HelioRoom: Problem-solving in a whole class visual simulation

                                       Mark Thompson and Tom Moher
      Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607 USA
                                  Email: mthomp2@uic.edu, moher@uic.edu

       Abstract: HelioRoom simulates the orbital motion of the planets in the Solar system on a
       set of synchronized computer displays situated on the walls of the classroom, with planets
       "orbiting" around the periphery of the room. Third grade students used the application for
       a   problem-solving    activity requiring    the  collection   of evidence    in  support   of theories
       concerning       the identity   of  planets    whose    size   and    surface   characteristics    were
       intentionally obscured.

Introduction
       Classroom     phenomenaria      such   as ant   farms     and  moth   hatcheries   afford   students   access  to
phenomena whose rate of change requires observation and data collection ranging over extended courses of
time, important skills in observational sciences such as astronomy and seismology. Phenomenaria of this
kind have three important characteristics that arguably contribute to their value as learning artifacts, and
that could inform the design of technology analogues. First, they are public, in that they are accessible to all
members of the class. Second, they are persistent; phenomenaria are accessible continuously, during the
whole school day. Finally, they involve the presentation of the phenomena over days and weeks instead of
class periods. In this paper, we briefly describe an effort to construct a simulation of one phenomenon--the
orbital motion of the planets in the Solar system--incorporating these three characteristics in our design,
and our experience with its use in a third grade classroom to support an evidence-based learning activity.

HelioRoom
       HelioRoom      is a  visual simulation    of the  orbital motion    of  the planets   in the   Solar system   that
explicitly attempts  to  adopt   the public,  persistent,   and  long    term  attributes   of  phenomenaria.     In our
implementation,   a tablet  computer   is Velcroed    to  the  middle   of each   of the four   walls  of a  classroom.
                                                    Adopting    the  pretense  that  the Sun    is coincident   with the
                                                    center    of  the    room,     the   tablet    computers    become
                                                    synchronized     viewports    into  the  Solar    system,  with  the
                                                    planets   revolving  360º    around   the  periphery,   temporarily
                                                    entering a viewport, then leaving and becoming invisible for
                                                    a while,     then entering    the   next   viewport,    and   so on.
                                                    HelioRoom presents a greatly simplified model of the Solar
                                                    system. The Solar system is reduced from ratio to ordinal
                                                    scale;  the  order   of   the  planets   is maintained,     but  the
                                                    distances  among     them  are   not proportional    to their actual
                                                    distances    from    the  Sun.   Orbital    periods   are   reduced
                                                    proportionately. Size and surface features are intentionally
                                                    ignored; each planet is represented only as a uniform size
      Figure 1. HelioRoom display.                  sphere of a distinct color. The overall illusion is of colored
                                                    discs  traveling  in a   counter-clockwise     fashion  at  different
speeds, with some discs crossing in front of other discs as they overtake them (see Figure 1).

Classroom Experience
       HelioRoom was introduced to a third grade classroom of 25 children, with the cover story that our
research lab had built the simulation, but now couldn't remember which color belonged to which planet.
The students  had   just completed   an   introductory    unit on   the  Solar system,   focusing     on the  order  and
properties (e.g., size,  orbital period)  of the planets.   Our   goal   was  to  leverage  their  nascent   declarative
astronomy   knowledge    in the  performance     of an   ambitious    evidence-based     inquiry.  The   simulation  ran
continuously for nine class days (until the end of the school year). During that period, as students would

                                                         1000                                                      ICLS 2006
make observations about the relative order of colored disks, they wrote their observations on index cards
and posted them (and theories drawn from them) to a public "Idea Board" on the wall. Periodically, the
students would come together as a whole class to propose theories about planet colors. As consensus was
reached on the identity of a planet-color combination, it was written on the blackboard.

         Not surprisingly, the task proved challenging for the third graders. As a group, after nine class
days they had correctly identified six planets. The primary instructional design implication of the activity
became evident after the first few group discussion sessions: the density and lack of organization of the
observations on the Idea Wall made it extremely difficult for students to retrieve the evidence they needed
to construct    argument   chains  to  support  their  theories.  Rather   than    populating  a  data  space   with
observations  and  then  exploring   the aggregate   data   set  for a global  solution,  the students  adopted   an
incremental  "inside-out"   strategy,  first identifying (within  seconds     of the introduction  of  the activity)
Mercury, and then building out planet by planet away from the Sun.

         As individuals, students posted an average of 3.5 index cards (many with multiple observations or
theories) and verbally presented an average of 3.3 theories over the course of the whole-class discussions.
Some students "specialized" in certain planets; Pluto, for example, drew over 30% of references during
class discussions  and   20%   of  references  on  the index    cards. Students   supported   written  theories with
evidence just over 50% of the time; support for theories was a procedural requirement during the group
discussions. Interestingly, students favored the velocity evidence base over occlusion evidence by about a
2:1 ratio.

         There   was   concern  at the outset   that the dynamism      of the  displays   might  raise problems   of
competing attention during other class activity. In practice, this proved not to be a problem, as the students
quickly relegated the displays to the background of their attention as appropriate. The classroom teacher
encouraged participation and devoted occasional class time for students to work on the task.

Conclusion
         HelioRoom is an example of a broader class of applications that we call embedded phenomenon:
simulations that map dynamic science phenomena to the physical space of classrooms, and allow students
to act as scientists by using computers as simulated instruments for measuring or viewing those phenomena
(Moher, et al., 2005).   Inspired by the concepts of participatory simulations (Colella, 2000) and ambient
devices (Wisneski, et al., 1998), embedded phenomena share important commonalities with other research-
based  classroom   (Rogers,  et al.,  2002)  and  outdoor   (Klopfer,  Squire,   &   Jenkins, 2002)   environments,
including the use of distributed embedded technologies to represent simulation state to groups of learners.
Embedded phenomena differ from these along the dimensions of persistence and duration; it is not used as
a serial component of instruction, but rather runs concurrently and continuously as instruction proceeds.
HelioRoom is currently undergoing a second classroom trial, augmented by a scaffolding application that
provides a simple database where students can store and retrieve observation data.

References
Colella, V.  (2000).   Participatory  Simulations:   Building    collaborative understanding    through   immersive
         dynamic modeling. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.
Klopfer, E., Squire, K., & Jenkins, H. (2002). Environmental Detectives: PDAs as a window into a virtual
         simulated world. Proceedings Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education 2002, 95-98.
Moher, T., Hussain, S., Halter, T., & Kilb, D. (2005). RoomQuake: Embedding dynamic phenomena within
         the physical space of an elementary school classroom. Extended Abstracts ACM Conference on
         Human Factors in Computing Systems 2005 (CHI 2005), 1665-1668.
Rogers,  Y., Scaife,   M., Harris, E., Phelps,  T.,  Price,  S., Smith,   H., Muller, H.,  Randell,   C., Moss,  A.,
         Taylor, I., Stanton, D., O'Malley, C., Corke, G. & Gabrielli, S. (2002). Things aren't what they
         seem to be: innovation through technology inspiration. Proceedings Designing Interactive Systems
         2002, 373-377.
Wisneski,   C., lshii, H., Dahley,   A., Gorbet,   M.,  Brave,   S., Ullmer,   B., &  Yarin,   P. (1998).  Ambient
         displays: Turning   architectural   space into  an  interface  between    people and  digital information.
         Proceedings International Workshop on Cooperative Buildings 1998, 22-32.

                                                        1001                                                    ICLS 2006
