Professional Development that Considers Teachers' Attitudes
                                   Toward an Innovation
   Jeannine E. Turner, ChanMin Kim, Florida State University, 307 Stone Building, Tallahassee, FL, 32306
                                     turner@coe.fsu.edu, cmk04f@fsu.edu

         Abstract. This study investigated the extent to which teachers' motivation and attitudes for
         professional  development    training    facilitated  their    willingness   to  implement   reform
         strategies. Teachers   completed      surveys  prior  to training    and   after receiving training.
         Analysis compared the responses of beginning teachers (new to the process) and advanced
         teachers (receiving advanced training). Advanced teachers showed that their instructional
         strategies and goals corresponded to the innovations at the start. At the end of the training,
         Beginning   teachers   gave positive    ratings   for the   training  and   their emotions   toward
         implementing the training.
Introduction
    Researchers have suggested that potential adopters' attitudes toward an innovation should be considered
for it's diffusion (e.g., Ellsworth, 2000). However, few studies have examined how to address this (Ertmer,
Conklin, Lewandowski,      Osika, Selo,  &     Wignall,   2003).  This  study  investigated    the extent to   which  a
professional development training, one that regards teachers' attitudes and beliefs as being important elements
to consider  when    designing   professional    development,     may    facilitate  teachers' willingness     to adopt
instructional ideals and strategies of the innovation.
    The professional development training in this study was Great Expectations (GE) in Oklahoma. As a
whole-school reform    model,   primary  objectives    of the  training is to instruct teachers on   ways   to increase
students' knowledge, self-esteem, and social competencies while also focusing on instructional strategies that
align with constructivist principles. For example, similar to research on exemplary teachers (e.g., Allington &
Johnston, 2002), model GE teachers are exceptional classroom managers because they establish and explain
routines/procedures  and   they emphasize      student self-regulation.  In a  high-implementation    GE    classroom,
disciplinary actions are rarely observed. Additionally, GE teachers use instructional strategies that emphasize
cross-curricular, meaningful    lessons  in    which   cooperation   and   effort are  emphasized.   Also   similar  to
exemplary teachers, GE teachers express high expectations for their students' learning and carefully monitor
their students' understanding (Turner & Shapley, 2000). Perhaps most importantly, teachers' implementation
of GE practices has been shown to positively and significantly affect students' achievement (Biscoe & Harris,
2005).
    To accomplish these overall objectives, GE focuses on the transformation of teachers through. Evaluation
results have shown that teachers who fully implement GE (Turner & Shapley, 2000) exhibit instructional and
relational behaviors that have been described as "exemplary" in excellent teachers. By examining differences
between teachers with and without experience of the GE training, this study investigated possible effects of
the GE training, for example, addressing the question, "To what extent might model professional development
training impact teachers' attitudes, motivation, and willingness to implement the training?"
Methodology
    Participants were 158 teachers enrolled in a week-long GE summer institute. Of the participants, 97 were
taking basic GE    Methodology    courses   (beginning     teachers), and   61 were    taking  advanced   GE   courses
(advanced teachers). Prior to the beginning of the training, participants were asked to complete the following
surveys:  Incentives   for  Training    (i.e.,  Self-Improvement,     External    Approval,    Mandatory    Pressure);
Instructional Strategies (Mastery Approaches, Performance Approaches; from PALS, Midgely et al., 2000),
and emotions for attending training (e.g., positive emotions and negative emotions). Following the training,
participants completed an evaluation survey. The current analysis is part of a larger study that focuses on
changes in teachers' attitudes and behaviors over time.
Results
    First, there were significant differences between beginning teachers and advanced teachers with respect
to their incentives for attending the training. Advanced teachers gave themselves higher ratings with respect
to being motivated to attend the training by self-improvement (t=-2.389, p<.05), while beginning teachers
gave   themselves  higher  ratings   for attending     the  training  because     of mandatory     pressure (t=-2.389,

                                                          1002                                                    ICLS 2006
p<.01).Second, with regard to feelings about attending the GE training, advanced teachers rated themselves as
feeling significantly more excited (t=-3.391, p<.01), enthusiastic (t=-3.155, p<.01), content (t=-3.492, p<.01),
determined (t=-2.102, p<.05) and optimistic (t=-2.670, p<.01). Third, with regard to instructional strategies,
advanced teachers gave themselves higher ratings with respect to using "mastery" instructional strategies (t=-
2.252, p<.05). Lastly, with regard to planning instructional goals for their students, beginning teachers gave
themselves higher ratings with respect to being motivated by mandatory, external curricular goals (t=5.518,
p<.01),  beginning   teachers  were    more  focused   on covering     the required curriculum,    than  on   students'
learning.
     Once the training had been delivered, we were interested in understanding if the training had effected
beginning teachers' emotions, such that they would be more likely and willing to implement the strategies
taught  in the  training. Our  results indicated that  following   the training, both   groups of  teachers   increased
positive  emotions  such   as  feeling excited  (p<.001)  and   enthusiastic   (p<.001). Interestingly,  although   the
beginning teachers rated themselves significantly lower in these emotions at the beginning of the training,
they had   reached  levels  of these   positive emotions  almost   at  the  same   intensity  levels as the   advanced
participants. For example, beginning teachers, on average, rated 3.99 for excitement at the beginning of the
training; while advanced teachers had an average excitement rating of 4.37. At the end of the training, the
beginning teachers increased their excitement to 4.50; while advanced teachers rated their excitement as 4.75.
     In addition to teachers' emotions following the training, we investigated possible differences with respect
to teachers'   perceptions  of the   quality of  the  training. There   were    no significant  differences   between
beginning teachers' and advanced teachers' ratings on items that assessed the extent to which (1) training
objectives were clear, (2) instructors adequately addressed the objectives, (3) instructors were knowledgeable
and Great Expectations, (4) participants had opportunities to obtain valuable feedback, and (5) participants
had opportunities to learn from other participants. It is anticipated that beginning teachers' increase in positive
emotions and perceptions of the training is--at the very least--a precursor for their willingness to implement
the training. Further data collection and analysis is needed to understand the extent to which these feelings
were translated into behavior changes in the classroom.
Discussion
     The findings from this study indicated that the GE trainings, which acknowledged teachers' attitudes,
experiences, and perceptions toward training, provided useful supports for teachers' willingness to implement
this program. Although the findings do not necessarily explain reasons for the differences between beginning
teachers   and advanced   teachers  without  in-depth  research,   they suggest    that advanced   teachers'  previous
exposure to GE trainings might have resulted in positive experiences on several aspects. Our data suggested
that, prior to the training, advanced teachers valued the GE trainings and they were excited and optimistic
about  what  they   would  learn. They  had  already   understood  and  implemented      the basic   principles of GE,
which were grounded in the beliefs that all students can learn and teachers need to learn methods that prepare
them  to  be flexible and  responsible  for  students' learning.   Additionally,   the  data suggested  that, although
beginning teachers tended to indicate that (1) they were participating in the training for mostly external and
mandatory reasons, and that they (2) entered the training with lower levels of positive emotions than advanced
teachers, they were predominately supportive and feeling positive emotions after the training had concluded.
It is anticipated that, with these positive emotions, teachers may be more willing to implement the strategies
learned at the training. Future research will investigate the specific strategies of trainings to address teachers'
attitudes.
References
Allington,   D. L.,  &    Johnston, P.  H.  (2002).  Reading    to learn:   Lessons    from  exemplary   fourth-grade
          classrooms. NY: Guilford Press.
Bisco, B. & Harris, B. (2005). Great Expectations Evaluation 2003-04. Technical Report.
Ellsworth, J. B. (2000). Surviving change: A survey of educational change models. NY: ERIC Clearing house
          on Information and Technology. New York, NY: ERIC.
Ertmer, P. A., Conklin, D., Lewandowski, J., Osika, E., Selo, M., & Wignall, E. (2003). Increasing preservice
          teachers' capacity   for  technology   integration  through      the use of   electronic   models.  Teacher
          Education Quarterly, Winter.
Midgley, C., Maehr, M. L., Hruda, L. Z., Anderman, E., Anderman, L., Freeman, K. E., et al. (2000). Patterns
          of Adaptive Learning Strategies (PALS) Manual: University of Michigan.
Turner, J., & Shapley, K. (2001). An evaluation of the implementation of Great Expectations in six Oklahoma
elementary schools. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Laboratory.

                                                        1003                                                     ICLS 2006
