          Perspectives and problem solving in an algebra classroom

                        Carla van de Sande, University of Pittsburgh, LRDC, cav10@pitt.edu

         Abstract: Perspective theory, an extension and generalization of schema theory, adapts the notion
         of  perspective from   psycholinguistics  to  capture   the  cognitive  and interactional   creativity  in
         reasoning and problem solving.      This poster applies perspective theory to two problem solving
         episodes of classroom mathematical discourse. The episodes illustrate the negotiation of differing
         perspectives,   participants'  commitment    to   perspective   and    demonstrate     how   perspectival
         constructions   can be   interactively  achieved.     Characteristics  of  task  and    positioning may
         encourage participation in exploratory perspectival construction.

         In our analyses of classroom mathematical discourse, our research group has encountered many instances
of cognitive and  interactional  creativity that  cannot  be understood     by  appealing to schema     theory.  In order   to
characterize these episodes   of  learning, we   have identified   a need   for a  generalization  of   schema   theory  that
incorporates the concept of entities and relations but that also includes a point of view, or perspectival, construct.
See Greeno   &   MacWhinney      (these  proceedings)  for   a discussion   of  perspective  theory.  In  problem    solving
discussions, the participants are often involved in considering alternatives and engaging in effortful interactions in
order to  reach  mutual    understanding.    These  interactions   can  be  characterized    as  instances of    exploratory
construction, in which at least one of the participants needs to discover and arrange a perspectival construction,
rather than fitting entities into a prefabricated arrangement based on a schema.

         In support of a perspective theory of understanding, this poster presents episodes from a progressive eighth
grade algebra  classroom.    In  one   episode,  students negotiate   alternative  perspectives  on   constructing   (linear)
functions to describe  pattern  configurations.  The  discussion   reflects each   participant's commitment      to her own
perspective  and the  role validity plays in  the resolution   of multiple  perspectival  views.    In the second episode
involving an  algebraic  word  problem,   the teacher  and   two  students  interactively construct   a perspective    that is
different than the schema-based perspective that the teacher initially planned to develop.          Both episodes provide
evidence for the existence of perspectives in the context of problem solving and allow us to distinguish between
perspectives that are schema-based and perspectives that are not schema-based but have schema-based components.
In addition, both episodes provide an account of the way in which perspectival flow and shift result in conceptual
schema alignment and the discourse surrounding constructive listening.       We conclude that perspectival alignment is
a critical component of mathematical learning that can occur within a single representational system.

Exploring Patterns
         As  a  homework     assignment,  students  completed     two  complementary      worksheets    entitled "Exploring
Patterns" and   "Graphing    Functions."    "Exploring   Patterns"   consisted  of six pattern   configurations     of either
toothpicks or tiles in which the first three `steps' were depicted.   Students were instructed to draw steps 4 and 5 for
each configuration, answer how many elements would be in step 10, and describe how the pattern was changing or
growing.  Each pattern configuration corresponded to a function for which students were to construct a T-table for
values 0 through 5, 10, 17, and `n' and draw a corresponding     graph. Students were organized in small groups during
the homework check to compare and discuss their solutions.        In the group of students (J, D, and G) we observed, the
answer to the question of how the pattern is changing or growing revealed three differing perspectives, each setting
up relations between the mathematical entities from a point of view.        J focused on the mathematical relationship
between step numbers and reasoned (incorrectly since the linear relationships had a constant term) that step 10
would have twice as many elements as step 5.      J maintained this perspective throughout the discussion despite the
presentation (and validation) of the other group members' perspectives.      D focused on the relationship between step
numbers and number of toothpicks, identifying a relationship that worked for each step/toothpick configuration (e.g.
2n + 1, where n denotes step number). In contrast to these schema-based perspectives, G focused on the number of
elements in step 1 and the relationship between successive steps, namely how many elements were added each time
(e.g. 3 + (n ­ 1)*2). G and D constructively listened to one another during the discussion and established that both
of these perspectives were valid.

                                                          1006                                                      ICLS 2006
The Garden Lap Problem

                                               Sally's backyard is 40 feet wide by 72 feet long, and it
                  flowers                      is  structured   so that a    central rectangle   of  grass is
                                               surrounded by an even border of flowers.         The area of
    40                                         the border (flowers) is 5/12 of the area of the wholegarden.If Sally wants to be sure to walk her dog for
                                               .25 mile, how many laps will she have to take around
                                               the grass?
                      72

                                         Figure 1. The Garden lap problem
         On the first day of the garden lap problem (see Figure 1) discussion, students calculated numerical values
for the area of the whole garden (2880 ft2), the border (1200 ft2), and the central rectangle (1680 ft2) and guessed
values for the dimensions of the central rectangle that would satisfy the two solution constraints. On the second day
of discussion, the goal of the class was to construct an algebraic solution to the problem. This was judged to be a
difficult task for the students, and the teacher (T) attempted to communicate her perspective to the class.     After
reproducing the problem diagram with numerical area values on the board, T labeled the left and top border widths
with question marks (?'s) and, surmising that she "gave it away" with this cue, asked the class "What would my
variable be?" Note that assigning a variable, say w, for the border width would result in the quadratic equation (72 ­
2w)(40 - 2w) = 1680, the solution of which could then be subtracted from the dimensions of the whole garden to
produce the dimensions of the central rectangle, and subsequently the central rectangle perimeter needed to answer
the question of the requisite number of laps.   The students, however, did not respond to T's hinted suggestion of
identifying a variable with the border width; they did not share the schema and, despite hints, were unable to `view
the problem' as T had with a focus on the border width.    Instead, when the question of variable was again raised in
conjunction  with the question   "What   am  I trying to figure  out here?," one of   the  students (G) introduced an
alternative perspective by drawing attention to "the two lengths of the inside square" and suggesting that these could
be given labels, x and y.   Because this was a different perspective than T had entertained and because G was only
able to present disjoint pieces of the corresponding solution, arriving at mutual understanding required considerable
effort and negotiation.  It was  at this juncture  that T, G, and    another student  (H)  embarked   on an extended
exploratory construction that included explaining entities (G: "So, if you do 40 minus x divided by 2, you'll get the
two widths, I think."), questioning referents (T: "Can you point out where the 72 minus y is going to be that question
mark?"), and suggesting relations (H: "I mean, you could make another equation, x times y equals 1680.").        The
result was a publicly available (via the white board) system of two equations in two unknowns [x times y = 1680
and (72-y)/2  = (40-x)/2],  the solution of which  would   yield numerical   values  for the dimensions of the central
rectangle, its perimeter, and consequently the requisite number of laps.  Following this exploratory construction, T
acknowledged to the class that "this is a completely different way than I looked at it" and instructed the class to
finish solving the problem from this perspective.

Conclusions
         We show how students exercise conceptual agency by presenting, constructing, and negotiating alternative
perspectives in the classroom and how novel understanding resulted from conceptual alignment.

References
MacWhinney, B.    (2005).   The emergence of grammar from perspective taking.        In D. Pecher & R. Zwann (Eds.),
         The Grounding of Cognition (pp. 198-223).      Cambridge, England:   Cambridge University Press.Brown, A.
         (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex interventions
         in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Spencer Foundation.

                                                         1007                                                 ICLS 2006
