Learning by Tagging: Group knowledge formation in a self-organizing
                                             learning community

                     Jude Yew, School of Information, University of Michigan, jyew@umich.edu
               Faison Gibson, Ross School of Business, University of Michigan, fpgibson@umich.edu
               Stephanie Teasley, School of Information, University of Michigan, steasley@umich.edu

         Abstract: This research explores the use of Social Tagging as a means by which group knowledge
         is formed within a learning community. A study of an undergraduate Business School class that
         utilizes Social Tagging is undertaken to analyze the patterns and evolution of use of tags in order
         to make a case for Social Tagging as a viable means to visualize and facilitate group knowledge
         formation.

Introduction:
         Social Tagging describes the collaborative activity of marking shared online content with keywords, or
tags, as a way   to organize content for     future navigation, filtering or  search. It is proposed  that Social Tagging
systems employed within a learning community can both facilitate and provide evidence of knowledge formation
within the group. Social Tagging facilitates the sensemaking efforts of the individual and the learning community
through the collective act of associating keywords with documents/artifacts and by sharing those terms with the rest
of the community. The use of Social Tagging systems also provide learning communities with a means to visualize
and be made aware of the tags used by the group. By extension, this provides learners with an indication of the
patterns of cognition taking place within the class on a particular topic. This study will analyze of the use of Social
Tagging  in   an undergraduate Business      School  class.  Analyzing  the   content of  the students' contributions and
correlating that with the frequencies and patterns in the use of certain tags, this study traces the evolution of this
learning community's   knowledge-formation.        Such  a study makes    a case  for Social  Tagging   as a viable means
through which group knowledge can be tangibly visualized and formed.

Characteristics of learning community:
         BIT 320, a Database and Information class being offered at a large Midwestern university, utilizes various
technologies to create a shared online space in which group learning can occur.           The class, dubbed the BIT 320
Remix by its instructor, is so named based on Lawrence Lessig's notion of a "remix culture" which describes a
society  that allows and encourages  efforts    to  improve  upon,  change,   integrate, or otherwise   remix the work of
copyright holders. (wikipedia, 2005). The class aims are to convey the latest principles in Business Databases and
Information systems through a philosophy of "learning by doing". Participation in the class is mandated through the
weekly     submission    of  5   blog        posts   and    10   bookmarks       to   the    class   "remix"   site   (see
http://thecommunityengine.com/bit320/remix/)        that aggregates all   the students'  contributions. Students  maintain
individual blog  and social  bookmarking     accounts,   and are encouraged    to contribute  their knowledge  by   sharing
relevant links, questions, answers, and observations of the material being taught in the class. This open sharing of
information is promoted to create a vibrant learning community where group knowledge is built collectively through
the efforts of the individuals in the class.

                               Figure 1. Portion of the BIT320 tag cloud (10/30/05)

                                                            1010                                                  ICLS 2006
         The formation of group knowledge is facilitated in the class through the use of Social Tagging systems.
The goal of the instructor here is to create a system where students are able to make contributions so that they are
aware of each other and are able to find pertinent information from the pool of contributions. Students in the class
are encouraged   to assign  categories,  or tags,  when contributing  their blog  and  URL    submissions.  Unlike  more
orthodox and controlled forms of classification, Social Tagging allows the users in the community to assign any
keyword/category that they view as relevant. Various visualizations, such as the use of tag clouds (see Fig.1) helps
members of the class to be made aware of the current and most frequently submitted topics/posts are by way of the
tags. This paper argues that Social Tagging is a means by which new information submitted to the class is made
sense of by the entire community. (Weick et al, 2005).

Social Tagging as evidence of group learning:
         Tagging    is essentially  a  process  of mapping    meaning   and  personal  understanding    to  the  essential
characteristics of the entities that are being organized. The tags associated with a particular item are a representation
of how a learner has activated related knowledge in his/her mind and associated it with the item. Social Tagging
expands this notion to a community of learners where each tag associated with an item provides "immediate self and
social feedback"    (Sinha,    2005). Social   tagging systems   allow  anyone    in  the  community    to freely   attach
keywords/tags to content. These tags are "socially translucent" (Erickson et al, 1999) meaning that they allow each
student an awareness of both their individual tags as well as the tags and content that others contribute to the class.
In other words, there are at once both personal and public aspects to collaborative tagging systems that make it
easier for students to make individual contributions of one's understanding as well as to build on the knowledge that
others have contributed. These are essential to the formation of a learning community and the group learning that
takes place within them. This paper proposes that the tags being used in a learning community such as BIT 320 can
be utilized to assess the scope and the content of the knowledge being formed by the class. Tag clouds, which aid
visualization of what current tags are being used and what their frequency of use is. Thus, studying the evolution of
the tag clouds of a learning community over time will provide one with an ideal representation of the evolution and
change in group knowledge formation.

Methodology of the study: Tracing the evolution of the tag clouds
This study will attempt an analysis of the use of Social Tagging utilizing the following methods:
·   Content analysis of the students' blog and bookmark contributions will be related to the tags. It is expected that
    there will  be  a  variety terms  that are being used by  different members    of the  class for a particular content
    type/topic. Examining      the range of vocabulary  used  for a particular topic  will allow  insight  into the group
    knowledge being formed around particular topics.
·   Analysis of relative frequencies and patterns in tag use will provide an indication of two contrasting effects:
    the popularity of certain topics, and the stabilization of certain tags used to categorize particular topics. Patterns
    in the use of tags will also reveal insights in to group cognition. For example, having a certain topic tagged
    differently by two distinct clusters of the class might indicate opposing viewpoints on a particular topic.
·   Citation & Social Network Analysis will be used as a method to surface the interaction patterns of the students
    in the class. Such an analysis provides a picture of the community structure in the class through visualizations
    called sociograms. These visualizations help us to identify key "idea leaders" in the class who generate tags that
    are adopted by a large proportion of the students. As such, being able to picture who generates the ideas and
    who is likely to adopt them will allow insight into the dynamics of group knowledge formation for BIT 320.

References:
Erickson, T., Smith, D. N., Kellogg, W. A., Laff, M., & Brander, E. (1999). A sociotechnical approach to
         design: Social  proxies,   persistent conversations, and the  design  of Babble.  In Proceedings   of  the ACM
         Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '99, Pittsburgh, PA, May), ACM Press, New
         York, NY. pp. 72-79.
Sinha, R. (2005). A cognitive analysis of tagging (or how the lower cost of tagging makes it popular).
         Rerieved October 5th, 2005, from http://www.rashmisinha.com/archives/05-09/tagging-
         cognitive.html
Weick, K., Sutcliffe, K. & Obstfield, D. (2005) Organizing and the Process of Sensemaking.
         Organizational Science, Vol. 16, No. 4, July ­ August 2005, pp. 409-421.
Remix Culture (2005, October 8). Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved October 10, 2005, from
         http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remix_culture

                                                           1011                                                  ICLS 2006
