                       What's a Situation in Situated Cognition? ­
                    A Constructionist Critique of Authentic Inquiry

                  Dor Abrahamson (Organizer), Andrea A. diSessa, Graduate School of Education,
                            University of California­Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-1670
                                   dor@berkeley.edu, disessa@soe.berkeley.edu
         Paulo Blikstein and Uri Wilensky, Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling,
  School of Education and Social Policy, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208-0001
                                           paulo, uri@northwestern.edu
              David H. Uttal, Meredith M. Amaya, and Loren M. Marulis, Department of Psychology,
                                  2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, 60208-2710
                             duttal, m-amaya@northwestern.edu, lmarulis@ekit.com
                     Allan M. Collins (Discussant), Northwestern University, collins@bbn.com

         Abstract: Four papers by learning scientists engaged either in design research or cognitive-
         developmental studies consider concreteness, context, content, pedagogy, and situativity and their
         implications for design that fosters opportunities for students to learn subject matter through
         experiencing  authentic scientific/mathematical   inquiry.    The   authors furnish  both theoretical
         considerations and recent classroom- and laboratory-based empirical findings to question prior
         interpretations of students' capacity to model and abstract from situations, to generate examples,
         to transfer, and to make insightful connections. The papers jointly suggest that even simple objects
         may nevertheless undergird emergent situativity that provides sufficient context to which learners
         can bring  diverse personal resources.   Model-based       design may  be   as intellectually honest,
         culturally respectful, cognitively   generative, and   scientifically/mathematically    authentic as
         learning that draws  more  directly  on students'   out-of-school    resources. The  authenticity of
         `authentic inquiry' may depend more on engagement and reasoning it enables than on specific
         content and a priori "good-science" practices it recruits.

Overview of Symposium Panel
         Education researchers and psychologists involved in the design and study of student interaction with
learning tools have demonstrated the potential roles of modeling--building models, interacting with models--as
vehicles of meaningful teaching and learning of subject matter content (Lesh & Doerr, 2003; Verschaffel, Greer, &
De Corte, 2000; Wilensky, 1999). At the same time, proponents of `situated learning' have proposed that student
learning is more engaging, meaningful, and democratic when students have opportunities to draw on real-world
situations and especially situations they are personally immersed in, such as issues of their community (Freire, 1974;
Ladson-Billings, 1995; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Greeno, 1998). It may appear, then, that practices of authentic
inquiry would be best fostered through engagement in activities that are both model based and situated in students'
real-world activities. Indeed, some designers have interpreted the combined calls for modeling-based and real-
world-driven inquiry by creating activities that "go out to the streets" to collect data that is then analyzed both to
practice scientific/mathematical  skills and, in turn, to facilitate   change  back  in  the community.   Whereas  we
recognize the potential of dialogical pedagogy to create richly contextualized learning activities that leverage
students' out-of-school situatedness and agency, we submit that intramural situatedness, too, can achieve these
goals. That is, a more nuanced interpretation of `context,' which complexifies relationships between pedagogy and
content, may enable designers to appreciate the potential of emergent situativity of scientific inquiry. Even Lego
bricks or computer-screen pixels, a far cry from what some may call `rich context,' enfold potential for an engaging,
personally meaningful, and authentic exploration into content.

         In this symposium, we will: (a) examine prevalent interpretations of the notion that `situations' should be
imported  `as is'   from students'  extramural   activities;   (b)   suggest that modeling-and-simulation      learning
environments that include manipulable and/or programmable objects can elicit the necessary situatedness of learning
activities; (c) propose that model-based learning activities can be designed to draw from both real-world situations
and from "hard-boiled content"--we see modeling as living in the middle (see also Gobert & Buckley, 2000; Lehrer
& Schauble, in press; Levy & Wilensky, 2004; Stieff & Wilensky, 2003; Wilensky & Reisman, in press). The

                                                        1015                                                   ICLS 2006
epistemic game (Collins & Ferguson, 1993) of building and "running" models enables coordination between the
world as we naively know it and the world as scientists and mathematicians know it (see also Schön, 1981).

         The authors in this symposium build on empirical data to interpret the constructs `situation,' `context,'
`concrete,' and `authentic' not according to superficial criteria of the materiality or familiarity of media, learning
tools, and content, but as indexed by the phenomenology of students who are immersed in model-based learning
environments and are recruiting cognitive resources that include personal context, imagination, and pretense skills.
diSessa warns that too narrow an interpretation of cultural situatedness may preclude the potential generativity of
intuitive, "abstractable," knowledge  inherent  in   cultural practices. Abrahamson   argues    for  the authenticity of
mathematics-learning   experiences   grounded     in immersive   construction-and-simulation      activities--given   an
interesting problem, liberty to explore, and judicious shepherding, a community of learners can build intellectual
edifices from simple blocks. Blikstein and Wilensky present an innovative computer-based learning environment
that  integrates and juxtaposes  within a single     medium   real-time  experimentation in     physical and simulated
phenomena--this design challenges the dichotomies outdoors--indoors and real--model. Comparing this physics
design to Abrahamson's mathematics design demonstrates what source materials each domain requires so as to
construct valid models. Uttal, Amaya, and Marulis demonstrate that interaction factors and not materiality per se
affect the likelihood that young learners will appropriate objects as representations. All the authors agree that the
authenticity of designed inquiry is measured by the conceptual processes and appropriation of procedures that it
promotes. From this perspective, any medium, technology, or activity--any context--where students learn content
through solving difficult problems, for which staple algorithms are not provided, is authentic.

Abstracts of Panel Participants
Culturally Wide-Spread, Abstract Structures and Their Implications for Learning
Mathematics and Science
Andrea A. diSessa
         Education is full of exhortations that learning activities must be embedded in the everyday lives and
contexts of students in order to be maximally effective. One of the most pointed and important versions of this idea
is that the particulars of diverse cultural communities should be exploited as "funds of knowledge" (Moll, Amanti,
Neff, & González, 1992) in making "abstract" school mathematics and science sensible to and appreciated by non-
white, non-middle class students. So, common activities, such as crafts, art, and pastimes of non-mainstream
cultures should be brought into school to motivate, situate, and support learning math and science with culturally
specific competence.

     While  supporting   the essence of  this  advice,  the   contention  of this presentation    is that conventional
interpretations of it unnecessarily narrow the field of consideration for creating "authentic" and "culturally situated"
learning activities. There are several moves that open up a much greater range of possibilities. The first is the
recognition that cultural activities are deeply generative. Within any culture or community, new "games" and
variations of old activities are easily taken on because they share a family resemblance with well-known particular
ones. Thus, to be well-connected to a student's heritage, we need only exploit those family resemblances, not literal
activity importation. The second move stems from a deeper view of the nature and generativity of cultural and
intuitive knowledge. We will make the case that much of this kind of knowledge is--counter to what is probably the
mainstream view--highly abstract in nature, and thus not bound in literal reproduction of culturally or individually
specific experiences. The possibility of an abstract deep structure in cultural or individual experiences opens up the
field of "authentic  and situated" activities far beyond  stereotyped    or quickly recognizeable    ones. Even  more,
"abstract deep structure" suggests the possibility of a much wider reservoir of "funds of knowledge," which are
simply NOT culturally specific.

     These largely theoretical arguments will be exemplified in a current project called "Patterns of Change and
Control." In this project, we seek to understand the intuitive pools of knowledge lying behind children's abilities to
comprehend and control many situations in the world--physical, social, and otherwise. The intuitive patterns we
believe children know about are things like "balance," "threshold," "stability," "stickiness," "pumping," and so on.
In a summer course aimed at eliciting and developing ideas like these, we feel we developed good preliminary
evidence that many "naïve" student ideas are, in essence, highly abstract and travel easily across very great divides,
such as between physical and social phenomena (diSessa, 2000; diSessa, in press). They are emphatically not
"bound" to one or a few recognizable, particular activities. Example data includes the fluid ability of students to

                                                         1016                                                  ICLS 2006
generate examples in highly diverse particular settings. Drug addiction, sumo wrestling, and the break-up of a dating
pair are all seen easily as examples of one particular pattern (threshold). Furthermore, we see very little reason to
expect much difference in these ideas across cultures, although examples students can give and explain likely are
more culturally specific. Finally, we believe that certain simple mathematizations (in particular, writing computer
programs to model such phenomena) are exceedingly natural and productive (rather than abstract and needing
extensive coaching and scaffolding). This last claim, however, probably depends on cultural experiences that may
not be as universal as those that support understanding patterns in their own terms.

    By the time of ICLS, we will have further classroom data testing the abstract nature of students' knowledge of
patterns and their ability to mathematize it, and we will have done at least one controlled, laboratory experiment
aimed specifically at illuminating the level of abstractness in students' knowledge of "patterns of change and
control."

"Because In the World, There Are More Blocks of This Type": The Real-Worldness of
Immersive Combinatorial Analysis as a Grounding of Simulated Probability Experiments
Dor Abrahamson
          Underlying any administration of mathematical concepts is a covert dissemination of values, norms, and
beliefs pertaining  to  mathematical    practice and  learners' critical agency  therein (Cobb,    Gravemeijer,  Yackel,
McClain, & Whitenack, 1997). Specifically for mathematical inquiry, I ask, `Which designs foster opportunities for
students both to develop deep understanding of content and to experience effective practices?' My argument is that
the authenticity of `authentic inquiry' depends more on the types of engagement and reasoning it enables than on
the specific  content   or structures it recruits. I  support the argument   with  data  from   an implementation   of  a
modeling-based design for probability.

          In discussing school-based situational contexts, I examine pedagogies that apparently motivate the design
of the learning environments where mathematical content is situated. However, the objective of this paper is not to
evaluate  pedagogies    per se but to   comment    on designs  that purport to  implement   these  pedagogies.   That is,
mathematical and scientific meaning can emerge successfully both through Freirean design (e.g., Blikstein, 2002)
and design for discursive classrooms (e.g., Cobb & Hodge, 2002). Yet whereas choices of pedagogy are more likely
to be informed by educators' deep-rooted philosophical and ethical dispositions, by considerations of the resources
and needs of target populations, and by political contexts, agendas, and motivations, choices of particular designs
could be informed by the extent to which these designs are likely to implement the desired pedagogy. Specifically, I
submit that students can potentially engage in deep mathematical discussion of personally-relevant matters even
when and because students' agency plays out in arenas that are, at least initially, one step removed from "the thing
itself"--namely, arenas such as model-based learning environments.

          The roles of modeling as supports for deep understanding of mathematical content have been discussed
widely (e.g., Lesh & Doerr, 2003; Verschaffel et al., 2000; Wilensky, 1995). A focus on building/interacting with
models suggests a shift in the interpretation of `context.' Extramural situations may initially trigger and frame the
mathematical reasoning, yet the model, a medium more amenable for exploration, gradually constitutes the locus of
active reflection, imagination, and conjecture. The model becomes a rich object onto its own that enables students to
embody    and pursue    coherent structures  through  generating,   examining,  discerning, and    articulating emergent
patterns of relational regularity bearing beyond specific data sets. In sum, initially "neutral" materials are more
generative than raw data in terms of: (a) eliciting a diversity of students' personal interpretations; (b) suggesting
relations to  other mathematical   concepts;    and  (c) enhancing  the  prospects that  students  will correctly model
situations in future encounters with suitable situational contexts. The modeling materials take on a mathematical life.

          To  support   my  position  I will discuss  findings  from implementations    of ProbLab      (Abrahamson    &
Wilensky,   2002;   see Figure 1,  below)    an experimental  model-based   unit designed   for middle-school    students
studying probability and statistics. Specifically, I will argue that students who were immersed in collaboratively
constructing a complicated combinatorial space of a stochastic device created a locally real world of emergent
situativity that enabled   productive   processes  of authentic  mathematical   inquiry. These   students  subsequently
leveraged personal insights into the designed contexts so as to concretize (Wilensky, 1991) distributions of random
outcomes that were generated by computer-based simulations of probability (compare, in Figure 1, the two right-
most pictures). These findings suggest that authenticity of mathematical inquiry is indexed not so much by a priori

                                                           1017                                                 ICLS 2006
extramural situativity per se as much as by any generative reasoning that the designed materials and activities afford.
Also, students'  general  engagement   around  very  simple    tools suggests  that any lack off motivation to      study
mathematics lies not necessarily in the "dullness" of mathematical objects but in activity design and facilitation.

   Figure 1. ProbLab: collaborative construction of the combinatorial space of the 9-Block, a 3-by-3 grid, in which
cells are either green or blue. Students construct a combinations tower and then compare it to simulated experiments.

        Implications of this study are that real-world experiences can be created in model-based mathematics
learning environments. Thus, modeling-based design could be instrumental in implementing culturally-relevant
pedagogy (Ladson-Billings, 1995). For example, design for statistics education need not focus primarily on practices
of assembling   reliable data sets, e.g., through  quasi-ethnographic   charting  of the community,  as   much      as on
conceptual processes of making sense of such data through constructing generative models that accommodate the
data as a case study. The pragmatics of available resources, e.g., classroom time, may, too, bear on designers'
decisions whether students should go out to the streets or whether the streets should be reconstructed in the
classroom (see also von Glasersfeld, e.g., 1992).

Linking Real-World Sensing and Multi-Agent-Based Computer Models
Paulo Blikstein and Uri Wilensky
        What do we obtain from "going out to the world" as a platform for learning? The multiple aspects of this
experience have been explored by different schools of thought in education. John Dewey (1916) was one of the first
to emphasize the importance of connecting school learning and real-world experiences. Critical pedagogy argued
that departing from the learner's context and previous knowledge is crucial to foster de-facto emancipating and
motivating learning  (Freire, 1974).  Constructionist  educators     (Papert, 1991) posited that building personally-
meaningful public artifacts is central to promote sustainable and deep learner engagement. However, critics of such
pedagogies would argue that the world might not afford the necessary information and opportunities for students to
learn the `official' school content: One cannot make sure that acid-base reactions, for instance, are out there situated
in the world.

        While concurring with claims about the relevance of the learner's context, background, and concrete
experiences for education design, we acknowledge that the current tools for scientific exploration available for
students limit the kind and complexity of their real-world investigations. Thus, we submit that the disconnect
between what one can learn in a fully situated environment and the more traditional school content is due, perhaps,
to the lack of appropriate tools to `dissect' reality to the appropriate level of analysis. Even if, by definition, Physics,
Chemistry, and Biology are `out-there' in the world, most phenomena are invisible to human vision and time scale.
Many patterns in nature are too long, too fast, too small, or too large for learners to extract and understand their
underlying structures. Canonical examples are weather behavior, chemical reactions, housing and traffic pattern,
particle physics, and population ecology. We need, thus, new technological tools which foreground and unveil the
deep structures of such phenomena. In this paper, our focus will be hybrid modeling, a framework for scientific
exploration and modeling which merges two types of educational technologies commonly used (separately) in
schools. The first kind is robotics and electronic sensing (Martin, 1996; Resnick & Ocko, 1991), which makes
possible a wide range of experimental activities in the real world. The second technology is multi-agent simulation,
which enables learners to create models to understand complex social and natural phenomena departing from very
simple behaviors embedded into elementary computational agents (Wilensky & Reisman, in press; Wilensky &
Resnick, 1999).

                                                          1018                                                 ICLS 2006
        This paper describes a research project that, by linking the two technologies, attempts to simultaneously
broaden the possibilities of situated investigation and ground computer modeling with real-world validation. For that
goal, we are developing software and hardware tools to bridge computer models and sensing in real time (see Figure
2, below). Typically, students build a computer model of a particular phenomenon, such as heat transfer, and a
sensor-equipped physical device. These are connected by an analog-to-digital interface. Students are able to run their
computer models in tandem with the physical apparatus, comparing the outcomes of both, and debugging their
model  until it matches the real-world    data. We  are currently building   proof-of-concept       systems for `hybrid'
explorations in heat transfer, gas laws, acid-based and oscillating reactions, and Materials Science. Our main goal,
however, is to create a technological infrastructure to enable students to build their own systems.

 Figure 2. Two `linked' systems for real-time physical/virtual investigations: heat transfer (above); gas laws (below).

        We conducted a case study comparing the artifacts generated by undergraduate and graduate students in
two distinct conditions. In the first condition, students created multi-agent-based models with no sensors. In the
second situation, another group of students built hybrid models with sensors. All students built their models as an
assignment   in an `Educational Design'    class. Based on our   analysis of their artifacts and     interviews,  we are
identifying the learning benefits of hybrid, "trans-media," sensor-equipped models as well as determining to what
extent  this  approach   can   effectively    expand   the  possibilities  of  situated  investigation       (see   also
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogolab).

When, How, and Why Do Concrete Objects Facilitate Young Children's Learning?
David H. Uttal, Meredith M. Amaya, & Loren M. Marulis
        The   assumption  that  young    children's thinking  is inherently  concrete is a   central    tenet   of many
developmental and educational theories. Scholars such as Montessori (1917; Lillard, 2005) and Piaget (1970) have
suggested that  young  children know     the world  primarily through   physical interactions with     it.  Their  mental
representations thus are based on the way in which the information is experienced, rather than on symbolic, abstract
representations of concepts. Although many researchers (Gelman, 2003; Simons & Keil, 1995) have challenged this
notion, it continues to have great sway (Ball, 1992; Clements, 1997).

        The idea that young children's thinking is based on their experiences with the environment has led to the
development of concrete educational tools that are designed to be physically manipulated. For example, one can find
letter or number magnets stuck to refrigerators in many American homes. In the classroom, teachers can use a

                                                         1019                                                   ICLS 2006
variety of more formal systems, such as mathematics manipulatives, that are intended to capitalize on young
children's concrete thinking.

       Despite the enthusiasm for the use of concrete materials, relatively little controlled research has evaluated
their effectiveness. The research that has been conducted has yielded mixed results. Consider, for example, research
on the effectiveness of concrete mathematics manipulatives. On the one hand, several studies have demonstrated that
the use of concrete manipulatives can facilitate children's understanding of mathematical concepts (Resnick &
Omanson,  1987;  Martin  &    Schwartz, 2005). Yet    on the  other hand,   systematic reviews of research      on the
effectiveness of the use of manipulatives have not found a consistent advantage over other forms of instruction
(Sowell, 1989; Uttal, Scudder, & DeLoache, 1997), and research has shown that children consistently fail to transfer
what they learn from using manipulatives to written representations (Resnick & Omanson, 1987).

       Our research examines the effectiveness of concrete objects in a variety of learning contexts. Our goal is to
reveal, through systematic and controlled studies, the conditions under which concrete objects facilitate (or inhibit)
learning. We will present the results of two sets of studies. The first focuses on 4-year-olds' learning of the symbolic
properties of letters and numbers. We asked the children either to play with concrete (magnetic) letters or numbers
or control stimuli (standard toys that involved games similar to those played with the letters or numbers). We then
tested the children's use of the letters and numbers to represent quantities or objects. For example, the children were
asked to use the magnetic numbers as well as a crayon to represent the number of "cookies" hidden in a container.
Likewise, they were asked to use letter magnets and a crayon to represent the identity of a hidden toy animal.

       We found that playing with the concrete objects does not facilitate learning. In fact, in some situations, it
actually hurt performance. However, using the concrete objects in a symbolic way (to represent quantity or identity)
does promote symbolic understanding. For example, using a magnetic letter to represent the identity of an object
made it easier for the children to use a crayon to do something similar. These results suggest that concreteness per se
may matter less than how or why the objects are used. We will also discuss additional lines of research that focus on
the use of concrete manipulatives in the classroom. Taken together, our studies suggest that, as a Learning-Sciences
community that frames design principles for learning with understanding, we may wish to reexamine what we mean
by `concrete.' For example, is concreteness an inherent property of learning material or a psychological relationship
that the learner develops towards any material (see also Wilensky, 1991)?

References
Abrahamson, D., & Wilensky, U. (2002). ProbLab. The Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based
   Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/curriculum/ProbLab/
Ball, D. (1992). Magical hopes: Manipulatives and the reform of mathematics education. American Educator, 16(2),
   14-18, 46-47.
Blikstein, P. (2002). The Trojan Horse as a Trojan Horse: Impacting the ecology of the learning atmosphere.
   Unpublished MSc. thesis, Cambridge: M.I.T.
Clements, D. H. (1997). (Mis?)constructing constructivism. Teaching Children Mathematics, 4, 198-200.
Cobb, P., & Hodge,   L. (2002).   Learning, identity, and  statistical data analysis. Paper presented at the     Sixth
   International Conference on Teaching Statistics (ICOTS6), Cape Town, South Africa.
Cobb, P., Gravemeijer, K., Yackel, E., McClain, K., & Whitenack, J. (1997). Mathematizing and symbolizing. In D.
   Kirshner & J. A. Whitson (Eds.), Situated cognition: Social, semiotic and psychological perspectives (pp.
   151­233). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Collins, A., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and strategies to guide
   inquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28(1), 25-42.
Dewey, J. (1961). Democracy and education. New York: Macmillan. Originally published 1916.
diSessa, A. A. (2000). Does the mind know the difference between the physical and social worlds? In L. Nucci, G.
   Saxe,  and E. Turiel  (Eds.),  Culture, Development    and  Knowledge    (pp. 141-166). Mahwah,  NJ:  Lawrence
   Erlbaum Associates.
diSessa, A. A. (in press). Systemics of learning for a revised pedagogical agenda. In R. Lesh (ed.), Foundations for
   the future in mathematics education. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Freire, P. (1974). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Seabury Press.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of essentialism in everyday thought. New York, NY: Oxford
   University Press.

                                                         1020                                                  ICLS 2006
Gobert,  J., &  Buckley, B. (2000).   Special issue editorial: Introduction  to model-based  teaching     and learning.
   International Journal of Science Education, 22(9), 891-894.
Greeno, J. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53(1), 5-26.
Ladson-Billings,   G. (1995). Toward   a theory  of culturally  relevant pedagogy.  American    Education     Research
   Journal, 35, 465 ­ 491.
Lave, J., &  Wenger,  E. (1991). Situated  learning: Legitimate   peripheral  participation. New   York:     Cambridge
   University Press.
Lehrer, R., &, Schauble, L. (in press). Cultivating model-based reasoning in science education.
Lesh, R.  &  Doerr, H.  M. (2003).  Beyond constructivism:    A models   and modeling  perspective  on    mathematics
   problem-solving, learning, and teaching. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Levy, S. T., & Wilensky, U. (2004, April). Making sense of complexity: Patterns in forming causal connections
   between individual agent behaviors and aggregate group behaviors. Paper presented at the annual meeting of
   the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA.
Lillard, A. S. (2005). Montessori: The Science behind the Genius. New York: Oxford University Press.
Martin, F. (1996). Ideal and Real Systems. In Y. Kafai & M. Resnick (Eds.), Constructionism in Practice (pp. 297-
   332). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Martin, T., & Schwartz, D.L. (2005). Physically distributed learning. Cognitive Science, 29(4), 587-625.
Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & González, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitative
   approach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 132-141.
Montessori, J. (1917). The advanced Montessori method. New York: Frederick A. Stokes.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. NY: Basic Books.
Papert, S. (1991). Situating constructionism. In S. Papert & I. Harel (Eds.), Constructionism. NJ: Ablex.
Piaget, J. (1970). Science of education and the psychology of the child. New York: Orion Press.
Resnick,  L.  B., & Omanson,    S. F. (1987). Learning to understand   arithmetic. In R. Glaser   (Ed.),  Advances  in
   instructional psychology (Vol. 3, pp. 41-96). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Resnick, M., & Ocko, S. (1991). Lego/Logo: Learning through and about design. In S. Papert & I. Harel (Eds.),
   Constructionism. NJ: Ablex
Schön, D. (1981). Intuitive thinking? A metaphor underlying some ideas of educational reform (Working Paper 8):
   Division for Study and Research, M.I.T.
Simons, D. J., & Keil, F. C. (1995). An abstract to concrete shift in the development of biological thought: The
   insides story. Cognition, 56, 129-163.
Sowell,   E. J. (1989). Effects of  manipulative materials in   mathematics   instruction. Journal  for   Research  in
   Mathematics Education, 20, 498-505.
Stieff, M., & Wilensky, U. (2003). Connected Chemistry: Incorporating interactive simulations into the chemistry
   classroom. Journal of Science Education & Technology, 12(3). 285 ­ 302.
Uttal, D. H., Scudder, K.V., & DeLoache, J.S. (1997). Manipulatives as symbols. Journal of Applied Developmental
   Psychology, 18(1), 37-54.
Verschaffel, L., Greer, B., & De Corte, E. (2000). Making sense of word problems. Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets &
   Zeitlinger.
Wilensky, U. (1991). Abstract meditations on the concrete and concrete implications for mathematics education. In
   I. Harel & S. Papert (Eds.), Constructionism (pp. 193­204). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Wilensky, U. (1995). Paradox, programming and learning probability. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 14(2),
   231-280.
Wilensky, U. (1999). GasLab: An extensible modeling toolkit for exploring micro- and macro- views of gases. In N.
   Roberts, W. Feurzeig & B. Hunter (Eds.), Computer Modeling and Simulation in Science Education. Berlin:
   Springer Verlag.
Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (in press). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep or a firefly. Cognition & Instruction.
Wilensky, U. & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems approach to making sense of the world.
   Journal of Science Education and Technology 8(1), 3-19.
von Glasersfeld, E. (1992). Aspects of radical constructivism and its educational recommendations (Working Group
   #4). Paper presented at the Seventh International Congress on Mathematics Education (ICME7), Quebec.
   http://srri.nsm.umass.edu/vonGlasersfeld/onlinePapers/html/195.html

                                                         1021                                                 ICLS 2006
