           Clubs, Homes, and Online Communities as Contexts for
         Engaging Youth in Technology Fluency Building Activities

                            Brigid Barron, Stanford University, Barronbj@Stanford.edu
                   Yasmin B. Kafai, University of California, Los Angeles, Kafai@gseis.ucla.edu

        Abstract: The goal of this session is to advance our understanding of the relationships between
        access to computing tools, learning opportunities, and the development of technological fluency.
        Understanding variability in the kinds of material and social resources that children have access to
        is   crucial  for   a   better   understanding       of   how    to   create   more    equitable   learning
        opportunities. Overview    talks of   three research    programs  and   their theoretical frameworks   will
        start this session. A poster session will follow that showcases nine empirical or design projects
        that  have   emerged   from  the  research   programs.     In keeping   with  the conference    theme,  the
        overview    presentations    and empirical    work   highlight   how    learning  to   use   technology   in
        empowered ways can be nurtured within and across a broad range of contexts.

Overview
       Adolescents   typically use   computers   more   frequently    at home   than   they do    at school  (Kaiser  Family
Foundation, 2004; Pew, 2002). During this out of school time the social contexts of their use and the nature of the
activities vary widely. Although playing games is a common activity, children and teens also use the computer to
communicate with friends, do research for school, find information about hobbies, and to download and listen to
music.  Some  teens  also use  their computing   tools  for  activities  that involve authoring   such  as multimedia  story
writing, robotics, programming, or web design. These creative activities are particularly likely to build aspects of
what has   been  called technological    fluency as  they   require   some    understanding of   fundamental   concepts   and
frequently a great deal of persistence and trouble shooting (NRC, 1999).        Recent research suggest that opportunities
to engage in fluency building activities out of school are not equally distributed. Children who have greater access at
home to tools such as high speed Internet access, scanners, cameras, and printers are more likely to have engaged in
fluency building activities (Barron,   Shatz,  &    Martin,  in preparation).   However,  the  strong  association   between
access to tools at home and experience can be moderated when learning opportunities are provided for elsewhere
such as in after school clubs or community centers (Resnick, Rusk, & Cooke, 1998).

        In this  symposium     we  discuss    three research    programs  that  are   designed to    advance  our theoretical
understanding of how learning to use technology in empowered ways can be nurtured within and across a broad
range of contexts. In addition, we hope to advance the conversation about how to empirically document learning that
occurs out of school.   We believe that understanding variability in the kinds of material and social resources that
children have access to is crucial for a better understanding of how to create more equitable learning opportunities.
The research that will be presented includes data from children who have high levels of interest, access at home to
knowledge resources and tools, and opportunities to participate in out of school summer camps or online classes that
are funded by their parents as well as children who have interest but little to no access at home and find resources
through after school  clubs or  community     centers   that provide    opportunities for fluency    building activities. The
session will begin with a 30 minute overview consisting of three papers that will summarize the research programs
and theoretical frameworks that drive them. Next, audience members will have 45 minutes to visit the nine posters.
For the final 15 minutes of the session the authors will gather and the audience will be invited to participate in an
open discussion.

Overview Paper I. Mapping learning across contexts: The role of informal and school
based contexts in the emergence of expertise and the development of interest
Brigid Barron

        Understanding how learning to use technology is distributed among multiple settings and resources is an
increasingly important goal. There are widespread concerns about inequities among children in whether they learn to
use computers in ways that can promote their own development and about who becomes interested in pursuing
advanced knowledge    that  would    position them   to work    in technological  design  fields  (AAUW,     2000; Attewell,
2001; Camp, 1997).      Schools are being asked to cultivate technological fluency, digital literacy, and other 21st

                                                             1022                                                   ICLS 2006
century  competencies      (NRC,  1999).  Yet,  as with  other   subjects, schools   differ widely   in the kinds  of    learning
resources they offer (Warschauer, 2000). A better understanding of how learning takes place across settings and of
the possible synergies and barriers between learning contexts may help educators find ways to supplement school
based learning. To make progress on understanding learning across the life spaces of home, school, community,
work,    and  neighborhood   we   need  frameworks    and  perspectives    that help articulate questions   that  will   advance
theory and guide data collection.

          In this paper a learning ecologies framework for studying the emergence of interest and the development of
technological fluency is presented. A learning ecology is defined as the set of contexts, comprised of configurations
of activities, material resources, and relationships found in physical or virtual spaces that provide opportunities for
learning  (Barron,  2004).   A   learning   ecologies perspective    foregrounds   that  1) adolescents    are simultaneously
involved in many settings; 2) they are active in creating activity contexts for themselves within and across settings,
and   3) that interest driven activities  tend  to be self-sustaining  given    adequate resources.   In this  overview   paper
conjectures about the development of interest and the dynamics of how a learning ecology can develop over time
will be presented along with ideas for how we might collect data to test some of these ideas and inform the design of
learning environments.

Poster   1.   Profiles  of   interest,  access,    and   fluency   building     experience     in  Silicon    Valley:    When
interest isn't enough.       Colin Schatz, Brigid Barron, and Sarah Walter,           Stanford University

          In order to better understand who gains access to fluency building experiences, survey and interview data
was collected from an economically diverse group of middle school students attending one of two public schools in
the Silicon Valley region. In this report we share analyses that examine the relationship between teens' experience
with  fluency  building    activities and a number    of variables including    access  to  tools at home,    use of  a  various
learning resources, and interest in learning about computing technology. Our results suggest that the children with
the most experience typically have high levels of interest and access to tools at home but that students who have
high  interest without  tools at  home    sometimes   find ways   to  gain these  experiences   inside  or  outside   of school.
Results from cluster analysis further suggest a compelling set of three different profiles of students based on the
variables of fluency, interest and home access to tools.         Notably, students matching a profile of low fluency and
limited home access to tools but high interest appear to exhibit a different general pattern of technology use (e.g.,
participating  more    frequently in   entertainment  activities than in   communication    or  learning   activities involving
technology) compared to students matching a profile of high interest, access and fluency or to students matching a
profile of high access, medium interest, and average fluency.        Results from analysis of individual activities are also
notable: Students matching the first profile, for instance, reported playing educational games and writing for fun
substantially more often than average for the overall sample population; Moreover, they used "instant messaging"
substantially less often than average, while instant messaging was an activity among the most frequent activities for
students  matching     the other  two  profiles.   Interview data  help    present more     detailed profiles  of the    learning
ecologies of students who vary in their experience/resource/interest profiles.

Poster 2. Community-based computer clubhouses as contexts for bridging divides: Evidence for
their central role in supporting the technological fluency of children without home access. Caitlin
Martin, Susie Wise, Brigid Barron, and Sarah Lewis, Stanford University

          In  order to  look  more    deeply at  the  learning   ecologies of   youth  who    have   found  a way   to   develop
technological fluency despite low home access, we conducted two years of ethnographic research in technology
programs at after-school community centers in areas with low SES. We developed a set of case portraits of youth in
this environment through weekly participant observation, surveys and interviews conducted with participants around
their technology    projects and  experiences,   and  interviews  with  parents   and  staff. Our  poster  will  discuss  youth
whose central source of fluency development is the community center, focusing on cases from two club contexts: a
computer clubhouse space and a long-term web design program. Results suggest that youth are highly interested in
the opportunities and that some are able to use the human and material resources at the community center to build
fluency, but that there are few instances where this excitement and knowledge are nurtured by other contexts like
school. We will frame the cases in the local community, drawing on survey and interview data collected from 160
students from a local middle school that was located 1.7 miles away from the community center that served as a
focal context for our research.

                                                             1023                                                     ICLS 2006
Poster 3. The role of online and face-to-face social networks in nurturing interest and experience.
Rachel Fithian, Brigid Barron, Karin Chapin, and Lori Takeuchi, Stanford University

          This poster presents   findings  from    recent  case   studies    of middle  school  children  in  Silicon  Valley   who
exhibit high levels of technological fluency and engagement. A primary goal of conducting these case studies was to
gain understanding of the learning ecologies that support these high-fluency children including their social networks
and access to learning activities in an out of school. We share the stories of two children from this set of case studies
and the role that online and "live" communities play in their learning and development. "Layla" is on her school's
math team and participates in an online math forum. Layla's mathematical expertise is central to her identity, and
her involvement in this forum led to her interest in learning about programming which she acted on by enrolling in a
class at school.  "Caleb" is experienced in the fields of computer science and technology; he started programming
and tinkering at toddler age and has amassed an extensive resume of technological accomplishments. In interviews,
Caleb presents himself as a contributing member of a "live" community of technology experts. While both children
are members     of  learning  communities,      the   motivations     they    express   for membership,      their  pathways    into
participation, and  the outcomes      of  involvement     differ. We     will discuss   themes  around    the  role of  community
including contribution to feelings of belonging and identity, and positioning in larger networks involving issues of
power hierarchies and molding the future.

Overview          paper      II:    Supporting            Urban          Youth       in     Developing           Empowered
Technology-User Identities by Bridging Home, School and Afterschool Contexts
Diana Joseph & Nichole Pinkard

          Many   middle-class    children naturally   and  automatically      acquire   the technological  fluency    they  need  to
successfully mediate school, home and community environments. In stark contrast, for the majority of children from
low-income    urban families,    this experience   is far  from     reality.  Our  project  aims  to level   the  playing   field by
scaffolding the   development    of   empowered    technology       user identities  in disadvantaged   urban    youth.  Extensive
research  has  highlighted   the importance    of identity   as   a determiner    of goals  and  effort (cf.  Eccles  et al, 1983).
Cultural  factors play  a  key   role  in determining     identities  that   operate  in  academic   and  work     settings (cf van
Knippenberg,   2000).   Our      work  places   this  set of ideas    at  the   center  of  the design  of   a program    to foster
technological fluency associated with identities that empower urban youth to work and play in new media domains.

          Working in the middle school grades at an urban charter elementary school, we have begun to implement
Digital Youth, a program that spans the worlds of school, home, and after-school activities. Our program immerses
youth in  frequent, substantial,   meaningful,    pleasurable     technology     learning   opportunities in   multiple  ecological
settings (Barron, 2004).     Through     this immersion,   they     develop   technological  fluency  and    take  on  identities as
powerful  users,   creators, and   teachers    of technology.       We   believe  that  as  young  people     begin  to  contribute
technological expertise across their environments, they will develop the knowledge, dispositions, skills, and social
connections to enter technology careers and degree programs.

          The Digital Youth program serves approximately sixty middle-school students at an urban charter school
serving African-American students.        Each student has a laptop for their own use in and out of school.             The school
curriculum integrates the use of laptops, especially in milestone projects in the major academic content areas. After
school, students participate in interest-based clubs.     In addition, workshops highlight key skills needed in school and
in clubs, including   tool workshops      (such as Excel   Basics    and  FinalCut    ProBasics)  and   skill  workshops    (Digital
Storytelling, Teaching Technology Skills to Peers).          Skilled participants offer tutorial office hours to other young
people before and after school.   We aim to provide summer internship opportunities for students who have earned an
advanced credential.   Because the laptop travels home with students, families have new opportunities to learn about
technology, and to identify their children as technology experts. A centerpiece of the program is the credentialing
system, which articulates skills that learners can demonstrate in order to earn specific quasi-professional titles, rights
and responsibilities. Our presentations in this symposium highlight design and preliminary findings from the pilot
year of the Digital Youth program.

                                                              1024                                                        ICLS 2006
Poster 1. Three club designs to foster the development of empowered identities. R. Benjamin Shapiro,
Karla Thomas, Nick Jaffe & Todd Carter, University of Chicago

           In an effort to create a sustainable model, the Digital Youth program makes use of club leaders and club
models from a variety of sources.    This poster highlights similarities, differences, and examples of student work, and
preliminary design lessons found by looking across three club designs. These clubs are intended to draw students
into new identities as technology users.     Video Game Design Club is led by a graduate student with technical and
learning environment design skills. The work involved in this club takes place mainly in the virtual space of Alice
(http://www.alice.org/), with occasional use of platform gaming systems.        The club is physically set in the school's
science classroom, including substantial infrastructure designed to support purposes other than those of the club.
Robotics Club is led by four professional engineers at a major firm. The club is centralized around a Lego robotics
competition, and the attendant materials.    This club works in a space used only after school.      Digital Music is led by
two musicians with extensive experience as club leaders and creators of digital music studios in schools.          They have
created  an   established  and articulated learning environment     designed and   tested over   several years.  Their work
takes place in a digital music studio with instruments, microphones, computers and other recording equipment, built
into what once was a small office in the school. The space is designed so that, as in a professional studio, each
physical object has a specific location and routines for its use.    This poster describes the implications of club leader
experience, curriculum design, physical materials, and space for identity development.

Poster     2. Digital  connectors:    Using    human        resources   to   bridge  between      existing   sociocultural
identities    and  new     empowered       technology-user      identities.  Nichole   Pinkard    and    Tiffanie  Jackson,
University of Chicago

           Researchers such as Gee (2003), Bryson et al. (2003) and Pinkard (2005) conjecture that many children,
especially minority youth, lack access to digital savvy mentors whose presence and products could serve to engage
other youth    in  acquiring   new  media   literacies. Gender    research   (Bryson  &   de   Castell,  1996;  de  Castell&
Bryson,1997; Hawkins, 1985) has shown that the lack of female role models and female peers willing to engage in
technical courses dramatically limits the number of women willing to pursue activities that require technological
abilities. Barron (2004) suggests that youth new to programming are more likely to learn from a peer or parent in an
informal context while a technically experienced youth was more likely to take courses and learn from books.                In
order to invite learners into taking on new identities, our design calls on adults with expert identities in technology
fields, and adults with whom young participants in our program identify.           Drawn from local colleges, universities
and an arts education organization, club and workshop leaders create as well as social environments that reflect how
technology user identities operate in the real world. At the same time, they interpersonal connections with students
that we expect will allow them to guide these youth in moving toward taking on technology identities.                 In this
poster, a club leader and the program manager present initial designs at the program and club levels, and describe
participant responses.

Poster 3. Credentials as an invitation to empowered technology-user identities. Diana Joseph and
Akili Lee, University of Chicago

           Young   people  develop   clear images   of  the learning  stages required  to accomplish     goals  connected   to
identities they care about (Nasir, 2002). We conjecture that most urban youth have limited exposure to adults in
technology professions.     The identities associated with these types of careers are likely to appear unattainable or
undesirable. To help students get on the path for technology-based careers, we must first help them perceive how
technological skills are related to desirable identities, how they are developed over time and how they enable lead to
new and more interesting tasks. Similarly, we want students to understand how technologists interact with, educate,
and  problem    solve with  their peers, and  push  each    other's thinking and   creativity.   In order to guide youth in
learning   new  media  literacies and adopting   identities that  highlight  their growing knowledge,     we   are creating a
system   of   credentials.     These  credentials,  based   in professional  work    identities, lay out  requirements    for
demonstrations of skills and ethical practices.    These demonstrations lead to related rights that serve the needs and
capacities of the school and community. For example, a youth who demonstrates web design skills and ethics and
thus  earns   the Webmaster    credential  might   acquire  the  right to post pages   on  the   school's website,   and  the
responsibility to manage a section of that website. view the credential system as an important vehicle for helping
youth understand the language and relationship between new media literacies, and how to move from one set of

                                                             1025                                                   ICLS 2006
skills to the next.   We conjecture that as youth complete certifications along a developmental pathway they will
begin to internalize the language, skills, processes, affordances and constraints of new media literacies.

Overview     Paper     III: Beyond       Point    &    Click:   Creating     Programming           Technologies         and
Opportunities for Supporting Technology Fluency in Afterschool Programs
Yasmin Kafai

        Many after-school programs have been installed to compensate for the lack of computer resources found in
low-income communities. Congress appropriated over $991 million for after-school programs in 2005 for the 21st
Century Community Learning Centers (CCLC) Program. These after-school programs not only include academic
and extracurricular   activities, but  also technology     education   programs.  There   are currently more      than  2,000
Community Technology Centers (CTCs) and related projects serving low-income and minority students nationwide.
These  include  libraries, youth   organizations,   settlement  houses,  housing  development      centers, and   stand-alone
computing centers (Schwartz, 2003). Most of these after-school programs offer structured, directed instruction on
basic computer operation, software application packages and basic internet use very much like the "point & click"
vocational classes  students  encounter   in  their schools.    Even those few   offering a   less structured  environment,
without pre-existing instructions or adult-led classes, focus on self-contained software packages, such as educational
games and interactive storybooks. Hardly any program attempts to offer programming as part of their afternoon
activities. Opportunities to learn about creative applications and programming in community technology settings are
virtually absent.
       Our presentations will focus on findings from two years of developing and implementing a new media-rich
programming     environment   and  activities  in a   Los  Angeles   community   technology   center  (CTC)     visited  by a
predominantly Latino/a and African-American youth ages 8-18.          Unlike most schools, the guiding philosophy of our
CTC had already cast a wider net around technology use and design by promoting access to technology fluency --
in contrast to computer literacy -- and by emphasizing personal expression as an essential catalyst for the learning
and use of technology (NRC, 1999). The center, where children and youth are considered "members" (as opposed to
students) of a  learning   community,   encourages     them  to devise multi-media,   multi-application activities    that are
founded   upon  their personal interests  (Resnick,    Rusk, &   Cooke,  1998).   Yet our initial  observations    at the  site
revealed that programming, unlike many other creative technologies, was not part of the members' activities.

        Our   framework     which  builds   on Jeannie    Oakes   (1992) model    examines    the  political, normative    and
technical dimensions that inform the introduction of technology fluency activities within the CTC. We address the
"technical changes"    such as    the development     of a  new   media-rich  programming     environment,    approaches    to
mentoring, and new activities that are critical but not sufficient in introducing change. The normative dimensions
address deep-seated   beliefs  about   what  kind   of technology  activities are appropriate  for   community     members.
Finally, the political dimensions focus on the cross-institutional relationships and alliances between the CTC and
other organizations that are aimed at addressing the lack of technology fluency.      These political changes are critical,
in that they build necessary support for providing both the commitment and resources for the changes to occur, and
to be sustained. Such analytical lenses are not often discussed within the learning sciences but they will help us
understand the resistances and opportunities in changing activity structures and interaction processes.

Poster  1.   Designing     Software    to   Foster     Technological     Fluency   in  Community-Based            Learning
Centers. Mitchel Resnick, MIT

        This poster will discuss the guiding principles underlying the design of a new programming environment,
called Scratch, that is grounded in the practices and social dynamics of Computer Clubhouses, a network of after-
school  centers in  low-income    communities.    Scratch  adds  programmability  to  the media-rich   and    network-based
activities that have proven most popular among youth at Computer Clubhouses. With Scratch, kids can create new
types of digital-arts projects, dynamically transforming images with Photoshop-like filters, mixing in sound clips
and drum beats, and integrating inputs from real-world sensors. Scratch is designed to make computer programming
more  accessible  and  motivating,    expanding   the  range of  what  Clubhouse  members     can  design     and create  with
computers,   while  also helping   them  learn  important    concepts  and ways   of  thinking associated     with  computer
programming.

                                                             1026                                                   ICLS 2006
Poster 2. Creative Partnerships: New Approaches to Mentoring as Pathways towards Technology
Fluency. Yasmin B. Kafai, Kylie Peppler, Shiv Desai, and Grace Chiu, UCLA

         This poster presents a recent intervention that introduced undergraduate mentors into programming and
provided support for programming projects in CTCs. While community service learning (Vogelsang & Astin, 2000)
is now  considered   an essential part of  undergraduate   education,  it is  seldom done    with the  intention of  having
undergraduates learn new skills -- let alone advanced skills like programming -- for the purposes of mentoring in a
community technology center. Traditionally, one would expect to have computer science and not liberal arts majors
mentoring young children in learning programming. However, we contend that inexperienced programmers are a
valuable  resource for  members    because   the  undergraduates   are   able to  provide  support    and collaborate  with
members   creating   a more  equitable   partnership. We   will  present  findings from   an  analysis   of  mentor/mentee
interactions results   from  two  undergraduate    classes in  the education     minor that  participated    in this  effort,
highlighting their perceptions of mentoring and their relationship to technology before and after the intervention.

Poster 3. Hook-ups: Integrated Physical and Virtual Design. Amon D. Millner, MIT

       This poster discusses a new initiative, called Hook-ups, that engages youth in multiple, integrated types of
design activities. In working on Hook-ups projects, youth build physical input devices to control computer programs
that they write themselves. The poster focuses on the relationships between three aspects of the Hook-ups building
experience: collaboration, physical design, and virtual design. We present examples from diverse youth working on
Hook-up   projects at  Computer   Clubhouse  after-school    centers. Several cases  are  presented    where learners work
alone, in groups, and begin projects by planning or tinkering with physical or virtual objects. We also discuss design
criteria for technical and social aspects of the Hook-ups project.

References
American    Association  of  University  Women     (2000).   Tech-savvy:   Educating   girls in   the  new   computer  age.
         Washington, DC: Educational Foundation of the American Association of University Women.
Attewell, P.  (2001).   Children  of the  digital divide.  Paper presented    at the annual   meetings    of the American
         Educational Research Association, New Orleans, USA.
Barron, B. (2004). Learning Ecologies for Technological Fluency:         Gender and Experience Differences. Journal of
         Educational Computing Research, 31(1), 1-36.
Barron, B. (accepted for publication). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development:     A learning
       ecologies perspective.  To appear in Human Development.
Barron, B., Shatz, C. & Martin, C. (in preparation). Profiles of interest, access, and fluency building
       experience in Silicon Valley: When interest isn't enough. Manuscript in preparation.
Bryson, M., Petrina, S., de Castell, S., & Braundy, M. (2003)."Conditions for Success"?" Sex-disaggregated analysis
         of  performance  and  participation indicators   in technology-intensive    courses in   B.C.  secondary  schools.
         Canadian Journal of Science, Mathematics and Technology, 3, 185-195.
Bryson, M. & de Castell, S. (1996). Learning to make a difference: Gender, new technologies, and in/equity. Mind,
         Culture and Activity, 2(1), 3-21.
Camp, T. (1997). The incredible shrinking pipeline. Communications of the ACM, 40(10).
de  Castell, S, &    Bryson, M.   (Eds.).  (1997).  Radical   in<ter>ventions:   Identity,   politics, and   difference/s in
         educational praxis. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Eccles, J. S., Adler, T. F., Futterman, R., Goff, S. B., Kaczala, C. M., Meece, J. L., et al. (1983). Expectancies,
         values, and academic behaviors. In J. T. Spence (Ed.), Achievement and achievement motivation (pp. 75-
         146). San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Gee, J. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hawkins, J. (1985). Computers and girls: Rethinking the issues. Sex Roles, 13, 163­180.
Kaiser Family Foundation (2005). Generation M: Media in the lives of 8-18 year olds. Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser
         Family Foundation.
Nasir, N. (2002).  Identity, Goals   and  Learning:   Mathematics     in Cultural  Practice. Mathematical    Thinking  and
         Learning, 4(2 & 3), 213-247.
National  Research   Council  (1999).  Being  fluent  with   information  technology.  A   report  of   the  Committee    on
         Information Technology Literacy. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

                                                           1027                                                   ICLS 2006
Oakes, J. (1992).   Can tracking  research inform  practice?    Technical, normative  and political considerations.
         Educational Researcher, 21(4), 12-21.
Pew Reports. (2002). The digital disconnect: The widening gap between Internet-savvy students and their schools.
      Internet     and     American       Life     Project.       Washington,     DC.     4      August      2005.
      http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=67.
Pinkard, N.(2005).  How   The   Perceived  Masculinity and/Or     Femininity Of Software  Applications  Influences
         Students' Software Preferences In Journal of Educational Computing Research, 32, 57-78.
Resnick, M., Kafai, Y. B., & Maeda, J. (2003). A Networked, Media-Rich Programming Environment to Enhance
         Technological  Fluency  at After-School Centers in    Economically-Disadvantaged  Communities.    Proposal
         (funded) to the National Science Foundation: Arlington, VA.
Resnick, M., Rusk, N., and Cooke, S. (1998). Computer Clubhouse: Technological fluency in the inner city.    In D.
         Schon, B. Sanyal, and W. Mitchell (eds.), High Technology and Low-Income Communities.         Cambridge:
         MIT Press.
Schwartz, W. (2003).   After-school and community technology education programs for low-income families.      New
         York: ERIC Clearinghouse on Urban Education.     Retrieved on July 15th, 2005 at http://www.eric.ed.gov.
van Knippenberg,    D.  (2000). Work   Motivation  and   Performance:      A  Social Identity Perspective. Applied
         Psychology:  An International Review, 49(3), 357-371.
Vogelsang, L.J. & Astin, A. W. (2000). Comparing the effects of community service and service-learning. Michigan
         Journal of Community Service Learning, 3, 25-34.
Warschauer, M. (2000). Technology and school reform: A view from both sides of the track. Educational Policy
     Analysis Archives. 8(4).

Acknowledgements
Barron's research was supported by an NSF Early Career award (NSF REC ­ 0238524) and funds awarded through
a Science of Learning Center grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF REC - 0354453), by an Iris Litt
award, and by the International Collaborative Education Foundation.   Kafai's research is conducted in collaboration
with Mitchel Resnick's group at the MIT Media Lab and supported by a grant of the National Science Foundation
(NSF-0325828). Joseph & Pinkard's work was supported by an NSF Early Career award granted to Pinkard (NSF-
00333002) and by a grant from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.     The views expressed are those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the supporting funding agencies or the host research
institutions.

                                                          1028                                               ICLS 2006
