          Innovative Session: Early Childhood Robotics for Learning
Marina Bers, Chris Rogers, Laura Beals, Merredith Portsmore, Kevin Staszowski, Erin Cejka, Adam Carberry, and
                                     Brian Gravel, Tufts University, Medford, MA
    Email: marina.bers@tufts.edu, chris.rogers@tufts.edu, laura.beals@tufts.edu, merredith.portsmore@tufts.edu,
    Kevin_joseph.staszowski@tufts.edu, erin.cejka@tufts.edu, adam.carberry@tufts.edu, brian.gravel@tufts.edu
                         Janice Anderson and Michael Barnett, Boston College, Newton, MA
                                        Email: anderaab@bc.edu, barnetge@bc.edu

          Abstract: Robotics is a powerful learning manipulative for young children (four through seven
          years) as it enables the early introduction of engineering and programming. This session begins
          with a theoretical introduction to the robotic technology of programmable LEGO bricks and its
          relationship to developmentally appropriate practice. This will be followed by an interactive poster
          and  demonstration   session  where   participants can  learn about  and discuss  different research
          projects using   robotics in  early childhood  education, including: fostering interactions between
          parents and children; promoting problem-solving skills; engaging teachers with different teaching
          styles; innovative partnerships between pre-service teachers, in-service teachers, and engineers;
          innovative curriculum projects using this technology; and the use of robotics with special needs
          students. A table with LEGO bricks and computers with ROBOLABTM software will be available
          so  participants can explore    the  materials in  a  hands-on   workshop    environment.  After the
          presentations, the session organizer will lead an open discussion.

Objectives of the Session
          This session aims to introduce a research program that uses an educational technology that has a broad
range  of applications  for early   childhood  in classrooms   as well  as in after-school settings and programs. The
technology, programmable robotic LEGO bricks, is comprised of two parts: (1) physical robotic LEGO pieces, and
(2) ROBOLAB        programming  software.     The robotics pieces include  traditional LEGO   pieces, a microcomputer
(called an RCX), motors, lamps, light sensors, touch sensors, wires, axles, and gears. ROBOLAB is a drag-and-drop
graphical interface that has several levels of difficulty, so the user can tailor the functions that are available to their
personal skills and developmental stage (Resnick, et al, 1996; Portsmore, 1999). Research methodologies used with
this technology and research findings about this technology will be presented via the posters, and the open-ended
discussion that concludes the session. The open-ended discussion will include implications for classroom practice,
pre-service and in-service teacher education, home-school connections, curriculum development, integration of new
technologies in the classroom, and new methods of data collection.

Session Format
          For this interactive session, a set of posters highlighting research projects using robotics in early childhood
will be provided along with demonstrations of the technology and videos of the technology being used. To open the
session, however, the session organizer will give a short introduction to the technology and area of research (as
summarized below), then there will be time for people to circulate the room--viewing the six posters (as described
below) and asking questions--followed by an open discussion moderated by the session organizer. The LEGO brick
materials and the ROBOLAB programming software will be available on a table so that participants in the session
will have an opportunity to explore and gain a better understanding of the technology used in all of these research
projects. Resources for additional learning will be provided at the end of the session.

Introduction: Early childhood and robotics
          The use of technology as an educational tool is becoming widespread. The use of traditional manipulatives
as  a teaching aid  is evident at   the youngest  ages--most   early childhood  settings have building  bricks, Pattern
Blocks, Cuisenaire Rods, etc. in order to allow students to build, design, experiment, and be creative (Brosterman,
1997). "Digital manipulatives" are now supplementing traditional hands-on materials, but they also afford students
the opportunity to explore ideas and concepts beyond what traditional manipulatives can provide (Resnick, 1998).

          The use of robotic manipulatives can serve as an ideal hands-on tool for children to learn about science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) concepts. Children can explore traditionally abstract concepts such as

                                                           1036                                                ICLS 2006
gears, levers, joints, motors, and sensors in a concrete manner. While using robotic materials, children can learn
STEM concepts--which are traditionally taught through boring and uninspired means--in a fun and creative way by
engaging in their own design projects. This type of work with the robotic LEGO bricks is done in the sprit of
"constructionism,"    which  conceives   the computer    as  a  material   to  build  and design  with   (Papert,   1980).  Bers
identified four pillars of educational experiences designed within a constructionist framework: (1) the potential of
technological environments to help learners learn by doing, by actively inquiring, and by playing, (2) the importance
of objects for supporting the development of concrete ways of thinking and learning about abstract phenomena, (3)
the need for powerful ideas that span across different areas of the curriculum, and (4) the premium of self-reflection
which engages learners in meta-cognition (Bers, Ponte, Juelich, Vera, & Schenker, 2002). These four pillars are
consistent   with  developmentally-appropriate      practice   in    early  childhood    settings (Bredekamp,       1997).    The
introduction  to  the session  will  present  this  theoretical work    and   implications  for   classroom  practice,    teacher
education, home-school connection, curriculum development, integration of new technologies in the classroom, and
research methods.

Poster 1: Fostering a Home-School Connection Through Robotics
         New technologies are slowly making it into the early childhood classroom; however, many families expose
their children to these technologies before they encounter them in the formal school setting. Thus many parents
serve as the first teachers of technological literacy to their children. Or, as is more frequent, parents and children
learn together new computational skills. What are the complexities hidden behind this learning process in which
both adults and children are learning at the same time?

         In response to these questions, Project Inter-Actions was designed (Bers, New, & Boudreau 2004). The
study was    developed   to  examine:  (a) the  interactions   between     children  and  parents as   they both    learn a   new
technology   and  as  they  work  together to  create personally     meaningful   projects; (b)   the  interactions between    an
abstract technology,    such as   a computer   program,   and   a    concrete  technology,  such   as  LEGO     bricks;   (c) the
interactions between     the technological   ability  of  young      children  and   the  developmental     appropriateness    of
technology for young children; and (d) the interactions between technology, art, and culture. This, study, called
"Project Inter-Actions" was also developed with three major educational philosophies and concepts in mind: (a) the
philosophy of constructionsim (Papert, 1993), (b) the concept of the zone of proximal development (Vygostky,
1978), and (c) the concept of peer learning environments (Blumenfeld, Marx, Soloway, & Krajcik, 1996).

         For  this study,   17 parent-child  dyads   and  20   first and   second   grade children  were    taught, during    five
weekend    sessions,  to use   robotic programmable      LEGO     bricks   to  create their own    meaningful    final  projects
involving  both   programming     and  building components.     The     programmable     LEGO     kits are  especially  ideal  as
support  for constructionism     because   students can  explore     abstract  thoughts,  ideas,  and   designs with   concrete
materials. Based on the four pillars of constructionism (Bers, et al., 2002), Project Inter-Actions workshops were
designed to allow participants to learn with hands-on, fun activities with concrete materials, to explore powerful
ideas, and to allow participants opportunities for self-reflection upon their projects.

         In  order   to  analyze  Project  Inter-Actions,  four   main    data sources    were  used:   (1) videotapes    of  the
workshops,   (2)  "memos"    that were  written by   every   instructor  at the   end of  each session,  (3) photographs      and
descriptions of the final projects written by the participants and posted on the project website, and (4) pre- and post-
questionnaires that were completed by all participants (and the parents of participants in the children-only sessions).
Using these data sources, final projects were evaluated by the teachers/researchers by developing a scoring system
which evaluated building and programming skills displayed by the projects.

         A significant difference was found between building and programming aspects of final projects between
the children-only projects and the parent-child projects (Beals & Bers, in press). This suggests that Vygotzky's zone
of proximal development played an important role, but it is argued that the children in the parent-child groups did
not learn as much as the children in the children-only groups, as the parents were too involved in their own learning
and did not tailor their instruction to their children at a level appropriate for the children to understand. The findings
from this study will shed light over different ways in which parents and children can spend time together learning
something    new--learning   about   a new   technology   is part    of a  larger picture  of  collaborative  family   learning,
Children's fascination with new technologies provide a unique opportunity to engage families in learning together.
However, just as teachers go through years of school to learn how to teach, the more opportunities parents have to
learn with their children, the better their collaboration will become.

                                                             1037                                                     ICLS 2006
Poster 2: Exploring the impact of an engineering design curriculum on first grade
students' problem solving strategies
          This presentation describes a newly developed research project that focuses on exploring how engineering
design activities impact students' problem-solving abilities. The presentation will identify the need for engineering
education  in   early elementary education   and  explore   the toolset that Tufts University's  Center  for Engineering
Educational Outreach (CEEO) has selected for bringing engineering activities to young children. The methods of
data collection that have been piloted in the research project will be described, preliminary conclusions will be
presented, and issues and difficulties will be discussed.

          While it is clear that successfully completing engineering projects requires problem-solving skills, it is not
obvious whether students develop those problem-solving skills through their participation in open-ended design
challenges. This presentation reports on a pilot study conducted with five first-grade classrooms in a suburban
Boston school district (approximately 40 students) to implement 12 weeks of a curriculum entitled Engineering by
Design. Engineering by Design is a sequence of activities that introduces mechanical concepts like structures, gears,
and pulleys as well as engineering design ideas, such as constraints, testing, and redesign, to young children through
open ended LEGO-based challenges. Projects range from constructing a chair for a stuffed animal to building a
motorized   snowplow.    The  goal  of the  activities is to increase  students' exposure  to engineering   concepts  and
integrate key math and science concepts. In addition, Engineering by Design seeks to enhance their competence and
confidence in problem solving. However, to date there are no developed assessment methods that aim to evaluate if
the curriculum impacts students' problem solving.

          Two of the classrooms serve as intervention classrooms by participating in Engineering by Design for the
first few weeks of school while the remaining classrooms serve as the control (and will complete the activities later
in the year). The pre- and post-testing is conducted during one-on-one interviews during which the student is asked
to perform an engineering problem solving task (rescue a toy from an enclosure, retrieve keys from a box). These
interviews are video-taped and coded for strategies used, number of attempts, response to success or failure, and
persistence. In addition, the interactions in the intervention classroom are also video-taped and students' classroom
work (journals, creations) is collected. Parents also complete a survey on their child's interests, experiences, and
choices in play. Finally, teachers assess each student's competence with respect to grade level for major subject
areas (reading, mathematics). Results from these assessments (which are only in their pilot stage) will be presented
as well as the issues of reliability and validity that have arisen.

Poster     3:      Simple      Machines,         Complex            Style--Teaching         Methodology            in    a
ROBOLAB Environment
          Even though ROBOLAB technology is being integrated into educational settings, teachers have received
little training on  how  to effectively teach  with    this technology. The   objective of this research   project was   to
determine the instructional benefits and challenges associated with the interaction between teaching style and an
early-childhood robotics curriculum. A group of first- and second-grade children participated in one of two week-
long   ROBOLAB      workshops.   The   curriculum used    in these  workshop   introduced  children to the   building and
programming components of the LEGO robotic and ROBOLAB technologies and the concept of simple machines.
One    session  of the workshop  was   taught with     an emphasis   on a child-centered,  constructionist philosophy    of
teaching, while a teacher-directed, didactic philosophy was emphasized in the second session of the workshop.
Otherwise, the curriculum covered the same materials and ideas in each workshop. Data presenting differences both
within and between the two workshop groups will be presented as well as the innovative method for data collection.

Poster 4: Innovative Teaching Partnerships: Bringing engineering into elementary
school classrooms through collaboration
          Bringing robotics into elementary classrooms (PreK­4) places new demands on teachers regarding content
knowledge, teaching style, pedagogical beliefs, and general classroom management. Engaging 25 young children in
hands-on   design   challenges that interface with  battery-powered     microprocessors  that can be  programmed      on a
computer   is   a  daunting challenge   for any  educator.    This  project  describes innovative partnerships  between
engineering students and members of industry with pre-service and in-service teachers to provide these educators
with the support and resources they need to engage in meaningful, open-ended projects.

                                                             1038                                               ICLS 2006
STOMP and I-STOMP
         STOMP (Student Teacher Outreach Mentorship Program) was developed at Tufts University to leverage
the resources of engineering students to aid teachers in bringing engineering activities to their classrooms. STOMP
uses the   model of  a  two-way   mentorship--where      engineering   students are  helping  teachers  to learn about
engineering content and the teachers are helping the engineering students learn about education and how to interact
with young   students. The  outcome    of this  two-way    mentorship  is a teacher  who  is more   knowledgeable   and
confident about using engineering activities in his or her classroom and an engineering student who is aware of the
educational and societal issues in engineering and the need for early engineering education. The program does not
seek to transform engineers into educators but to help them understand the issues in education so that as future
leaders of industry and as voting citizens they can make informed decisions to support education. To date, the
STOMP program has had over 60 engineering students supporting 40 K­12 teachers and an estimated 1800 K­12
students. The STOMP model is being used to create similar outreach programs at other universities and modified for
use in high school as well.

         Industrial STOMP (I-STOMP) works with engineering and technology companies to encourage, train, and
support employee classroom volunteers. The employee volunteers--majority of whom are engineers--help teachers
bring hands-on LEGO robotics activities that focus on developing math, science, technology, and engineering skills
into the classroom. Currently, the program includes two major engineering companies with volunteers in central
Texas elementary schools and British primary schools. In addition to supporting the teachers, the industry volunteers
serve as mentors for the elementary students and bring real-world engineering experience into the classrooms.

Collaborative       Classes:      Pre-Service         Elementary       School     Teachers       and    First    Year
Engineering Students
         Pre-service elementary school teachers at Tufts, in one of their courses, focus on developing innovative
curriculum in math and science and tackle the question of how to integrate new technologies in their classrooms.
Typically, this course  can  be  frustrating   because the pre-service teachers  need   a great deal of support  at the
university and in the classroom environment. The instructor of the course generally has limited resources to help
each student   work on  a   meaningful project   that  allows them  to grapple  with the  issues of  math, science  and
technology.  Meanwhile    across campus,     a class  offered through  the  College  of Engineering  teaches  first-year
engineering students basic robotics and the engineering design process. Here the instructor grapples with providing
the students with an authentic design process that allows them to create something for a "real" client.

         A solution to both instructors' dilemmas is pairing pre-service teachers and first-year engineering students
together to work on developing a robotic technology-based lesson. The pre-service teachers focus on the educational
content and how to engage the students in a lesson while the engineering students focus on how to design and
develop supporting technology. This collaboration gives each group purpose and expertise while allowing them
opportunities to develop communication and project management skills. The result of these collaborations have
ranged from robotic cars that move up and down the number line to a robotic "Simon Says" that allowed children to
explore patterns and simple machines. This presentation will discuss results from this collaboration.

Poster     5:  Innovative       Curriculums          and   Tools:     From     ROBOTables         to   Underwater
Robotics
         As Lego robotic technology becomes more widespread in schools, educators are challenged to develop new
and innovative curriculums to continue to engage students in learning. Three new tools and related curriculums are
presented: (a)  underwater  robotics, (b) ROBOTable,     and   (c) stop-action moviemaking    (SAM).   These tools  and
curriculums are able to be scaled for use in early-childhood classrooms up to college-level courses.

Underwater Robotics
         The CEEO is developing a curriculum for underwater robotics that will give hands-on experiences for
elementary students to explore concepts such as buoyancy, propulsion, and water properties. Underwater robotic
activities allow students to experiment with many types of materials to explore how boats and submarines work.
This new curriculum is early in its developmental stages, but has gained much interest and attention from both
teachers and students. A number of underwater activity possibilities giving early elementary students an opportunity
to design and build submersible vehicles will be presented.

                                                           1039                                                ICLS 2006
The ROBOTable
         The ROBOTable is a frosted glass or Plexiglas tabletop that acts as a rear-projection screen. Through a
mounted projector below the table, an extended computer screen is projected on to the table via a mirror below (see
Figure 1). The table uses video conferencing capabilities, a camera to track objects and user interactions, and an
Internet connection for sharing data with other ROBOTables. Through the table, users can see two-dimensional
projections of remote robots while they navigate the tabletop with their own robot.

                                            Figure 1. ROBOTable set-up.

         Development of the ROBOTable is progressing in two areas. The first is to create a self-contained learning
environment    for training industry professionals, teachers,  and volunteers for mentorship  and   outreach work   in
schools. The aim is to familiarize teachers with engineering and engineers with teaching by practicing with pre-
designed activities from an online database. The second is to create a distance-learning tool for communication,
collaboration, and  real-time competition.  Participants  at different geographic locations  can share  an activity or
compete in the same shared workspace. Both goals can be realized by producing an interactive learning environment
that is enhanced   by judiciously including  new    technologies such  as augmented  reality (AR)   and tangible user
interface (TUI) devices. Five example activities have been developed aimed at assisting the user in learning how to
build with LEGO bricks and program in ROBOLAB.

Stop-Action-Movies (SAM)
         SAM is stop action movie making software that gives students the chance to make simple animations as a
way to explore and share ideas. By taking single-frame images and controlling the speed at which they are played
back, we empower students to make scientifically and mathematically accurate predictions of phenomena prior to
experimentation or design. With robotics, students can make (a) predictions of how a robot will behave under certain
conditions, (b) kinematic predictions of specific robot actions, or (c) an animation demonstrating what their robots
can do. The power comes in allowing students to control time and thus demonstrate things through animation that
may be difficult with video. For younger students, simply using the concept of demonstrating understanding in
animation format offers another mode of expression but also a window for the teacher, researchers, etc. into what the
student understands. For example, say a student is asked to make a movie explaining the "reasons for the seasons."
To effectively display this concept through an animation, the student must have a certain understanding of the
content. With traditional written deliverables, students can copy what they have heard or read elsewhere. With an
animation, the chance of them producing something simply from memory is quite rare. Thus the animation they
produce will essentially be their personal understanding of the content at hand.

         The actual process of making the animation also forces students to examine their beliefs on the subject.
Building and watching the movie allows them to critique their own understanding--if something does not look
"right" in the movie, they will either change their thought to match what they observed or change the movie to
match their prior understanding. With robotics, SAM can be used as a method for younger students to communicate
what  their robot  does. The  relative ease-of-use  in making  single-frame animations makes   this approachable    for
students of younger ages. In one school local to the CEEO, fourth-grade students animations explaining the phases
of the moon to second graders. While there were some misconceptions in these animations, the students spent a

                                                          1040                                               ICLS 2006
longer time thinking more critically with the content than with the traditional written methods of reporting. This tool
is an alternative media for students that provides a new dimension for sharing their knowledge with fellow students,
teachers, parents, and others.

Poster 6: Using Activity Theory and Situated Cognition to Analyze and Describe
Special Needs Students Understanding of Engineering Design Principles Through
LEGO Robotics
        This paper represents a pilot study of a LEGO Robotics Curriculum which is currently being used to teach
the Engineering Design    Principles  that are presently    tested on the  Massachusetts  Comprehensive   Assessment
System (MCAS) to a group of special needs students in grades one through five at the Chamberlain Elementary
School (pseudonym) in Allston-Brighton, Massachusetts. The curriculum represents the current trend to move away
from the traditionalist models   of learning that   are more  didactic  in their approach. Instead  of conceptualizing
knowledge and learning as being transmitted from the teachers to students, a social constructivist approach, with
students emerging as active participants in their own learning experiences, has emerged.

        Two special needs classes at Chamberlain Elementary were used in the study. Class A consisted of six
students, all male, in a special needs class for grades one through three. Class B consisted of twelve students, eleven
boys and one girl, in a fourth and fifth grade special needs class. These classes met with the science specialist once a
week on Friday afternoons for fifty minutes.

        This naturalistic inquiry   study  utilizes a mixed   methodological  approach with  grounded   interpretations
(Guba & Lincoln, 1983). Quantitative surveys and drawings as well as qualitative ethnographic data was collected
over a several  month   period   of time   through   direct observation and  field  notes  directed at specific  groups
participating in the activity. Activity theory was used as both the theoretical lens and tool of analysis in this study.
The relation of the participant and the object as it was mediated by the components of the activity system were
examined.

        The preliminary data suggests that it is important to begin to look at the complexities of the dynamics of the
LEGO robotic activity that exist. The dualities or tensions that arise may lead to outcomes which have not been
anticipated as was seen in the Student / Classroom tensions and the Group A / Group B interaction tensions. These
experiences will alter how future studies are situated. Additionally, it is important to harness tensions in order to
analyze how they affect classroom culture and learning goals.

Additional Resources
Tufts University Center for Engineering Educational Outreach (CEEO): www.ceeo.tufts.edu

Developmental Technologies, Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development, Tufts University:
        http://ase.tufts.edu/devtech/

Urban Sciences Research and Learning Group, Boston College: http://www2.bc.edu/%7Ebarnetge/
        urslg/urslhome.html

References
Beals, L., & Bers., M. (in press). Robotic technologies: When parents put their learning ahead of their child's.
        Journal of Interactive Learning Research.
Bers, M. U., Ponte, I., Juelich, K., Viera, A., & Schenker, J. (2002). Teachers as designers: Integrating robotics into
        early childhood education. Information Technology in Childhood Education Annual, 2002(1), 123­145.
Bers, M, New, B. & Boudreau, L (2004) "Teaching and learning when no one is expert: Children and parents
        explore technology" Journal of Early Childhood Research and Practice.
Bredekamp, S, Copple, C (1997) Developmentally Appropriate Practice in Early Childhood Programs: Serving
        Children from Birth to Eight. NAYEC Position Statement NAYEC, Washington, D.C.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., Soloway, E., & Krajcik, J. (1996). Learning with peers: From small group
        collaboration to collaborative communities. Educational Researcher, 25(8), 37­40.
Brosterman, N. (1997). Inventing Kindergarten. New York: Harry N. Adams Inc.

                                                          1041                                                 ICLS 2006
Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1983). Epistemological and methodological bases of naturalistic inquiry. In G. F.
       Madaus, M. S. Scriven, & D. L. Stufflebeam (Eds.), Evaluation models: Viewpoints on educational and
       human services evaluation (pp. 311­334). Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff Publishing.
Papert, S. (1980). MINDSTORMS: Children, Computers, and Powerful. NY: Basic Books
Papert, S. (1993). The children's machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. New York, NY: Basic
       Books.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1969). The Psychology of the Child. New York: Basic Books, Inc.
Portsmore, M. (Spring/Summer 1999). ROBOLAB: Inuitive robotic programming software to support life long
       learning. APPLE Learning Technology Review, 26­39.
Resnick, M., Bruckman, A., & Martin, F. (1996). "Pianos Not Stereos: Creating Computational Construction Kits".
       Interactions, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 41-50.
Resnick, M. (1998). "Technologies for Lifelong Kindergarten. " Educational Technology Research and
       Development, vol. 46, no. 4.
Vygotsky, L. M. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
       Harvard University Press.

                                                         1042                                               ICLS 2006
