   Whither Education Research? Science Policy Implications of NSF
                                            Research Support

  John C Cherniavsky, Janice Earle, Hari Narayanan, National Science Foundation, 4201 Wilson Blvd, Room 855,
                                                 Arlington VA 2230
                             jchernia@nsf.gov, jearle@nsf.gov, nnarayan@nsf.gov
        Roy Pea, Stanford University, Wallenberg Hall, Building 160, Stanford CA, roy.pea@stanford.edu
          John Bransford, University of Washington, College of Education, 210 Miller Hall, Seattle WA,
                                             bransj@u.washington.edu
    Marcia Linn, University of California Berkeley, 4611 Tolman, Berkeley CA 95720, mclinn@berkeley.edu

        Abstract: This session addresses policy implications of NSF support for the learning sciences.
        The session is organized around recent activities of NSF in the support of the learning sciences.
        The first presentation will address the report Cyberinfrastructure for Education and Learning for
        the Future and how the Learning Science community can respond to the research challenges in this
        report. A  second  theme    will be a  retrospective  look at  the Interagency   Education  Research
        Initiative and the Centers for Learning and Teaching programs and their affect on practice. A third
        presentation addresses the appropriateness of the core individual researcher programs in learning
        science at NSF. The final presentation will review some of the newly funded Science of Learning
        Centers from the researchers' perspectives. Discussions within this innovative session will revolve
        around science policy issues of funding learning science research in a constrained environment
        and the affect of that funding on research and practice.

Introduction
        This innovative session is planned to generate discussion on the affect of NSF support on research and
practice in the learning sciences. Lead discussants familiar with the NSF programs, as researchers, will introduce
four topics from the NSF learning science research portfolio spanning the range from individual research support to
large centers. Moderated discussions will revolve around two issues:

·   Has the research supported by NSF lead to either innovations in practice or to innovations in advancing learning
    science?
·   What should the future support of Learning Sciences look like?

        The  session is organized   around  four themes:  the  CELF    report  (CRA, 2005) Cyberinfrastructure for
Education and   Learning for the   Future;  an assessment of   two  programs     (the Interagency Education   Research
Initiative and the Centers for Learning and Teaching) that were intended to fund research that would affect practice;
an assessment   of the two main    NSF   programs  supporting    learning  science research  (the Advanced    Learning
Technologies program and the Research on Learning and Education program); an early assessment of the Science of
Learning Centers.

Cyberinfrastructure for Education and Learning for the Future
        The CELF report is the result of an NSF sponsored set of workshops whose purpose was to determine the
role of education research in the context of cyberinfrastructure (Atkins, 2003). The workshops were sponsored by
the Computing Research Association and the Society for Learning Sciences and were organized around four themes:
Modeling, Simulation and Gaming Technologies Applied to Education; Cognitive Implications of Virtual or Web-
Enabled Environments;    How  Emerging     Technology  and    Cyberinfrastructure     Might Revolutionize the Role  of
Assessment in Learning; and The Interplay Between Communities of Practice and Cyberinfrastructure. The report is
organized around the themes of Blending Formal and Informal Learning; Lifelong Learning Chronicles; Teaching
Through Cyberinfrastructure;  and    Communities   of Learners    with a   final section  on  Educational  Policy and
Cyberinfrastructure. Numerous policy and research recommendations to the learning science community on how
cyberinfrastructure will enable new research and raise new challenges to the learning science research community
were presented.

                                                         1043                                                 ICLS 2006
          A new Office of Cyberinfrastructure (OCI) has been established at NSF. The establishment of this Office
gives opportunities     to  the Learning    Science     community    to   participate  in  cyberinfrastructure    activities. The
responsibilities of this office are described below (from the NSF Web Site):

·   The Office of Cyberinfrastructure coordinates and supports the acquisition, development and provision of state-
    of-the-art cyberinfrastructure resources, tools and services essential to the conduct of 21st century science and
    engineering research and education.
·   OCI supports cyberinfrastructure resources, tools and related services such as supercomputers, high-capacity
    mass-storage systems, system software suites and programming environments, scalable interactive visualization
    tools, productivity     software   libraries and    tools, large-scale   data  repositories   and  digitized  scientific  data
    management systems, networks of various reach and granularity and an array of software tools and services that
    hide   the complexities     and    heterogeneity    of  contemporary     cyberinfrastructure     while  seeking  to   provide
    ubiquitous access and enhanced usability.
·   OCI supports the preparation and training of current and future generations of researchers and educators to use
    cyberinfrastructure     to further  their  research   and  education   goals,  while   also  supporting   the  scientific and
    engineering    professionals  who    create  and  maintain    these IT-based   resources     and systems  and  who    provide
    essential customer services to the national science and engineering user community.

Interagency Education Research Initiative
    The   Interagency    Education     Research  Initiative (IERI)  is  a three agency    (NSF,   NIH,   and  the Department    of
Education) program designed to fund projects that investigated education innovations at scale. The intent of the
program was to develop a research capacity to investigate innovations, which were shown to work in small contexts,
in large contexts (e.g. from classrooms to school districts; from districts to states; etc.).         This program was unique
within NSF as no other program had explicit research goals of both doing scale-up and studying the process of scale-
up for research on learning in K-12. The program invested more than $150 million over its 6 years in this type of
research.  As part of the IERI program, the Data Resources and Development Center (DRDC) was established at
NORC, a research center at the University of Chicago. This center has acted as a synthesis for the activities of the
IERI  grantees and   it  has   compiled  two   books  (forthcoming     from  Rowman     and  Littlefield  Publishing)  that   have
resulted  from  Program     work.      Scale-up  in Principle   suggests   that education   researchers    would   benefit    from
interactions from researchers in other fields (engineering or health, e.g.) and creates new frameworks for thinking
about what it means to "scale up" in schools and districts.          Scale-up in Practice draws on the work of the IERI
investigators and describes how to design and conduct studies that provide compelling evidence of an intervention's
impact in school settings and how to implement a specific intervention with fidelity once it as been tested. Below are
two examples of IERI projects and some of their findings:

          Modeling Across the Curriculum (Paul Horwitz, Concord Consortium)

          This project   is  developing    learning   tools that  enable   students'   to visualize   and  understand   complex
          scientific phenomenon.       The tools    are easy   to use,    easy  to incorporate    into curriculum,   and   freely
          distributed. The simulations cover all of high school science ranging from biology to chemistry to physics.
          The study is in its fourth year and longitudinal results are just beginning to be reported. The simulations are
          being used in curricula affecting more than 200 high schools in high school science classes around the
          country.

          As an  example,      initial results  using   chemical  reaction   simulations   within    the Connected     Chemistry
          curriculum    show   significant score    gains  for those   students using  the  simulations    as opposed   to    those
          students   not    using  the    simulations.     These   simulations     are    freely  available   on   the    web   at
          http://www.concord.org/downloads/.          Additional    longitudinal   studies  are   being   conducted    to further
          understand the properties of the simulations that contribute most to learning science.

          An Evaluation of Teacher Training for Triarchic Instruction and Assessment (Robert Sternberg, Yale
          University)

          This project directly addresses the training of teachers of science and mathematics to better enable their
          students   to learn.  Triarchic  cognitive  theory    posits  that individuals  learn   in three  modalities,   analytic

                                                               1044                                                    ICLS 2006
       thinking,   creative   thinking,  and  practical  thinking   and  that these modes     of learning  are present    in all
       learners, but in different concentrations. Triachic instruction is instruction that builds upon each modality ­
       for example in learning addition of whole numbers there would be a combination of analytic instruction
       (number     tables and     addition algorithms),   creative  (e.g.  working    with manipulatives)    instruction,    and
       practical   (e.g. real world    problem solving)   instruction.   The  theory, validated  in  small   studies, says  that
       building    upon   all three  modalities   improves   learning    especially when    instruction  is  tailored  to  each
       individuals preferred modalities.

       The project studied a Triarchic instruction intervention for teachers (12 hours in the summer) to enable
       them to utilize the triarchic theory in their own lessons. The study had three interventions ­ triarchic, a
       memory based/analytic intervention, and a critical thinking intervention. Strong gains were made under all
       three interventions with the triarchic intervention having the best gains.

       This study involved 196 teachers and 7702 students. It spanned four years, 9 states, 14 school districts, and
       110 schools. The participating districts spanned the spectrum of social and economic status. The samples
       included primarily classrooms of fourth-graders, but also included third- and fifth- graders who were taught
       by teachers participating in the study with their fourth-graders.

       The   project results  demonstrated     how   a theoretical  model  could   be translated  into  educational   practices
       with proven learning gains, inexpensively, that meet national and state standards in reading, science, and
       mathematics.

Centers for Learning and Teaching
       The Centers for Learning and Teaching (CLT) program focuses on the advanced preparation of science,
technology,  engineering,    and  mathematics     (STEM)    educators,    as  well  as  the   establishment    of meaningful
partnerships among   education    stakeholders,  especially  Ph.D.-granting    institutions,  school  systems,   and  informal
education performers.    Its goals are to  renew and   diversify the cadre of leaders in STEM education; to       increase the
number of K-16     educators  capable   of delivering    high-quality STEM    instruction  and   assessment;  and  to  conduct
research into STEM education issues of national import (e.g., the nature of learning, teaching strategies, and reform
policies and outcomes).   The effect of these programs on practice are just now being assessed and both CLT and
IERI have gathered a considerable amount of information about working with schools and about working at a larger
scale. This session will take a retrospective look at how these programs affected practice and a discussion of the
overall need for such programs.

       Technology Enhanced Learning in Science (TELS). (Marcia Linn, UC Berkeley).                    TELS is a partnership
       that  includes    UC   Berkeley,   Arizona  State,  Penn   State, Mills   College,  Technion,   Concord    Consortium,
       Norfolk State, and North Carolina State along with school district partners in Cambridge and Maynard
       (MA), Tempe (AZ), Mount Diablo and Berkeley (CA) and Durham (NC).                     TELS creates resources so that
       the   field can   investigate the  impact  of technology    on  science   learning  and  instruction.  The Center has
       created  resources     for teachers, defined    a research  agenda,   and conducted    investigations  to  advance    the
       agenda.     Resources produced to date include:
             ·     Technologies.     TELS   merged   WISE    (UC    Berkeley)  and  Pedagogica    (Concord    Consortium)    to
                   offer the research community a platform for design, development and delivery of inquiry science
                   curricula that includes dynamic visualizations and models.
             ·     Benchmark      Assessments  and   Knowledge      Integration  Rubric.    Working     with teachers,   TELS
                   identified science   topics that  perplex   students,   align with  standards,    and could   benefit  from
                   visualizations  and  models.    Twelve    topics   were selected   and  for   each  topic TELS     designed
                   assessments    that tapped  the   integrated understanding     shown    to  lead  to  learning from    prior
                   research.
             ·     Curriculum Projects.     Inquiry  activities were   designed   for each   of  the twelve  topics   using  the
                   TELS technologies.
             ·     Design Principles Database.      The database includes features from over 50 technology-enhanced
                   innovations.
             ·     Perspectives.   To   build on  research  in  the field, each  of the   twelve  partnerships   reviewed    the
                   research on their topic and created a short perspective written for a general audience to identify the

                                                             1045                                                     ICLS 2006
                   challenges of learning the topic, the common intuitions students bring to sciences classes, and any
                   relevant prior research along with promising directions for design.
             ·     Collaborative Courses.     Courses    are  jointly designed    for  postdoctoral    scholars, fellows, and
                   researchers. In 2004 the course was on Metacognition and Technology.
             ·     Research Agenda.     TELS     participants have    identified  six research   themes:  science  curriculum
                   design, scientific modeling and visualization, knowledge integration assessment, professional and
                   leadership development, science learning for diverse contexts and populations.

         Center on Assessment and Evaluation of Student Learning (CAESL).              (Steve Schneider, WestEd). CAESL
         is a collaboration with WestEd, Stanford, UC Berkeley, UCLA and the Lawrence Hall of Science.                    The
         partnership also  includes   several   California   school   districts.  CAESL      focuses   on improving   science
         teaching  and learning   through  the   informed    use of   quality assessments.       The Center   also builds  the
         knowledge   base   through     creating a   set of   resources    for    practitioners,  researchers,   parents, and
         policymakers.  The Center,
             ·     Develops   professional  capacity     for  assessment     and   evaluation    professionals   through   the
                   development masters and doctoral programs.
             ·     Provides professional development in assessment for practicing science teachers.
             ·     Promotes in-depth assessment training for preservice teachers.
             ·     Conducts research and development on formative assessment. And
             ·     Makes outreach to parents, administrators, policymakers and the general public available through
                   the production of online learning tools.

         Most recently, WestEd (with CAESL partners) provided leadership for the development of the 2009 NAEP
Science Assessment Framework.

         After three years  of  program   operation,  an external   evaluation    conducted    by Abt  Associates,   SRI, and
Westat (2005) showed that the CLTs have involved sizable numbers of disciplinary faculty in the work and that
more STEM faculty are becoming engaged in STEM education research.               The graduate programs have engaged over
300 doctoral students to date, and 90% of those students indicate that participating in a collaborative center that
includes multiple  institutions has  value over   and  above   other  single     institution graduate  programs.   They   cite
increased opportunities to interact with faculty and students at other institutions, and faculty indicate that the CLT
students are better prepared in multiple areas.

Research On Learning and Education and Advanced Learning Technologies
         The main programs for individual researcher grant support are the Research on Learning and Education
(ROLE) program and the new Advanced Learning Technologies (ALT) program. The ROLE program has typically
funded projects at  levels above    the typical  NSF  research   project   under  the  rationale  that NSF    needed to   build
capacity for research in this area. It has been the main supporter of Learning Sciences Research at NSF.            The ALT
program is a joint Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) directorate and Education and Human
Resources   (EHR)  directorate  program   aimed   at funding   innovations    in  technology   that  show  great  promise  for
learning sciences. The size of ALT awards is substantially smaller than ROLE awards. This session will look both
retrospectively on the affect of the ROLE program on learning sciences and prospectively as to how these programs
can adapt to new funding realities ­ in particular given the program realignment as described in the FY 2007 budget.

         As part of this realignment, a new division, the Division of Research on Learning in Formal and Informal
Settings (DRL) has been proposed as part of the FY   2007 budget.   This division incorporates much of the Division of
Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education and the Division of Research, Evaluation, and Communication. A new
program, Research on Education and Evaluation in Science and Engineering (REESE), incorporates the ROLE, IERI, and
evaluative research programs. Below  are two examples of projects funded by ROLE and ALT:

         Adaptive E-Learning for Middle-School Mathematics (Valerie Shute, Educational Testing Service)

         With the goal of helping teachers provide individualized instruction to students with disabilities - and to do
         so in the same  classroom   as  students  without    disabilities - NSF-funded      researchers  and educators   have
         successfully demonstrated a computer-based learning system for mathematics that can accommodate both

                                                           1046                                                      ICLS 2006
       visually impaired and sighted students. The system uses text enlargement on normal displays for low vision
       students, a Talking  Tactile Tablet  for blind students, and   normal displays for fully sighted  students. In
       addition, the system develops a model for each student's understanding of mathematical concepts, and then
       uses those  models  to provide problem-solving   advice  to  students  regardless of their visual acuity. The
       student models have been validate in a pilot test of 50 students, and the system is now being tested with
       over 300 blind, visually impaired, and fully sighted students.

       Developing Teacher's Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching (Heather Hill, University of Michigan)

       Over the past decade, policymakers have funded a range of professional development efforts designed to
       improve   elementary teachers' knowledge    of  the mathematics  they  teach. However,   there has been   little
       rigorous  research  investigating whether   and  when    teachers    develop  mathematical  knowledge     from
       professional development,    and  if so, what  features  of professional development   contribute  to teacher
       learning. This project provides an example of how such research might be done. Its preliminary results
       could lead to profound changes in teacher professional development.

       Using new measures of teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching, and a pre-test/post-test design that
       compared    the progress of  teachers participating in  California's Mathematics  Professional  Development
       Institutes (MPDIs) to those not participating, an assessment of whether and how teachers grew as a result of
       this experience was carried out. The analyses show that teachers participating in the MPDIs did improve
       their performance on these measures during the extended summer workshop portion of their experience. In
       the first year evaluation, teachers grew roughly half a standard deviation; in the second year evaluation,
       teachers grew roughly a third of a standard deviation. Teachers in the comparison group, by contrast, did no
       better on the post-test than on the pre-test. The analysis also suggests that program length (as measured in
       days in the summer workshop) and workshop focus on mathematical exploration, communication, analysis,
       and proof positively predicted teachers' learning. Lessons from this study are being published in the Journal
       of Research in Mathematics Education and in Educational Policy (forthcoming).

Science of Learning Centers
       The final session will provide a brief overview of the four Science of Learning Centers funded by NSF in
FY 2004. At least two of these centers have a focus directly related to ISLS researchers. The session will look
prospectively at the promise of these centers, in particular in regard to broader participation of the ISLS community
in them and how they fit in with existing learning science programs in EHR.
       The moderated discussions after these sessions will focus on the balance between modalities of support; on
new research opportunities afforded by cyberinfrastructure; on missed research opportunities; and on success stories
from the learning sciences research community.

References

Atkins, D.E. (Ed.) (January 2003) Revolutionizing Science and Engineering Through Cyberinfrastructure: A Report
       on the National Science Foundation Blue-Ribbon Advisory Panel on Cyberinfrastructure.
       http://www.cise.nsf.gov/sci/reports/atkins.pdf.
CRA (November 2005) Cyberinfrastructure for Education and Learning for the Future: A Vision and Research
       Agenda. Computing Research Association, Washington, DC.
       http://www.cra.org/reports/cyberinfrastructure.pdf

                                                        1047                                                ICLS 2006
