                                Theorizing Games in/and Education

                         Richard Halverson, David Shaffer, Kurt Squire, Constance Steinkuehler
                  University of Wisconsin- Madison, 225 North Mills Street, Madison, Wisconsin
         Email: halverson@education.wisc.edu, dws@education.wisc.edu; kdsquire@education.wisc.edu;
                                               e.steinkuehler@wisc.edu

        Abstract:     Games   are a nascent  topic for   educational research, with  an  increasing numberof
        conferences (e.g. Games, Learning, & Society), print publications (e.g. Games & Culture), and
        even federal grants (e.g. Quest Atlantis, RiverWorld, Whyville) recently given to the study and
        design of gaming technologies in/for education. However, to date, games have been chronically
        under-theorized     ­ a  "technology in   search of a   paradigm"  (Gredler, 1996).  This  symposium
        proposes new conceptualizations of games in relation to education. Our collective goal is to better
        articulate the nature of contemporary interactive technologies so as to forward educational theory;
        each paper addresses crucial aspects of games and gaming culture against a backdrop of research
        on learning, education, and society (c.f. Shaffer, Squire, Halverson, & Gee, 2005; Steinkuehler, in
        press). To do so, this unique symposium combines (a) ethnographies of naturally occurring game
        environments, (b) game-based learning programs based on findings of how learning occurs in such
        environments (c) a an empirical model based on games for thought, a type of professional practice
        simulation games, and (d) a research project using games and game technologies for social science
        theorizing.   Together,   these papers suggest   new  directions for the cognitive  sciences  pointing
        toward how to design learning systems for an information age networked society.

Games as a Highly Visible Medium for the Study of Distributed, Situated
Cognition: Constance A. Steinkuehler
        Early academic discussions in game-related fields about what games are and how they ought to be studied
tend to fall back on a tired dichotomy drawn between ludology (the study of games as formal rule systems) and
narratology (the study of games as texts), even when core scholars on both sides acknowledge that the debate is an
unfortunate red herring (cf. Aarseth & Jenkins debate, 2005). Games are designed experiences (Squire, in press) and,
as such, their study requires an understanding of the full range of human practices through which players actively
inhabit those worlds of rules and texts and render them meaningful. Games are a "mangle" (Pickering 1995) of
production and consumption ­ of human intentions (with designers and players in conversation with one another,
Robison in press), material constraints and affordances, evolving sociocultural practices, and brute chance. While
rules and stories partially constitute the designed object or little-g "game" at the center of a given individual's play
experience with   it, it is the emergent  culture or big-G  "Game"   around  them   that renders them  meaningful   and
consequential (Gee, 1999; Shaffer, 2005; Shaffer, et al. 2005; Squire, 2002, Steinkuehler, in press).

        Such big-G Games provide a highly visible medium for the study of cognition as inter(action) in the social
and material world. Accounts of thinking, learning, and understanding based solely on a symbolic processing model,
which  treats the mind    as  a wet-wired symbol   processing   system analogous  to  the computer   (e.g. Anderson  &
Lebiere, 1998; Simon, 1989), cannot easily account for the range of everyday human activity or its meaning ­ how it
is distributed across tools, representations, and other people; how it is situated in the material, social, spatial, and
temporal context in which it occurs; how it ontologically changes who and what the person is (rather than just the
epistemic contents in the head) (Packer & Goicoechea, 2000); or how it is tied to larger sociocultural (and political)
"forms of life" (Wittgenstein, 1958) enacted out in the world. In order to construct such accounts, we must rethink
cognition as a distributed and situated event.

        Games are an extremely valuable context for the study of cognition within this paradigm. They provide a
representational  trace  of  both individual and   collective activity and  how  it  changes  over  time,  enabling the
researcher to unpack the bidirectional influence of self and society ­ how a given sociocultural context shapes and
influences individual activity and meaning-making through socialization and enculturation (Nasir, 2005), and how
the individual shapes and influences the culture in which she participates in return. As both designed object and
emergent culture, g/Games (a) consist of over-lapping well-defined problems enveloped in ill-defined problems that
render their  solutions  meaningful, (b)function  as naturally  occurring, self-sustaining, indigenous versions of  the

                                                           1048                                               ICLS 2006
online learning communities produced by various groups in fields such as distance education and eLearning (with
somewhat lackluster success), and (c) simultaneously function as both culture and cultural object ­ as microcosms
for studying  the  emergence,    maintenance,   transformation,     and  even   collapse of  online  affinity groups    and  as
talkabout- able objects that function as tokens in public conversations of broader societal issues within contemporary
offline society. In this paper, I will unpack each of these claims in the context of the massively multiplayer online
games.

Designing Learning Environments for an Interactive Age:
Kurt D. Squire
         Interactive immersive entertainment or video games have emerged as a major entertainment medium and
enculturation force for today's youth. Videogames epitomize a potentially destabilizing wave of technologies where
students access information and social networks any time, anywhere. More importantly, videogame cultures have
tacit assumptions about knowledge, learning, expertise, and formal institutions which may be at odds with school
(Beck & Wade, 2004; Gee, 2003; Lankshear & Knobel 2003; Squire & Giovanetto, in press). As students confront
more and more sophisticated digital worlds outside of school, a challenge becomes how will schools react: Do we
present  and  expect students  to pursue    print-based literacies,   ignoring  the  visual culture and  computer      mediated
worlds they inhabit out of school? And, perhaps most importantly, what identities do we make available to students
in school?   Whereas our schools ask students to all learn at the same rates, in the same ways, at the same time,
games make a variety of different paths to learning available.

         This  research  paper   describes   findings   from an     ongoing  design   experiment    iteratively  building  and
researching an after-school learning environment around Civilization III and now IV. In this after school program,
kids learn world history through playing and designing historical scenarios (Squire, Giovanetto, Devane, & Durga,
in press). Building on ethnographies of online gaming "Universities," the program aims to move players from game
"players"  to "designers"  of    historical scenarios,  a  program    in which     students  develop   historical knowledge,
historical modeling and reasoning skills, and new digital literacies around game development. This project seeks to
develop  an  educational model    for an interactive   age (c.f. Lemke,    ) in which   students are   self-directed,  draw  on
multi-modal discourses, and participate in socio-technical networks appropriate for the digital age through drawing
on Crowley's (2002) notion of islands of expertise, coupled with Gee's (2004) notion of affinity spaces, and Jenkins
(in press) notions of participatory media structure.

         Specifically, this paper draws on data from a year long, ongoing after-school club with fourth sixth grade
underachieving students (mostly of color) where they reciprocally play and develop historical modifications for the
computer game Civilization III. It follows the trajectory of three students who entered the program as novice game
players  and  reluctant producers    of  media,  to  skilled historical  modelers.    Drawing    on  roughly    100    hours of
observations, videotaped interactions, and clinical interviews with students, it provides narrative case study accounts
of  how  they develop   new   historical and  technical   literacies, deeper   conceptual   understandings    of  geographical
history, and  transformations  in identity   from consumers      to producers   of  media.  This process  includes     students'
developing   (a) an  interest in the  game   history,  (b) students   seeking   outside  sources (including     texts) to meet
developing curiosities, (c) desires to create historical scenarios to communicate ideas and impress their colleagues,
(d) a desire to interact with other developers over the Internet.

         The study details specific historical understandings that evolved through participation in this program, such
as systemic view of the geographical impact on the fate of civilizations, and explores the limitations of students'
understandings,  particularly  as they   develop  in  a non-linear    context.  Using  prepost   tests administered    every  3
months, or after 20 hour intervals, it details growth in their historical vocabulary, understanding, and interest in
history. The paper concludes with a tentative model for how such clubs might be developed and replicated at other
sites, addressing key issues of scalability and sustainability in design research projects (Shaffer & Squire, in press).

Games as Social Systems Theory Testing: Games for Instructional Leadership:
Richard Halverson
         This paper explores how video game design can provide social science researchers with a powerful method
for testing theory adequacy and interdependence, outlining our effort to bring the principles of game design and play
into the world of school leadership in the form of the Instructional Leadership Game (ILG). We take theories of
school   improvement  and  school    leadership  as  a  subset   of social   science theories in order   to investigate   how

                                                            1049                                                      ICLS 2006
videogames might test social science theory adequacy and reliability. We know that school leaders play a critical
role in developing structures and communities for sustained learning across schools ­ without good leadership, the
best research-proven educational innovations fail. The ILG provides a research-driven context for leaders to see the
short- and long-term consequences of trying out new strategies, engaging in the politics of leadership, and practicing
the micro-tasks of supervision, management and planning. In so doing, the ILG not only helps novice school leaders
learn new practices but also provides a sandbox for experienced leaders to customize the game to their schools and
engage in what-if experimentation.      The paper provides a review of our efforts to build the ILG as an occasion to
discuss the emerging role of videogames and social science research. The birth of cognitive science was marked by
the new capacity of information technologies to simulate complex cognitive processes, such as chess playing and
decision-making (Gardner, 1985). Such simulations enabled researchers to see complex interactions in simplified
environments, which in turn informed the development of models in disciplines from weather to economics. Social
science theories, however, have proven particularly difficult to test in domains representing complex practices, such
as  school leadership.   Yet, recent advances    in  videogame    design   have  opened  new   possibilities for including
interactivity in complex systems models, thus enabling researchers to study how, for example, agency plays out
within complex    systems. Real-time    strategy games  such   as Rise  of Nations   and Civilization  immerse   players in
complex, research-based theories-of action through the development of rich, open-ended narrative environments that
allow  players to  participate in   complex  systems    and   to learn from    the  consequences   of their  actions. Thus,
videogames allow for two directions of theory testing: 1) game design allows for the articulation and specification of
models for how theories play out in practice (see, for example, Burns, 2002 on the influence of Jared Diamond's
(1997) Guns, Germs and Steel on the design of the Civilization games), and 2) game play allows individuals to
experiment with complex theoretical models in order to understand, as it were, social theories from the inside.

         The  paper   is structured into three  parts. First, we  review   the  ILG  game   design by  describing how    we
operationalized   key components     of  school  improvement     efforts, such  as  professional community,     data-driven
decision-making, high-stakes accountability and theories of day-to-day administrative practice into the underlying
systems model of the ILG. We found that each component theory was radically underspecified and that we needed
to engage in interviews and basic research in schools to understand how the theories would play out in practice.
Assembling    the model   involved  extensive   user testing  to insure   that the  designed process  actually  represented
authentic practices. Second, we describe game play with a review of our user-testing process. We asked eight school
leaders to interact with the game and reflect on a) what they learned, and b) how the game could be improved.
Finally, we   discuss the  implications  for video-game   design   as  a  tool  for vetting  existing school improvement
theories and speculate on the next-generation of theory development that might result from game-modeled research.

Games for Thought: The Future of Education and How We Can Get There:
David Shaffer
         In this talk, I present the concept of Games for Thought, a view of games that moves our education system
beyond traditional academic disciplines and classroom practices to a new model of learning through meaningful
activity in virtual worlds as preparation for meaningful activity in a postindustrial, technology-rich society. I argue
that practices in the world, such as the professions, have coherent epistemic frameworks (Shaffer, 2005, in press). So
the ways   in which   professionals  and members     of other  valued   communities   acquire  their  practices provide  an
alternative educational model: a model based on epistemic games ­ games that recreate the training and practice of
professions and other socially-valued communities (Shaffer, 2004; Shaffer, et al., 2005).

         To do this, I examine two epistemic games, using these games to illustrate an educational system of Games
for Thought in which students learn to think as urban planners, architects, engineers, journalists, and other socially-
valued practitioners not in order to train them for these pursuits in the traditional sense of vocational education but
because learning to work as members of these communities of practice provides students with an opportunity to
learn about the world in ways that are fundamentally grounded in meaningful activity and well aligned with core
skills, knowledge, identities, values, and epistemologies for life in a postindustrial society.

Digital Zoo
         In the epistemic role-playing game Digital Zoo (Svarovsky & Shaffer, in press), children cultivate their
natural tendencies to explore, create, and design by working as professional biomechanical engineers who solve
design problems in a realtime persistent world. By playing Digital Zoo, students develop scientific understanding by
seeing, thinking, and acting as engineers.

                                                           1050                                                   ICLS 2006
Stage One: In-House Design.
        Middle school students solve engineering design challenges on SodaConstructor, a Java-based spring-mass
modeling simulation using rapid iterations of the Design-Build-Test cycle ­ the core practice of engineering design
­ to learn physics through epistemic gameplay.

Stage Two: Prototyping for External Clients.
        Students level   up to work  as    biomechanical engineers      developing structural  character prototypes on
SodaConstructor for the next Pixar movie. They conduct prototype evaluations, interface with clients, and balance
competing design objectives as they learn about engineering design, physics, and animation. In this paper, I present
an overview of Digital Zoo and data from both stages of gameplay, focusing on how engaging in authentic iterations
of the engineering Design-Build-Test cycle develops scientific knowledge and engineering values.

MyCity
        Human beings are the architects and planners of cities, so good stewardship and good citizenship require an
understanding of the relationship between the built and natural world. One way students can gain an awareness of a
city's ecological relationships is through urban simulation: for example, in computer games such as SimCity, where
players solve urban problems by managing a fictitious urban environment. But before there was SimCity there were
real cities, and the real urban planners who organize their growth and development. The epistemic game MyCity
(Beckett & Shaffer, in press) shows how a game based on the authentic practices of urban planning helps players
think like urban planners about the complex relationships of urban ecology. In MyCity, high school students learn
about  urban ecology  by working  as urban   planners, using   an interactive planning    model  to redesign a popular
downtown pedestrian mall. Studies of the MyCity game show that students begin to think like urban planners by
inhabiting a virtual world in which they take up such roles.

Methods
        Each of these epistemic games was pilot tested through 10 hours of game play by 10-15 students (middle
school students  for Digital Zoo  and   high  school   students for     MyCity). Clinical interviews  were   conducted
immediately  before  and after game  play,   including "content   questions"     and "game    play" questions. Content
questions were  analyzed for changes  between   pre- and     post-test. Game  play   questions were  analyzed  within a
grounded theory framework which attempted to relate students' assessment of and experiences in the game to each
other and to changes in content questions.

Results
        In both games, students showed a statistically significant change in their knowledge of scientific concepts.
Both games also showed that students developed ways of thinking characteristic of the profession they were role-
playing. Finally, in both games there was a significant qualitative and quantitative relationship between changing
understanding of science and development of professional ways of thinking and acting.

References
Aarseth, E. & Jenkins, H. (2005). Aarseth-Jenkins debate on (computer) game studies. Presented at the HUMlab, IT
        University of Copenhagen, January 18.
Anderson, J. R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components of thought. Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Beck, J. & Wade, (2004). Got game: How the gamer generation is reshaping business forever. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard Business School Press.
Beckett, K. L., & Shaffer, D. W. (in press). Augmented by reality: The pedagogical praxis of urban planning as a
        pathway to ecological thinking. Journal of Educational Computing Research.
Burns, A. (2002) Civilization III: Digital game-based learning and macrohistory simulations. Australian Foresight
        Institute/Disinformation, Accessed July 31,2005 at
        http://www.disinfo.com/archive/images/linda/CivilizationIII.pdf
Crowley, K. & Jacobs, M. (2002). Islands of expertise and the development of family scientific literacy. In G.
        Leinhardt, K. Crowley, & K. Knutson (Eds.) Learning conversations in museums. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
        Erlbaum Associates.
Diamond, Jared (1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fate of Human Societies. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Games-to-Teach Team. (2003). Design principles of next-generation digital gaming for education. Educational
        Technology, 43(5), 17-33.

                                                        1051                                                  ICLS 2006
Gardner, H. (1985). The mind's new science: A history of the cognitive revolution. New York: Basic Books, Inc.
Gee, J. P. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. New York: Routledge.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave/St. Martin's.
Gee, J.P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. NY: Routledge.
Gredler, M. E. (1996). Educational games and simulations: A technology in search of a (research) paradigm. In D.
       H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational communications and technology (pp. 521-540).
       New York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.
Jenkins, H. (in press). Media convergence. NY: NYU Press.
Klopfer, E. & Squire, K. (in press). Environmental Detectives: The development of an augmented reality platform
       for environmental simulations. Educational Research Technology & Development.
Lankshear, C. & Knobel, M. (2003). New literacies. London: Open University Press.
Lemke, J. (1998). Metamedia Literacy: Transforming meanings and media. In D. Reinking, L. Labbo, M.
McKenna, & R. Kiefer (Eds.), Handbook of literacy and technology: Transformations in a posttypographic world.
       Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. (pp.283-301).
Nasir, N. S. (2005). Individual cognitive structuring and the sociocultural context: Strategy shifts in the game of
       dominoes. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(1), 5-34.
Packer, M. J. & Goicoechea, J. (2000). Sociocultural and constructivist theories of learning: Ontology, not just
       epistemology. Educational Psychologist, 35(4), 227-241.
Pickering, A. (1995). The mangle of practice: Time, agency, and science. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Robison, A. J. (in press). Videogame designers as literacy pedagogues. In Y. Ming-tu (Ed.), Reformation: The
       Teaching and Learning of English in Electronic Environments. Taipei: Tamkang University Press.
Shaffer, D. W. (2004). Pedagogical praxis: The professions as models for post-industrial education. Teachers
       College Record, 106(7).
Shaffer, D. W. (2005). Epistemic Games. Innovate, 1(6),
       http://www.innovateonline.info/index.php?view=article&id=79.
Shaffer, D. W. (in press). Epistemic frames for epistemic games. Computers & Education.
Shaffer, D. W., Squire, K. A., Halverson, R., & Gee, J. P. (2005). Video games and the future of learning. Phi Delta
       Kappan, 87(2), 104-111. .
Simon, H. A. (1989). Models of thought, Vol. 2. New Haven CT: Yale University Press.
Squire, K.D. (2002). Rethinking the role of games in Education. Game Studies, 2(1).
Squire, K. D. (in press). From content to context: Videogames as designed experiences. To appear in Educational
       Researcher.
Squire, K. D. (2005). Educating the fighter. On the Horizon, 13(2) 75-88.
Squire, K. & Gionavetto, L. (in press). The Higher Education of gaming. Elearning.
Squire, K. D., Gionavetto, L., Devane, B. & Durga, S. (in press). Building a learning community for gaming
       production in an after school learning community. To appear in Technology Trends.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (in press). Massively multiplayer online videogames as participation in a Discourse. To appear
       in Mind, Culture, and Activity.
Svarovsky, G., & Shaffer, D. W. (in press). SodaConstructing knowledge through exploratoids. Journal of Research
       in Science Teaching.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

                                                        1052                                               ICLS 2006
