Making a difference with attention to content, technology, and scale:
                     A session honoring the memory of Jim Kaput

   Stephen Hegedus, University of Massachusetts, 128 Chase Road, Dartmouth MA 02747, shegedus@umassd.edu
         Dick Lesh, Indiana University, School of Education, Bloomington IN 47405, ralesh@indiana.edu
   Jeremy Roschelle, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave, Menlo Park CA 94025, Jeremy.Roschelle@sri.com

         Abstract: The theme of this year's ICLS, "making a difference," resonates with the life-work of
         our dear colleague, Jim Kaput, who unexpectedly passed away in summer 2005. Kaput's approach
         to making a difference was grounded in the Learning Sciences and distinctively attended to the
         nature of   mathematical  content, the role    of technology,  and  the   problematic  of  scale.   In this
         symposium, we honor his memory by discussing the current projects of three investigators who
         continue to drive Kaput's vision forward. These projects address: (1) "foundations for the future"
         based in a deep reconceptualization of mathematical content (2) technology as representational
         and connectivity infrastructure that democratizes access to mathematics worth knowing and (3)
         scale as a challenging problematic essential to "making a difference."

Introduction
         While  learning  scientists can  present rich  accounts  of learning  in  complex    contexts,  convincing     policy
         makers,  teachers,  and  other  researchers    of the theoretical and   practical    value of   our work    is not a
         straightforward  process.   We  must show    impact at the  local level   while at the same     time,  work to  have
         claims of more global significance. In other words, we must make clear that the learning sciences make a
         difference.
         (from the ICLS 2006 web site)

         We, like most of our colleagues, are learning scientists because we want to make a difference in the lives of
learners. We find ourselves drawn together in departments, conferences, and projects because we see the scientific
process as providing tools of inquiry that could unlock paths to richer, fuller learning of important mathematics and
science for many more learners. The seductive allure of learning sciences lies in its potential to clarify foundational
issues and inspire innovative approaches which could dramatically improve education. The shine wears off when we
find that the path from insight to widespread betterment of education is anything but well-defined. "Getting to scale"
is rare in education  (Elmore, 1996).   Too   little of what   learning scientists create survives   the  process    of "fatal
mutation"    eloquently described  by   Ann   Brown     (Brown,  1991).  Faced   with    this challenge,   our   field  needs
pathmakers--innovators with vision, practical wisdom, and the ability to persevere against the odds and encourage
others to follow. Jim Kaput was such a person.
         Kaput provided a vision of how the learning sciences could make a difference: by democratizing access to
important mathematics (Kaput, 1994). Kaput saw a positive strand of development in human history in which more
people could gain access to important conceptual tools (Kaput & Roschelle, 1998). Centuries ago, only a few scribes
could write. Now we expect everyone to do it. The printing press commoditized books, but parallel developments in
developing new genres, switching from Latin to the vernacular, standardizing printed language, and developing new
pedagogical   methods   were required  in order to   democratize  access  to knowledge    through   reading.    Similarly,  in
mathematics there was a time in which multiplication and division were very specialized skills, available only to
those who could travel to particular universities. As late as 100 years ago, only 3% of students were expected to
learn Algebra. Now 70% do, and we expect "Algebra for All." Today 3% of students are expected to learn Calculus.
Given   that we live in a time dominated    by  dynamism    and  change,   Kaput   felt confident   that we  would   need   to
dramatically increase opportunities to learn this mathematics and we might not have a century to do it in. Hence the
SimCalc project was born (J. Roschelle et al., 2000).
         The Learning Sciences provide deep and broad tools of inquiry. Because the tools are deep, they afford
pushing foundational changes that could democratize access to mathematics worth knowing. But because they are
broad, they could be applied to potentially every aspect of education. In some areas, this approach to inquiry is
likely to be fruitful; in some areas it may not be. Hence, problem selection is critical. We need to understand what
the Learning Science could contribute to democratizing access.

                                                           1053                                                    ICLS 2006
         Kaput   provided   a  clear  vision of   what  the  Learning    Sciences   could   contribute:  new   technological
infrastructures  for  representation  and    connectivity and    reconceptualization     of  subject  matter    to open   new
opportunities to learn (Kaput, 1992, 2002). Kaput took a strong position that technology should be thought of as an
infrastructural, not as particular applications and tools. Rather he saw new representations, particularly graphical and
dynamic representations, as making concepts more accessible to students. He expected that these representations
could  be embodied    in many    media,  devices,  applications,   and  tools.  He  was   interested in  the new   classes  of
representation  made   possible  by   technology   (e.g.  directly  editable   graphs  of  piecewise    functions)  and   their
relationship to learning. Likewise, in his last major project, Kaput saw within-classroom network connectivity as
providing a   new infrastructure   ­  an infrastructure  that created   new   structures  and   opportunities  for classroom
participation in doing   and   commenting    on   mathematics.   In many     presentations,  Kaput   used  the  phrase  "new
technology    without new     curriculum  isn't   worth   the  silicon   its written   in"   to indicate   his  believe   that
reconceptualization   of subject matter  would    be necessary   to realize  the learning   benefits  of new   infrastructure.
Kaput took responsibility for reconceptualizing a "mathematics of change and variation" strand from elementary
school through   the  first year of   university.  He  was   experimented    deeply,   for  instance,   with the   benefits of
introducing  piecewise   functions much   earlier in the  curriculum,   finding  that they   were intuitive  to students  and
highlighted conceptually important contrasts in a way that students could more readily perceive.
         Finally, Kaput embodied a proactive approach to the issue of scale. He understood scale to be a multi-
dimensional problem, some of which was political, some commercial, and only a part scientific (J Roschelle et al.,
in press). Hence, he worked with colleagues to influence standards. He engaged commercial companies to make his
representations  available. He  built a  network  of  researchers   and research   projects, so  as  to examine    scaleability
across settings. And he engaged in projects directly related to scaling up.
         In this symposium, we invite presenters, discussants and the audience to engage in reflecting on Kaput's
approach  to  making  a  difference:  What   are  researchers doing    now   to carry forward   Kaput's   themes?    Do these
approaches make sense for a broader cross-section of the learning sciences? How could the community employ
these themes to make a difference?

Symposium Agenda
         We plan to open with a short introduction that recapitulates the text above, setting the context and agenda.
Then we will invite three presenters, each of whom was working with Kaput on a major project when he died and is
still carrying that project forward, to share the current state of their efforts to make a difference. We will then invite
two discussants to each speak for a few minutes about the thematic content of the session, before opening the floor
to the audience for commentary. Our discussants, Roy Pea (Stanford) and Corey Brady (Texas Instruments), will
represent the Learning Sciences and commercial efforts to make a difference, respectively.
         0:00 Welcome and Introduction
         0:10 Presentation 1: Stephen Hegedus
         0:25 Presentation 2: Dick Lesh
         0:40 Presentation 3: Jeremy Roschelle
         1:00 Discussants: Roy Pea and Corey Brady
         1:15 Audience Participation
         1:30 End

"Representational and Connectivity Infrastructure"
Stephen Hegedus, University of Massachusetts
         Since the early 1990's, Kaput's vision to create dynamic visualization tools to allow students better access
to core mathematics has evolved into a powerful suite of technologies with complementary curriculum materials that
has had impact on students and teachers in middle and high schools, as well as undergraduate students in College
Freshmen and Pre-service courses. Such work has not only made a difference on students and teachers though, but it
has helped researchers and educational software developers understand new perspectives of the role of technology in
21st century mathematics education. His theoretical insights which draws deeply on the history and evolution of
notation systems has led to new perspectives on software design for the purpose of enabling all students to explore
multiple-linked  representations  of  algebraic  concepts,   model  real situations,  develop   problem-solving    skills and
discover  core  principles  of Calculus,  hitherto left  for  an elite population   of  students; ideas   that  help students
understand the mathematics of change and variation.

         Kaput's  idea   of a  representational   infrastructure has   become    an extremely    useful  model   to  describe
dynamic vs static aspects of educational software that provides new ways for teaching and learning mathematics.

                                                            1054                                                    ICLS 2006
This model was deeply embedded and exemplified in his software SimCalc MathWorlds. Representational features
include  direct manipulation    of  graphically   editable    functions,   and direct,  hot  links    between      graphically  editable
functions and their derivatives or integrals. Others include, connections between representations and simulations, the
ability to import physical motion, and re-animate it, and the use of hybrid physical/cybernetic devices embodying
dynamical systems. Since all such representational features are linked, they provide an infrastructure for a multitude
of activities and learning opportunities.

         Five   years ago,  we   began   to combine    our    software,    which   previously     existed  separately    on    hand-held
devices  and   desktop  computers,   to   work in   parallel.   It was  not    an easy  task    to allow   functions     created  on     an
assembly  language    application   to  be reproduced    in   a Java environment.       But  it was   not  just    about technological
innovation, it was a new avenue to allow students working with our software on affordable graphing calculators to
be aggregated via classroom networks into our desktop software in mathematically meaningful ways. We did this
using various forms of connectivity but the prevalent one being Texas Instruments' Navigator system, a hub-spoke
semi-wireless intranet, which can be self-configured for local, classroom based networking without an expensive
network  infrastructure   (e.g. Internet).  So  now,   classrooms       could  support    connectivity      without   the    need    for a
laboratory of computers with massive associated overheads and physical configurations that do not support, active,
collaborative   work.   The SimCalc     Connected     Classroom      was    born,  which    allowed      a distribution   of   cost  and
deliverables for maximal learning benefits; the cheapness, yet low resolution and power of many hand-held devices,
with the expense but computational and representational power of desktop computers. This new system was not just
about costs and affordances, but the genesis of new types of activity structures, that allowed students to contribute
mathematical work all at once to a social workspace, via a teachers computer being projected on a whiteboard.
There teachers can facilitate discussion to allow more students to investigate, analyze and discover mathematical
relationships  from   observing  and    listening to  how     their work    fitted into   a  broader   set  of     students' work.    For
example,  consider    a class split into   groups   where     each  group   has   to  control   an actor's    motion   graphically       or
algebraically, who runs the same amount of time as a target actor (e.g. 2 ft/sec for 6 seconds; algebraically Y=2X),
but you need to start at a position 3 times your group number ahead of such a target, but end the race in a tie with
your target.  This calls for  each  group   to develop      a different  function,    whose    variation   is   in terms of    slope and
intercept in the algebraic form Y=MX+B, and which can be examined publicly when each group is aggregated. Such
group work, calls all students to participate, not necessarily vocally, enhancing legitimate peripheral participation
via mathematically    enhanced   communication       infrastructures.    It allows    a student    to project   their self,    their own
identity, from a private workspace to a more collaborative social workspace. Jim believed this was a new type of
mathematical learning and thinking and one that would prove to be a new educational landscape of the 21st century.

         The    present  project   that Jim   and   I directed      has  explored     the  impact     of   this representational     and
technological   innovation  on  student    participation and    engagement     as  well   as the   impact   on     traditional forms     of
pedagogy, classroom interaction, and learning. We are deep in the midst of discovering new forms of interaction
cycles that occur in Connected SimCalc classrooms, new types of questions that can be asked to help the majority of
students in  a  classroom  engage   in  mathematical     analysis.  We     are also   observing    shifts  in teaching   beliefs  about
effective methods for instructing core mathematical ideas such as linearity, slope as rate and simultaneous equations.
I shall present core activity structures that have evolved from recent work, participation structures that are evident in
SimCalc   connected     classroom  vs   traditional environments,       as  well  as  data   on impact     on   student  learning    and
teaching practice from our collaborative analyses with our participants teachers.

"Foundations for the Future of Mathematics"
Richard Lesh, Indiana University
         Any description of Jim Kaput's work should involve future-oriented themes.                    So, in this presentation, I'll
describe a next project that we were laying the groundwork to undertake.                It was intended to extend our joint vow,
taken years ago, to focus on "democratizing access to powerful ideas."                The next step, was to focus on what Jim
referred to  as "curriculum     futures."   And,  a   first step   toward   this   project  is  a  book    that  we  just finished    on
Foundations for the Future in Mathematics Education (Lesh, Hamilton & Kaput, in press).                         In fields ranging from
aeronautical   engineering  to   agriculture,  and    from    biotechnologies      to   business   administration,     future-oriented
university programs increasingly emphasize the fact that, beyond school, the nature of problem solving activities has
changed dramatically during the past twenty years. For example, powerful tools for computation, conceptualization,
and communication have led to fundamental changes in the levels and types of mathematical understandings and
abilities that are needed for success in such fields.

                                                                1055                                                           ICLS 2006
         These observations raise the following questions:
                    What    is   the nature    of  typical  problem-solving      situations  where    elementary-but-powerful
                    mathematical constructs and conceptual systems are needed for success in a technology-based age
                    of information?
                    What kind of "mathematical thinking" is emphasized in these situations?
                    What does it mean to "understand" the most important of these ideas and abilities?
                    How do these competencies develop?
                    What can be done to facilitate development?
                    How   can    we  document     and assess   the most     important   (deeper, higher-order,   more  powerful)
                    achievements that are needed: (i) for informed citizenship, or (ii) for successful participation in the
                    increasingly wide range of professions that are becoming heavy users of mathematics, science, and
                    technology?
         We   believe    that such   questions  should   be investigated    through   research--not   simply   resolved  through
political processes (such as those that are used in the development of curriculum standards or tests).           We also believe
that researchers with broad and deep expertise in mathematics and science should play significant roles in such
research and that input should be sought not just from creators of mathematics (i.e., "pure" mathematicians), but also
heavy users of mathematics (e.g., "applied" mathematicians and scientists).               This is because the questions listed
above are about the changing nature of mathematics and situations where mathematics is used; they are not simply
questions about     the  nature  of  students,  human    minds,    human    information    processing   capabilities, or   human
development.
         Upon further reflection and research about the preceding issues, we gradually developed the opinion that,
for most  topics    that we    have  tried to  teach,   the kind   of   mathematical    understandings   and   abilities that  are
emphasized    in mathematics     textbooks  and   tests tend  to  represent  only  a  shallow,   narrow, and   often  non-central
subset of those that are needed for success when the relevant ideas should be useful in "real life" situations.                For
example, in projects such as Purdue University's Gender Equity in Engineering Project, when students' abilities and
achievements     were   assessed  using   tasks that  were    designed   to  be simulations   of  "real  life" problem     solving
situations, the majority of understandings and abilities that emerged as being critical for success included were not
among those emphasized in traditional textbooks or tests.          Consequently, when we recognized the importance of a
broader  range   of deeper    understandings    and abilities,  a  broader  range    of students  naturally emerged   as   having
extraordinary    potential.    Furthermore,    many   of these    students  came     from populations    that  are highly   under
represented in fields that emphasize mathematics, science, and technology; and this was true precisely because their
abilities were previously unrecognized. ... Such observations return us to the following fundamental question:
         What kind of understandings and abilities should be emphasized to decrease mismatches between: (i) the
narrow  band   of mathematical       understandings   and   abilities  that are emphasized   in   mathematics    classrooms    and
tests, and (ii) those that are needed for success beyond school in the 21st century?
         Many    people   assume     that students  simply  need   more     practice with  ideas  and  abilities that have  been
considered to be "basics" in the past.         Others   assume    that  old conceptions   of "basics"   should   be  replaced  by
completely new topics and ideas (such as those associated with complexity theory, discrete mathematics, systems
theory, or computational modeling). Still others assume that new levels and type of understanding are needed for
both old  and  new   ideas.   Examples    include  understandings     that  emphasize   graphics-based   or   computation-based
representational media.

"The Problematic of Scale"
Jeremy Roschelle, SRI International
         In a 4-year "Interagency Educational Research Initiative" (IERI) project, we are conducting a series of
experimental  trials  in which   hundreds   of  teachers   will use   SimCalc   curriculum   and  software    across the state of
Texas. This project has brought the team of Principal Investigators (which formerly included Kaput) face to face
with scale as a research problematic which is quite different from business-as-usual in the Learning Sciences.
         In this  project,    we consider   SimCalc   as   an  instance  of  a  coupled   representational  technology     and re-
organized   curriculum,   which     we support    with   teacher   professional  development      in order  to   form a    testable
intervention. Because     SimCalc    was   always   conceived     as  a curricular   strand and   not a  full-year   mathematics
curriculum, we are testing SimCalc via a replacement unit in 7th and 8th grade.
         The primary research question we ask across studies is about variation at the teacher level. Most learning
science       design        projects       are      subject       to       the     "Boutique         Critique;"       that     is,
"sure the intervention works with your special teachers, but I don't believe it will work with my average teachers."
To counter this, we have recruited a wide variety of teachers (over 100 for the 7th grade study, from 4 regions across

                                                               1056                                                      ICLS 2006
Texas  and  representing   a diversity  of   backgrounds,    settings, and pedagogical   styles). In addition to    seeing if
SimCalc "works," we seek to model how variations in student achievement with SimCalc materials correlate with
teacher variability
         Many   of  the  critiques of  the lack   of experimental  designs  in past educational   research might    give the
impression that researchers avoided this path because they were incompetent, biased, or lazy. Kaput always held that
this was not   the case;  rather, he felt  that carrying out  such  research  without  a very careful  team who     carefully
documented each step could only result in dubious knowledge. Our experience has born out this conviction.
         A first problematic is the disjunction between how the innovators envision their intervention working at
scale vs. what can actually be tested in today's schools. Kaput always envisioned technology as infrastructural ­ e.g.
ubiquitiously available and often used. In contrast, in the real schools we are involving in Texas, teachers still have
to take students to a computer lab. This is known to be an undesirable setting for using computers, but yet it's what
we can actually study. There is a chicken-and-egg problem here, because middle school math teachers are unlikely
to gain access to ubiquitous technology without evidence that it works and yet one can only approximate eventually
effects if teachers and students are basically unfamiliar with the technology in their everyday classroom experience.
         A  second    problematic   occurs   in  the  design of a  control  condition.   When  the  intervention is  a new
technology and curriculum, it is impossible for teachers to be blind to condition. A good control condition must give
teachers a positive experience and some expectation that they may perform well ­ teachers are unlikely to motivate
their students to do well if they feel they are in the conditions that's not supposed to do well. Further, we did not
want to "design" the control for fear that we would be accused of intentionally or un-intentionally crippling the
control. Hence, we choose to have every teacher (in both groups) attend a first professional development, which was
chosen  because    of its high    reputation  for quality across   Texas;   then  only  SimCalc   teachers  had  additional
professional development.    This fails to balance for additional time-on-task of teachers in professional development
and  hence, if we   get positive  results, we   won't be  able  to discern whether  it was because   of more  professional
development or the technology-and-replacement unit.
         A  third   problematic    has to  do    with conflicts between    ideal  teacher professional  development      and
experimental difficulty of handling teacher clustering. It is common wisdom in teacher professional development
that teachers should work together within a school site or at least work in teams or pairs. This becomes challenging
when  working   in  Texas  middle    schools,   where many   schools   have  only  one math   teacher! Further,  if teachers
collaborate effectively, a larger n is needed and instead of a two-level design (teacher, student) one needs a three-
level design (school, teacher, student) which is incredibly expensive to execute.
         Yet, despite these and other difficulties, we believe that research on scale can be a valuable adjunct to
ordinary Learning Sciences research. On one hand, as Kaput insisted, there will be no single "definitive" experiment
that establishes whether curriculum reorganization, representational infrastructure, or new classroom connectivity
capabilities are "what works." On the other hand, research on scale can overcome important credibility problems.
Today, there are no large-scale, systematic, rigorous studies that measure the effects of representational technology
in middle   school  mathematics.    Given    the high-level  of funding   for this area  over many   years, this creates   a
credibility gap that we hope our study will address. Further, only through large-scale research can we address the
"boutique critique" by showing a learning-sciences based intervention can work across a wide range of ordinary
settings and teachers. Finally, we can learn something about how teacher variation mediates outcomes which could
enable learning sciences researchers who are designing new innovations to be more methodical about doing design
research in the settings and with the teachers whose circumstances tend to diminish outcomes.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported under National Science Foundation grants #0437861 and #0337710. Any opinions are
those of the authors and not the funding agency.

References
Brown, A. (1991). Design experiments. Theoretical and methodological challenges in evaluating complex
         interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Elmore, R. F. (1996). Getting to scale with good educational practice. Harvard Educational Review, 66(1).
Kaput, J. (1992). Technology and mathematics education. In D. Grouws (Ed.), A handbook of research on
         mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 515-556). New York: Macmillan.
Kaput, J. (1994). Democratizing access to calculus: New routes using old roots. In A. Schoenfeld (Ed.),
         Mathematical thinking and problem solving (pp. 77-155). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

                                                             1057                                                 ICLS 2006
Kaput, J. (2002). Implications of the shift from isolated, expensive technology to connected, inexpensive, diverse
       and ubiquitous technologies. In F. Hitt (Ed.), Representations and mathematical visualization. Mexico:
       Departmento de Matematica Educativa del Cinvestav - IPN.
Kaput, J., & Roschelle, J. (1998). The mathematics of change and variation from a millennial perspective: New
       content, new context. In C. Hoyles, C. Morgan & G. Woodhouse (Eds.), Rethinking the mathematics
       curriculum. London, UK: Falmer Press.
Roschelle, J., Kaput, J., & Stroup, W. (2000). Simcalc: Accelerating student engagement with the mathematics of
       change. In M. J. Jacobsen & R. B. Kozma (Eds.), Learning the sciences of the 21st century: Research,
       design, and implementing advanced technology learning environments. (pp. 47-75). Hillsdale, NJ:
       Erlbaum.
Roschelle, J., Tatar, D., & Kaput, J. (in press). Getting to scale with innovations that deeply restructure how students
       come to know mathematics. In A. E. kelley & R. Lesh (Eds.), Foundations for the future: Reconceiving the
       goals in mathematics education in the 21st century. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

                                                        1058                                               ICLS 2006
