What makes groups learning effectively in a videoconference setting?
                            Ulrike Cress, Aemilian Hron, Felix Friedrich, Karsten Hammer
              Knowledge Media Research Centre, 72072 Tübingen, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, Germany
     Email: u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de, a.hron@iwm-kmrc.de, f.friedrich@iwm-kmrc.de, k.hammer@iwm-kmrc.de

        Abstract: In an experimental study designed to test co-operative learning in a videoconference
        setting,  dyads    were   formed  to   work  under   three  different  conditions:   "without a   shared
        workspace",   "with   a shared   workspace",  or  "with a   shared   workspace plus  a  content-specific
        graphical representation". The dyads without a shared workspace used more verbal co-ordination
        than   both  other groups.  The   dyads  working   with a   shared   workspace plus  a  content-specific
        graphical   representation demonstrated    better quality   in their collaboratively written  texts. The
        quality   of this  collaborative  process   resulted in better   individual  acquisition  of  important
        knowledge    units. The   study  demonstrates  that  content-specific  graphical  representations make
        cooperative learning in videoconference-based learning settings more effective. The overall effects
        of a shared workspace were not so clear and should be further investigated.

        Keywords: shared workspace; video conferencing, cooperative learning.

Introduction
          Desktop videoconference settings are becoming increasingly interesting for cooperative learning in net-
based communication environments. But so far there have been only a few investigations into how such learning
settings should be arranged for potential enhancement of collaborative learning (Kopp, Ertl, & Mandl, 2004). In
videoconference-based learning settings the groups are often not only supported by video, but they can also use
shared applications  or  shared   workspaces   (Rummel    &  Spada,    2005). Until now,   there have  hardly    been  any
empirical investigations concerning the effects of these shared workspaces. The present study aims at investigating
whether a shared workspace in a videoconference-based learning setting makes the coordination of collaborative
activities easier, whether there is a resulting positive effect on the learning process, and whether a content-specific
graphical representation used as a scaffold is able to facilitate collaborative knowledge construction and learning in
this setting.

Theoretical framework

Effects of a shared workspace used in video-based collaborative learning
          A number of investigations into using videoconferences for collaborative learning provide evidence that
there are no substantial disadvantages of videoconferences as compared to face-to-face cooperation. Neither process
variables nor learning outcomes are affected adversely (Fischer, Bruhn, Gräsel, & Mandl, 2002; Jucks, Paechter, &
Tatar, 2003). In view of the fact that videoconferences have certain natural limitations in comparison with face-to-
face  communication   (Bruce,   1996;    Finn, 1997)  the   results of  these  investigations  suggest   that learners  in
videoconference-based    settings make   more   of an effort to compensate     for  these limitations in communication
(Fischer & Mandl, 2002). However, in many videoconference-based settings the groups are not only supported by
video, they can additionally work with shared applications or shared workspaces. There has been a lot of research on
using  shared  workspaces   in  settings without   video. These  studies   have investigated  the function    of  a  shared
workspace as external memory, they analyzed the collaborative processes in a shared workspace, or the role of a
shared workspace in the development of shared cognition (e.g. Hoppe, Gassner, Mühlenbrock, & Tewissen, 2000;
Reinhard, Hesse,    Hron,   &   Picard,  1997;  Suthers,  Weiner,   Connelly,   &   Paolucci,  1995).  Altogether    these
investigations show that shared workspaces can be regarded as predominantly positive for collaborative learning.

          This   research  has  already  shown  that shared  workspaces    reduce  coordination  requirements    for work-
groups in both   editing and  design tasks (e.g. Dorish   &  Bellotti, 1992;  Gutwin   &  Greenberg,  2002).   It also has
revealed that a shared workspace eases the task-related coordination of the group ­ including the coordination of the
treatment of the task, the distribution of subtasks and the coordination in the course of the work routine (Cannon-
Bowers & Salas, 1998; Whittaker, Geelhoed, & Robinson, 1993). And this lower coordination load allows for more
discussion of the contents and in consequence can lead to increasing collaborative learning. Relieving the group

                                                           106                                                   ICLS 2006
from task-related coordination lessens the cognitive load of the learners and therefore also improves learning (Van
Bruggen, Kirschner, & Jochems, 2002).

           But  contrary to  these   findings, other research  points  out that those coordination   activities in learning
groups   which  shared  workspaces   aim  to   minimize do   not only  have  negative effects on learning. Co-ordination
activities can also have positive effects if they increase referral to the learning content and stimulate meta-cognitive
processes and the self-control of the learners (Rogoff, 1991; Wertsch, 1991). So it could be that if the use of a shared
workspace reduces co-ordinative activities, it at the same time reduces activity which is topic related and would thus
foster learning. So in sum, for the use of a shared workspace there is no clear evidence if the positive or the negative
effects prevail

Effects of a content-specific graphical representation in video-based collaborative
learning
           A second aim of the present study is to test if a content-specific graphical representation used as scaffold
facilitates collaborative knowledge construction and learning in the workspace-supplemented videoconference-based
setting. The content-specific graphical representation functions as a content schema (Kopp, Ertl, & Mandl, 2004;
Suthers & Hundhausen, 2001) as it is intended to structure the content to be learned. It appears to be able to diminish
the distractions of mutual referencing in videoconferences (Finn, 1997), and to focus the learners´ discourse on the
important  topics.  In this way, in  the applied  videoconference   setting, a  content-specific graphical representation
should serve to structure the collaborative construction of knowledge. .

           Studies that analyze the effects of content schemes in videoconferences have seldom been undertaken.
However, with non video-based learning settings a number of studies have been conducted. In their study Suthers
and Hundhausen (2001) showed that graphical representations make central characteristics of the learning object
salient, and   thus influence    the learning   discourse   by   "representational guidance".    In this sense   graphical
representations serve as contextual anchors which support the learning partners in focusing the discussion on the
contents relevant to learning. The presence or absence of the central topics becomes apparent to the learners through
these external  representations.  These  findings   are supported   by a number    of studies which  show  that  graphical
representations can play an important role in the negotiation and co-construction of meaning during communication.
Roschelle (1992) showed that diagrams could be social tools for attaining common meaning in a discourse, because
they support individual thinking and facilitate negotiating of meaning. Van Boxtel, Van der Linden, and Kanselaar
(2000) performed a study on collaborative students who constructed argumentative diagrams and concept maps. In
their study, the requested product forced students to pay attention to key principles in the domain. The diagrams
proved to be supportive for maintaining a shared focus on the task and on the communication process. Fischer,
Bruhn, Gräsel, and Mandl (2002) examined the effects of graphical representations given to collaborative problem
solvers. They found positive effects on the process and results of collaborative knowledge construction.

           Based on these finding the following study is undertaken to test the effect of a shared workspace in a
video-based  learning   setting, and  to  test  the  effect of a  shared   workspace  with a   content-specific  graphical
representation.

Method

Participants
         Thirty students between the age of 21 and 35 took part in the investigation. They were randomly assigned
to the three test conditions "without shared workspace", "with shared workspace", and "with shared workspace plus
content-specific graphical   representation".  For   each of  these conditions,  five same-sex   two-person  groups   were
formed resulting in 8 female learning dyads and 7 male learning dyads.

Material
         As  learning   material  we  used   a  multimedia   learning  program  about  solar  astronomy.  It presents  the
learning content primarily by means of audio commentaries accompanied by animations and videos. For analyzing
the content, students had to learn, we first had to analyze, how many different "knowledge pieces" this material
presented. By experts we analyzed a total of 126 different knowledge pieces (KPs), each KP corresponding roughly

                                                             107                                                  ICLS 2006
to a proposition that was stated in the program, e.g. ,,the sun is a star". Due to the expert ratings a total of 30 KPs
were classified as "important KPs" and 96 as "less important KPs".
          As a content-specific graphical representation we used a blank flow chart, which formally represented the
sequence of the concepts to be considered in the learning task. The learners had to designate the names of the boxes
and  rhombs    of  the  flow  chart and    had   to abide   by   those  designations   during    the task. Thus,   the  graphical
representation served as a content-specific externalization of main concepts and showed the relations between the
concepts.
          The  writing  task, which  first  had  to  be done   individually,    then  collaboratively, and  finally individually
again, was the following: The participants had to describe the development process of a star, from the birth to the
death  of a  star.  The  video  connection    was   established    by   ViGO   Meeting    Point.  The  application  sharing  was
accomplished by Microsoft NetMeeting.

Experimental design and procedure
           The experimental session with a learning dyad covered four phases:
1st . Phase (30 min.): Each participant had to learn with the multimedia program individually.
2nd . Phase (40 min.): Each participant had to do a writing task (describing the development process of a star, from
  the birth to the death of a star.).
3rd. Phase (50 min.): The participants worked in dyads in the video conference. The task was the same as in Phase 2
  (writing    about  the  development      process  of  a  star),  but  as   opposed  to  the  second  phase   they now     wrote
  collaboratively. But they were able to draw on their individually written texts from phase 2.
4th . Phase (40 min.): Each participant had to do the same writing task a third time (writing a text describing the
  development       process  of a  star. This  test  served   as   post-test because   it measured   a  participant's  individual
  knowledge after the co-operative task.

Independent variable
           The   experimental   conditions    only   differed  in  the  tools   the  groups  had  during   the videoconference
(Phase 3).
           Under the condition "without shared workspace" a learner could see the video picture of his/her learning
partner, but no shared workspace was provided. For the collaborative text production, an editing window was given
into which only one learner could type the joint text (centralized control; Noël & Robert, 2004). It was visible only
for this learner. In the beginning of Phase 3 a dyad had to decide which of the two learners would type in the text.
Because of the missing visual representation of the text for the other person, the learners had to rely solely on verbal
exchange in coordinating the joint text production. Each learner could see only his / her private editing window with
the individual text solution once it had been written.

           Under the condition "with shared workspace" a
learner  could see  the video   picture  of his  /  her learning
partner,  and  a   shared   workspace    was   provided.    Both
learners could write in a joint editing window, but only
one learner at a time. The right to write had to be passed
from  one  learner  to  the other.  Passing   over  the    editing
work  was   totally dependent   upon  the   disposition    of the
learners. Moreover,     the shared  workspace    also   included
the private windows of the learners with their individual
texts they had produced during phase 2. That means that
these  texts  were   visible  for  both.   In  order    to make
completely visible a learner's text for both partners, one                     Figure     1:  Interface    under    the
had to  scroll the  window.   An   example    of this   screen is              condition ,,with shared workspace".
given in Figure 1.

           Under    the condition   ,,with shared   workspace      plus content-specific   graphical  representation"   the same
workspace was given as under the condition "with shared workspace". Additionally each learner obtained a sheet of
paper with   a flow  chart  visualizing  the  developmental    stages   of   a star, which   the learners  had learned  from  the
multimedia learning program. However, the labels denoting the boxes and rhombs were missing. The learners were
instructed to insert the labels before jointly writing the text about the development of a star.

                                                               108                                                      ICLS 2006
Dependent variables
           As dependent variable we used process variables describing the verbal discussion and outcome variables
describing the quality of the written texts.

Verbal discussion process
           For the analysis of the discussion protocols of phase 3, an operable set of categories was developed, with
an emphasis on the information dialogues of Dynamic Interpretation Theory (Hron, Hesse, Cress, & Giovis, 2000).
Accordingly, a distinction was made between task-focussed dialogue acts (content-related, coordinative), dialogue
control acts, off-task talk, and  others. In this paper  we  only  focus on coordinative  utterances which   we further
divided into different subcategories:
-  Utterances related to text editing and referencing to individual texts in the private windows. These utterances
   were additionally classified as to whether they showed topic-relation or not.
-  Utterances related to deciding on the right to type.
-  Utterances related to scrolling the private windows (only under the second and third experimental condition).
-  Utterances about completing the flow chart (only under the third experimental condition).

Quality of the written texts
           All the co-constructed texts from the videoconference in Phase 3 and all the individual texts written in
Phase 2 and Phase 4 were analyzed by how many important and how many less important knowledge pieces (KP)
presented in the learning program which where considered.

Expectations
        The expectations were as follows:
H1: The shared workspace lessens the number of the coordinative utterances.
H2: The shared workspace with the additional use of the content-specific graphical representation increases the
        quality of the collaboratively written texts.
H3: The shared workspace with the additional use of the content-specific graphical representation increases
        individual knowledge acquisition.

Results
           To  test H1, the  coordinative utterances   during the discussions were   counted  and compared   across the
experimental   conditions.  Table 1  shows   that the  differences between  the    mean total number    of coordinative
utterances for the  three experimental  conditions   only approach   significance. However,   the table also shows  that
under the condition "without shared workspace" significantly more utterances occur concerning the coordination of
text editing  and referring  to the individual texts  in the private windows  than  under the  other two   experimental
conditions ­ for both kinds of utterances: with and without topic-relation. "Deciding on the right to type" did not
differ under the three conditions. Coordinative utterances referring to "scrolling of the private windows" took place
only under the two conditions where a shared workspace was present and made no difference. "Completing the flow
chart" was done only under the condition ,,with shared workspace plus content-specific graphical representation".
The latter two types of coordinative utterances add to the total number of coordinative utterances under the second
and third condition and account for the finding that the difference among the three experimental conditions only
approach significance. There are no further differences concerning other types of utterances (e.g. content-related
utterances, dialogue control acts or off-task talk).

                                                            109                                                ICLS 2006
    Number of KPs
Table 1: Mean number of utterances of the described categories.

                                                                       Without shared       With shared        With shared work-     FValue
                                                                           workspace          workspace        space & graphical
                                                                                                                 representation

   Coordinative utterances (total)                                   136.80                101.00              96.40               2.92+
                   related to text editing and individual text in                  67.00a             30.00b              22.80c      14.64**
                   private windows with topic relation
                   related to text editing and individual text in                  57.40a             27.80b             24.40b       19.86**
                   private windows without topic relation
                   deciding on right to type                                       12.40               24.80               26.40         1.71
                   scrolling private windows                                                           18.40               11.20
                   completing the flow chart                                                                               11.60     t(8)=0.91
** p < .01 Means with different letters significantly differ with Scheffé post hoc.
+ p < .10

                     To   test H2,     the number    of knowledge         pieces which    were  part    of the collaboratively  written  texts in
Phase 3              were compared        across  the  three experimental        groups.  We     differentiated  between   important    and less
important             knowledge        pieces. The   2x3  ANOVA           with the  within    factor   "Importance"   and  the   between  factor
"experimental group" revealed no main effects, but did show a significant interaction which is shown in Figure 2.

                  20

                  15

                  10
                                                                                  important KPs
                   5

                                                                                  less important KPs
                   0
                        without shared       shared           shared
                         workspace         workspace       workspace &
                                                           graphical rep.

                           Figure 2: Mean number of important and less important knowledge pieces the texts which were
                                               collaboratively written by the dyads in phase 3 refer to.

                     The  higher       proportion   of important     knowledge     pieces  shows      a higher  quality of the   collaboratively
written texts. Thus, the shared workspace plus graphical representation did not lead to the consideration of more
knowledge pieces, but it enhanced the selection of knowledge pieces which were considered for inclusion in the
collaborative text. More important knowledge pieces were discussed and this supports H2 about a higher different
quality of the discussion process in the different experimental groups.

                     To test H3, the number of the knowledge pieces the tests produced in the posttest (Phase 4) was counted
and also a 2x3 ANOVA was done. The analysis revealed no main effects, but did reveal a significant interaction
shown in Figure 3. This interaction for knowledge acquisition (on the individual level, Figure 3) is analogous to the
interaction which was revealed for the collaboratively written tests (group level, Figure 2). Thus, a better individual
knowledge             acquisition      is  associated  with  the  higher    quality  of   the   co-constructed  texts (a higher   proportion   of
important knowledge pieces). This does not mean that people actually knew more, but that they had acquired more
of the primary concepts and relations than secondary ones.

                                                                               110                                                     ICLS 2006
           Number of KPs
                         20

                         15

                                                                                                   important KPs
                         10
                                                                                                   less important KPs

                          5

                          0
                               without shared   shared workspace  shared workspace
                                 workspace                         & graphical rep.

                          Figure 3: Mean number of important and less important knowledge pieces referred to in the texts which
                                                    were individually written in Phase 4 (the post-tests).

Discussion
                         The present study investigated the effects of a shared workspace and the effects of an additional content-
specific graphical               scaffold       in a videoconference-based               learning  setting.      It   considered   the process  as well as the
outcome of collaborative learning.

                         The results regarding the effect of a shared workspace showed that the shared workspace could lessen the
number of coordinative utterances in joint text editing. But compared to the condition with a shared workspace it did
not lessen them to the expected extent. This is due to the fact that the use of the shared workspace itself (as well as
the use of the flow chart) involves specific coordinative requirements. So the effort saved by fewer utterances for
text editing was taken up not only by learning enhancing activities, but also by communication about scrolling or
about how to co-ordinate the shared workspace.

                         However, according to the learning results those learners working without shared workspace did not show
any poorer results in the quality of collaboratively written texts or individual knowledge acquisition than the learners
under  the               condition   "with      shared  workspace".       This        is due  to  the fact        that   the higher   number   of  coordinative
utterances               caused  by  the       missing  shared      workspace         was   associated  with           a substantial  number   of  coordinative
utterances               referencing  the      learning content.     This  might         have  facilitated       the     cognitive processing  of  the learning
content  and                compensated        for the potential     disadvantage         of  verbal  coordination           load  due to  the  missing shared
workspace. This result is consistent with the view that coordination activities in learning groups can have positive
effects on learning if they increase referral to the learning content and stimulate metacognitive processes (Rogoff,
1991; Wertsch, 1991). This result clearly shows that the simple argument, "shared workspace lowers coordination
load, which in turn leads to better learning outcomes", is not valid. To gain more insight into the associations and
dissociations between team coordination and processing of learning content more research is needed definitely.

                         The results regarding the effect of a graphical representation used as scaffold in the "shared workspace"
condition showed that this tool in fact had an impact on the outcome of the collaboration. It led to a higher number
of important knowledge pieces in the collaboratively written texts, and to a higher number of important knowledge
pieces in                the individual       knowledge acquisition.      These        results confirm           the  view   that the graphical   representation
worked   as               a  content scheme        and supported      the learners        in  focussing their          discussion  on  the main   ideas and in
understanding the subject matter (Kopp, Ertl, & Mandl, 2004; Suthers & Hundhausen, 2001). Altogether, the results
provide evidence that a content-specific graphical representation is a meaningful support in videoconference-based
learning settings. In our study the learners achieved the best results it in the condition where learners had a shared
workspace                 and  a graphical      representation.      We   assume         that this effect        would    be  even    stronger if the graphical
representation it itself part of the workspace.

                                                                                        111                                                           ICLS 2006
References
Bruce, V.  (1996). The   role  of the face in  communication:    implications for videophone    design. Interacting  with
         Computers, 8(2), 166-176.
Cannon-Bowers,   J.  A., &    Salas,  E. (1998).  Team   performance  and   training in complex     environments: recent
         findings from applied research. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 7(3), 83-87.
Dourish, P., & Bellotti, V. (1992). Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces. Proceedings of the 1992 ACM
         Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 107-114). New York: ACM Press.
Finn, K. E.  (1997). Introduction:   an  overview  of  video-mediated  communication    literature. In K. E.   Finn, A. J.
         Sellen, & S. B. Wilbur (Eds.), Video-mediated communication (pp. 3-21). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
         Associates.
Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2002). Being there or being where? Videoconferencing and cooperative learning. In H.
         Van   Oostendorp  (Ed.),    Cognition  in   a digital world  (pp.  53-73).  Hillsdale, NJ:  Lawrence   Erlbaum
         Associates.
Gutwin, C., & Greenberg, S. (2002). A descriptive framework of workspace awareness for real-time groupware.
         Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 11(3-4), 411-446.
Hoppe, H. U., Gassner, K., Mühlenbrock, M., & Tewissen, F. (2000). Distributed visual language environments for
         cooperative learning: applications and intelligent support. Group Decision and Negotiation, 9(3), 205-220.
Hron, A., Hesse, F. W., Cress, U., & Giovis, C. (2000). Implicit and explicit dialogue structuring in virtual learning
         groups. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 70(1), 53-64.
Jucks, R., Paechter, M. R., & Tatar, D. G. (2003). Learning and collaboration in online discourses. International
         Journal of Educational Policy, Research & Practice, 4(1), 117-146.
Kopp, B., Ertl, B., & Mandl, H. (2004). Fostering cooperative case-based learning in videoconferencing: effects of
         content schemes   and    cooperation   scripts. In P.  Gerjets, P.  Kirschner, J. Elen,    &  R. Joiner  (Eds.),
         Instructional design  for   effective and   enjoyable  computer-supported   learning   (pp.   29-36). Tübingen:
         Knowledge Media Research Center.
Reinhard, P., Hesse, F. W., Hron, A., & Picard, E. (1997). Manipulable graphics for computer-supported problem
         solving. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 13(3), 148-162.
Rogoff, B. (1991). Social interaction as apprenticeship in thinking: guided participation in spatial planning. In L. B.
         Resnick, J. M. Levine, & Teasley, S. D. (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 349-364).
         Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: convergent conceptual change. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
         2(3), 235-276.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: an instructional approach to promoting collaborative
         problem solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.
Suthers, D., &   Hundhausen,   C.  D.  (2001).  Learning  by   constructing collaborative representations: an   empirical
         comparison  of  three alternatives.   In P. Dillenbourg,  A. Eurelings,  &  K. Hakkarainen    (Eds.), European
         perspectives on computer-supported collaborative learning (pp. 577-592). Maastricht, NL: University of
         Maastricht.
Suthers, D., Weiner, A., Connelly, J., & Paolucci, M. (1995). Belvedere: engaging students in critical discussion of
         science and public policy issues. In J. Greer (Ed.), Proceedings of AI-ED'95, 7th World Conference on
         Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 266-273). Washington, DC.
Van Boxtel, C., van der Linden, J., & Kanselaar, G. (2000). Collaborative learning tasks and the elaboration of
         conceptual knowledge. Learning and Instruction, 10(4), 311-330.
Van Bruggen, J. M., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2002). External respresentations of argumentation in CSCL
         and the management of cognitive load. Learning and Instruction, 12(1), 121-138.
Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind: a sociocultural approach to mediated action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University Press.
Whittaker, S., Geelhoed,   E., &  Robinson,    E. (1993). Shared  workspaces:  how   do they    work and  when   are they
         useful? International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 39(5), 813-842.

                                                            112                                                 ICLS 2006
