Learning at the nanoscale: Research questions that the rapidly
    evolving interdisciplinarity of science poses for the learning
                                                sciences

     Sherry His, The Exploratorium & NISE Network, 3601 Lyon Street, San Francisco, CA, 94123
           Nora Sabelli, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave, BN-316, Menlo Park CA 94025
              Joseph Krajcik, University of Michigan and NCLT, 610 East University Avenue,
                                         Ann Arbor, Michigan, 48109
     Robert Tinker, The Concord Consortium, 10 Concord Crossing, Suite 300, Concord, MA 01742
  Kirsten Ellenbogen, Science Museum of Minnesota and NISE Network, 120 West Kellogg Boulevard,
                                            Saint Paul, MN 55102
                                   NCLT and NISE Network researchers
    Email: sherryh@exploratorium.edu, nora.sabelli@sri.com, krajcik@umich.edu bob@concord.org,
                                           kellenbogen@smm.org

        Abstract:   Recent    interdisciplinary discoveries  in  the sciences   and engineering   at the
        nanoscale, specifically in our ability to manipulate, molecules at atomic scales, suggests a
        need   for the education  community     to reconsider   the  ways in which  disciplinary-based
        sciences and mathematics are being taught in schools, as well as how the public might
        engage with nanoscale phenomena. This session will discuss key learning questions and
        their importance in helping to advance both conceptual reasoning from the macro, micro,
        nano, and atomic levels, as well as their implications for curricular restructuring, public
        programming,     and   teacher   professional   development.   The    timeliness   and  broader
        importance    of this  research  derives   in part  from  two  NSF-sponsored     workshops   on
        nanoscale education held in 2005, the National Nanotechnology Initiative, and two multi-
        institutional  NSF    awards:  a  National    Center  for   Learning   and  Teaching    and  the
        Nanoscale    Informal   Science   Education   Network.    This session   will discuss   research
        implications for the learning sciences and education community.

Background
        The U.S. federal government has placed nanoscience and nanotechnology as one of its top R & D
priorities because  of   its potential to  revolutionize    medicine,  computing,     materials science,  energy
production, and manufacturing. This investment has created the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI;
NSTC/NSET, 2005) and the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network to support the development
of research, programs, and tools to advance nanoscience and nanotechnology research and education (Roco
and Bainbridge,    2002; Roco    2003)   The impact    of  nanotechnology    on  manufacturing    processes  and
everyday   applications  makes   this  investment     important  for education,  and   calls for   cognitive and
pedagogical research around issues of scale which run across all scientific disciplines.

    To make these advances visible and comprehensible to all audiences, the National Science Foundation
has made    two substantial  awards.   One award   targets  public   audiences  through  the establishment   of a
national infrastructure that links science museums and other informal science education organizations with
nanoscale science and engineering research organizations, called the National Nanoscale Informal Science
Education (NISE)1 Network led by the Museum of Science Boston along with the Exploratorium and the
Science Museum of Minnesota. NISE's goal is to foster public awareness, engagement, and understanding
of nanoscale science, engineering, and technology. The second award, the Nanoscale Center for Learning
and Teaching (NCLT)2, with Northwestern University, Purdue, the University of Michigan, and a large
number of institutional partners, is aimed at the college and pre-college science education communities.
    In addition,   two  NSF-sponsored    workshops     were  held   recently to  consider  aspects  of nanoscale
education:  one at SRI's  Center  for  Technology     and  Learning  (CTL)   and other  at the  National Science
Foundation.   The  CTL   workshop     at SRI International   brought   together  a  wide  variety of participants

                                                       1066                                                  ICLS 2006
including educational researchers and science educators (spanning high school, community college, and
university   levels),  nanoscientists,  science    museum     and informal    learning   specialists, and    workforce
development     staff to consider   the  integration  of  concepts   of the nanoscale    with  science   education.   In
particular,  the  workshop     identified  core  nanoscale    concepts  and  discussed   their  representations,     and
considered needs and directions for research related to nanoscale education (Sabelli et al., 2005).
    The primary goal of the NSF workshop was to bring together principal investigators of awards funded
by the NSF Division of Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education and the education coordinators of
several nanoscience research centers, to facilitate both knowledge transfer among participants, and moves
towards defining a coherent nanoscience education vision.

Introduction ­ A Climate for NSET Education
        This ICLS session will explore the need for learning scientists to consider educational implications
of the initiatives in nanoscale science, engineering, and technology (NSET).         Researchers concurrently and
collaboratively    working     on middle    school  science   curricula, interactive   modeling    software,    teacher
professional development, exhibitions in museums, and public understanding of nanotechnology will share
the multiple     approaches     and challenges     in which    learning  at   the nanoscale    is  being     facilitated,
implemented, and assessed across settings and audiences.
        The     nanoscale   is  unfamiliar   to  students   and relatively  inaccessible.   Compared      to  everyday
experience, different forces are important, friction is almost never encountered, everything is in thermal
motion, and   odd  quantum      effects are observed.    To develop   an understanding     of this world,  the  learner
needs to depend on indirect evidence, mental models, and computational environments. It could be argued
that these concepts are too difficult to tackle until students reach an advanced undergraduate level and can
handle sophisticated mathematics. It is, however, desirable for a much broader range of students to gain a
general conceptual     understanding    of  the area  for various  civic and    economic   reasons    and because    the
complex,     interdisciplinary  nature   of  nanotechnology     better  reflects  modern   science    than    the usual
disciplinary  treatment.  Furthermore,     the  science  concepts that  are important   at nano    scale provide   deep
linkages between disciplines. Taught at a conceptual level, they could make large parts of science more
accessible and motivated. It is possible that student exploration of computational models can develop the
needed concepts (Tinker, 2005a; 2005b).
        A conceptual framework, responsive to the new interdisciplinary, system-oriented ways of doing
and using science is needed if a coherent curriculum vision can be refined. While views of the curriculum
have evolved (AAAS, 1989; AAAS, 2001), the underlying expectations and structure assume the current
sequencing, and does not yet reflect the cumulative impact of the changes that have taken place in the field
of science, engineering, and technology. Two possible frameworks derived from the technologically-driven
methodological advances are catalysts for deep science curricula reform. They are (a) complexity: i.e. the
systemic,    self-inferential, multi-level  nature  (Waldron,   1992,   Holland,  1998,  Kaput  et  al.,  1999)   of the
scientific  issues that  confront   citizens in  making   sense   of political  discussions   and  reaching   personal
decisions (global change and risk assessment of genetically engineered foodstuffs for example), and (b) the
scientific  and  technological    advances   that   have  enabled the   study   and  manipulation   of   matter   at the
nanoscale, where chemistry, physics, biology overlap, and where engineering                and design takes a more
eminent role. Either complexity (see Sabelli, 2005) or nanotechnology can be used as a lens to analyze
ways in which curriculum can addresses the evolution of science in support of science education goals.

        In this session we will discuss the educational importance of looking at the nature of matter as a
continuum    that  has been    made clear   by  the practical applications  of  nanotechnology     (see,  for example,
Roco, 2004). This approach shares a starting point with Lederman's "physics first" curriculum, which uses
the interdisciplinary molecular basis of nature as its conceptual underpinning (Lederman, 2001). Our aim is
to explore how learning sciences research can use the issues of learning at the nanoscale to help learners to
develop    a more   coherent    and  integrated   understanding   of    science  and its methods,     without     adding
nanoscience to an already impacted curriculum to benefit from the affordances of interdisciplinarity.

                                                          1067                                                     ICLS 2006
Emerging NSET education research question
         The two events mentioned in the background section generated preliminary key research questions
that need the help of the learning sciences to be addressed. In March 2005, SRI International convened a
working  meeting  to   discuss conceptual   issues  related to integrating  the   science and  technology  of  the
nanoscale into science education (Sabelli et al., 2005). In October 2005, NSF convened a workshop on
K12  and   Informal Nanoscale   Science   and  Engineering    Education   gathering  participants  from different
science and  technology    centers and  education   outreach  projects to take  stock  in the  progress so  far in
nanoscience education and outreach. A key goal of this NSF workshop was to promote synergies between
researchers and practitioners working in the formal and informal learning areas, and move towards defining
a coherent nanoscience education vision. The two workshops were complementary: nanoscience education
and awareness (NSF) and integrating scale in science education (SRI CTL).

         In both  these   meetings, key  learning   research  questions and  nanoscience    key  principles were
identified by consensus and agreed upon as important to address. With the participation of the learning
sciences community, these questions could be further investigated to convert principles into learning goals
and to formalize a research agenda.3   A workshop to start the process is being planned for early 2006.

The broad set of questions posed during the workshops are as follows:
     ·   What are possible development trajectories for 5 ­ 12th grade students to learn major learning
         goals related to nanoscience (or interdisciplinarity and complexity)?
     ·   How do people reason about scale? How do we get learners to understand crossing boundaries
         from macro, micro, nano, and atomic levels?
     ·   Given that people cannot see nanoscale phenomena with the naked eye, what do learners extract
         from the various visualizations, representations and models we design for them?
     ·   What is the role of physicality and experiential activities when dealing with nanoscale
         phenomena?
     ·   What are the scaffolds, models, representations, and/or exhibit interactions that lead to educational
         progress? And how do they evolve/change with the learner over time?

        Cognitive   research   questions relate  to the importance     of understanding    not  only  each  scale
independently, but also the transition between scales of matter: When does an object stop being a collection
of individual atoms or molecules and become a "material?"       If the components are identical when there is a
larger aggregate of particles, forming a bulk amount of the same substance, is it the same "material" or not?
Is there a rule that aptly describes the transition area between a nanoscale object and a bulk object? These
questions apply in physics as much as in chemistry and in biology.        There is not a "nanoscience" as such,
rather a science of matter at the nanoscale where the boundaries between disciplines becomes blurred. It is
thus educationally exciting to explore how integrating scale into science school subjects can lead to a more
coherent conceptual understanding of science. It is where the boundaries between disciplines blur that we
can attempt an integrative pedagogy.

         In addition   to cognitive aspects,  there are epistemological   considerations   about  the nature  and
conception of `small' and beliefs about what exists when the science phenomenon is invisible to the naked
eye. For example, when adults, teens, and children were asked about the smallest thing as objects they
could conceive, a majority across all ages said a piece of dirt or a grain of sand. (see Waldron et al., 2005)
Can learners really reason mathematically or conceptually at 10-9 meter scales? Or does this even matter
that this might not be comprehensible or teachable? Research into conceptual bridges of how to teach ideas
that small  quantitative  changes  lead  to large qualitative  differences, and   that matter  can be studied   as
individual  particles, a  group of  particles or  a large   group of   particles, might   help lower  barriers  to
understanding of why nanotechnology has become so important, and how it forces the interconnections
among scientific disciplines. This, in turn, could help learners acquire a more coherent version of science
and of scientific advances.

                                                      1068                                                  ICLS 2006
Prior and Related Research and Evaluation on NSET
         Prior research has addressed some of these questions in the context of discipline-based classroom
teaching   such as   chemistry   or   physics  (Harrison    and Treagust,  1996;   DeWos       and Verdonk,   1996;
Johnstone, 1993) Some of these questions have been addressed by research into advanced learning tools to
support  visualization   and haptic   interactions by   students to  address  learning  morphologically     accurate
models  of  viruses  (Jones  et  al., 2002).  Other   interventions  have demonstrated      the  success of  linking
molecular representations with symbolic and macroscopic phenomena using multimedia-based instruction
(Ardac and Akaygun, 2004). For example, the Concord Consortium has developed a molecular dynamics
(MD) engine for education that uses classical mechanics to predict the motion of particles that act under
forces that approximate    the forces  on   atoms  and  molecules   (Pallant and  Tinker,   2004;  Xie  and  Tinker,
2005). Using molecular dynamics software, students can interact with and build models of liquid crystals,
self-assembly, and protein conformation. 4

         Because the field of nanoscience is still new to many, there are few if little documented prior
studies of conceptions or misconceptions about nanotechnology among the public or learners in both the
US and in Europe (Cobb and Macoubrie, 2004; Lee, Scheufele, and Lewenstein, in press). This presents an
interesting opportunity for NSET learning sciences research and education in formal and informal settings.

         In museums and science centers, several formative studies and evaluations have been conducted
that studied   visitors' ideas about   atoms,    molecules,  and scale before     visiting exhibitions;  and  public
audience   reactions to  exhibitions  that focus   on nanoscale  phenomena,     nanoscience    and  nanotechnology
(e.g., NanoZone, Strange Matter, Marvelous Molecules (Serrell and Associates, 2001) It's a NanoWorld,
Too Small to See.)) These studies found that visitors have difficulty reasoning about things they can't see,
don't differentiate between micro (10-6) and nano (10-9), and had difficulty ranking an atom, DNA, and cell
by size  (Stafford and   Molinaro,    2005;   Holladay, 2005;   Waldron   et al., Korn  et  al., 1999).  Adults  and
children alike are challenged by interactions and phenomena at the nanoscale. Social sciences research has
also been done on public perceptions of nanotechnology focusing upon people's assessment of potential
benefits and risks associated with the field, preferences for learning about applications, and their limited
awareness of nanotechnology issues (Flagg, in press). As more public forums, educational media, and new
NSET exhibitions are developed, learning scientists have even more opportunities to study learning at the
nanoscale with the learners of all ages in the general public, and to contribute research-informed design
principles  to  foster   designs for   greater   engagement   with   and  understanding     of   nanoscale  science,
engineering, and technology in a more comprehensible and interdisciplinary way.

Conclusions
         Nanoscale   research    challenges   both the  learning  and  science   research  communities    to jointly
explore  new   pedagogies   needed    and  to create  approaches  to  communicate    why    the  work of nanoscale
scientists and engineers has attained such visibility and how it might also engage the general public, not
only nanotechnology specialists. Changes in observable properties with scale are not cognitively obvious,
and the ability to manipulate matter at these small scales is creating a new paradigm in manufacturing.          To
inform  the  public  about   the advances     in scientific research, and    to capture    the imagination   of new
generations of diverse communities of youth who may choose careers in science and engineering requires
research that considers changes in science when these changes have become so fundamental to society.
Addressing   these challenges    will hopefully   lead  to new  thinking, techniques,   and    partnerships between
learning scientists, educators, and scientists, just as the advancement of nanoscale science, engineering, and
technology has led to new disciplines, technologies, and collaborations.        The learning sciences community
has both a body of empirical research and prior knowledge to contribute, as well as expertise to advance
research on learning and teaching at the nanoscale. However, without focused collaboration and continued
interactions across disciplinary boundaries and without learning scientists taking an active role and voice in
these endeavors, another opportunity will be missed to make deep science educational progress.

Endnotes
(1) NISE URL: http://www.nisenet.org

                                                        1069                                                    ICLS 2006
(1) NCLT URL: http://www.nclt.us/
(1) The latest version of both reports will be available at the ICLS session.
(1) The force used in most Molecular Dynamics simulations from the Concord Consortium is derived from the
    Lennard-Jones potential. Through the tools, three objects and related forces can be added to the basic MD model
    that allows the system to illustrate some important nano-science concepts: Gay-Berne particles, Smart Surfaces, and
    water interactions. Using these, students can interact with and build models of liquid crystals, self assembly, and
    protein conformation.

References
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (2001). Atlas of science literacy. New York:
        Oxford University Press.

American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1989). Science for all Americans. Washington,
        DC, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Ardac, D. & Akaygun, S. (2004). Effectiveness of Multimedia-Based institution that emphasizes molecular
        representations on students: Understanding of chemical change. Journal of Research in Science
        Teaching 41, 317-337

Bainbridge, W. S. (2002). Public attitudes toward nanotechnology. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 4,
        561-570.

Cobb, M. D., & Macoubrie, J. (2004). Public perceptions about nanotechnology: Risks, benefits and trust.
        Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 6, 395-405.

DeWos, W. & Verdonk, A. H. (1996). The particulate nature of matter in science education and in science.
        Journal of Research on Science Teaching. 33, 657-664

Flagg, B. (in press). Nanotechnology and the Public. Informal Learning Review for 2006 issue.

Johnstone, A. H. (1993) The development of chemistry teaching: a changing response to a changing
        demand. Journal of Chemical Education.70, 701-705

Harrison, A. J, & Treagust, D. F. (1996). Secondary students' models of atoms and molecules: implications
        for teaching chemistry. Science education. 80, 509-534

Holland, J. (1998). Emergence: From Chaos to Order, Addison-Wesley.

Jones, D. G. C. (1991). Teaching modern physics - Misconceptions of the photon that can damage
        understanding, Physics Education, 26 (2) 92-98.

Jones, M. G, Bokinsky, A., Andre, T., Kubasko1, D. , Negish, A., Taylor, R.,          & Superfine, R., (2002)
        NanoManipulator Applications in Education: The Impact of Haptic Experiences on Students'
        Attitudes and Concepts. Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Science Haptics 2002 Symposium, pp.
        295-298. Orlando, Florida: IEEE Computer Society.

Kaput, J., Bar-Yam, Y., Jacobson, M., Jakobsson, E., Lemke, J., Wilensky, U. et al. (1999). Planning
        documents for a National Initiative on Complex Systems in K-16 Education. Retrieved August
        2005, from http://necsi.org/events/cxedk16/cxedk16.html

Korn, R. & Associates (1999). A front-end evaluation of Materials MicroWorld. Prepared for the Materials
        Research Society.

                                                      1070                                                      ICLS 2006
Korn, R. & Associates (2004). Strange Matter Summative Evaluation. Prepared for the Materials Research
       Society.

Lederman, L. (2001) Revolution in Science Education: Put Physics First! Physics Today, September issue.

Lee, C., Scheufele, D., & Lewenstein, B. (in press) Public attitudes toward emerging technologies:
       Examining the interactive effects of cognitions and affect on public attitudes toward
       nanotechnology. Science Communication.

Macoubrie, J. (2005). Informed public perceptions of nanotechnology and trust in government.   Project on
       emerging technologies at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. Retrieved from
       http://www.wilsoncenter.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=events.event_summary&event_id=143410

NISE Network, The Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network. http://www.nisenet.org

NNI, National Nanotechnology Initiative, http://nano.gov. See also
       http://www.nano.gov/html/edu/home_edu.html

NNIN, National Nanotechnology Initiative Network, http://www.nnin.org/

Pallant, A., & Tinker, R. (2004). Reasoning with atomic-scale molecular dynamic models. Journal of
       Science Education and Technology: 13 (1), 51-66.

Roco, M.C. (2003). Converging science and technology at the nanoscale: opportunities for education and
       training. Nature Biotechnology, 21 (10) 1247.

Roco, M.C., (2004). Nanoscale Science and Engineering: Unifying and Transforming Tools. American
       Institute of Chemical Enguneers Journal, 50 (5) 890.

Roco, M.C. & Bainbridge, W.S. (eds.)  (2002). Converging Technologies for Improving Human
       Performance: Nanotechnology, Biotechnology, Information Technology and Cognitive Science.
       Retrieved from http://www.wtec.org/ConvergingTechnologies

Sabelli, N., Schank, P., Rosenquist, A., Stanford, T., Patton, C., Cormia, R., & Hurst, K. (2005). Report of
       the Workshop on Science and Technology Education at the Nanoscale. Menlo Park, CA: SRI
       International.  Retrieved from
       http://nanosense.org/documents/reports/NanoWorkshopReportDraft.pdf

Sabelli, N. (in press). Complexity, Technology, Science and Education, International Journal of the Learning
       Sciences.

Serrell and Associates. (2001). Marvelous Molecules: The Secret Life. Summative Evaluation. Retrieved
       from www.informalscience.org/tools/summative.html

Stafford, C. L., Molinaro, M., & Nanozone Leader Team. (2005) Lessons learned from Nanozone.
       Retrieved from nanozone.org/museum.htm

Scheufele, D. A., & Lewenstein, B. (forthcoming). The public and nanotechnology: How citizens make
       sense of emerging technologies.  Journal of Nanoparticle Research.

Schummer, J. (2005). Reading nano: The public interest in nanotechnology as reflected in purchase patterns
       of books. Public Understanding of Science, 14 (2), 163-183.

Tinker, R. (2005a). Molecular Dynamics in Education. Berkeley, CA: The University of California,
       Berkeley.

                                                   1071                                                ICLS 2006
Tinker, R. (2005b). Nano-engineering with the Molecular Workbench. Berkeley, CA: The University of
       California, Berkeley.
Waldrop, M (1992). Complexity: The Emerging Science at the Edge of Chaos and Order, Touchstone Press

Waldron, A., Spencer, D., & Batt, C. (forthcoming). Too Small to See: The Current State of Public
       Understanding of Nanotechnology. Nanobiotechnology Center. Cornell University

Xie, Q., & Tinker, R. (in press). Molecular dynamics simulation of chemical reactions for use in education.
       Journal of Chemical Education.

                                                   1072                                                ICLS 2006
