      "Theory in pieces" ­ the communal development of a theory

           Orit Parnafes, Andrea diSessa, Joseph Wagner, Jose Mestre, Tom Thaden-Koch & Bruce Sherin
    Organizer's address: Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley, oritp@berkeley.edu

          Abstract: This symposium aims to expose some of the social dynamics of theory development in
          the learning   sciences by  examining    one particular  case.    It examines   how    individual   studies
          contribute  to  theory  development   by   using  and  extending     an  original  theory   of  conceptual
          development, coordination class theory. We show how the diversity of contexts in which these
          ideas have been applied has contributed, not so much to validation, but to genuine expansion of
          meaning and power of the theory. This pattern emphasizes the essentially social nature of theory
          construction, and also a striking parallel between theory development in professional science and
          ideas about conceptual development in students that emphasize the role of multiple contexts. We
          discuss theoretical and  methodological    issues of   communal      development    of a theory,  such  as
          theoretical power, fit, extension and generality.

Symposium Overview
          This symposium     discusses   meta-theoretical  questions  relevant     to the core   issue of  how  theories   are
developed by a community of researchers. It attempts to expose some of the social dynamics of theory development
in the learning sciences through the case of coordination class theory.

          What is a coordination class theory? Briefly speaking, coordination classes provide a means for getting a
certain class of information (e.g., force, velocity, energy etc.) from the world. The very idea of coordination classes
is explicated in diSessa (2002):

          The fundamental assumption behind the idea of coordination classes is that information is
          not transparently available in the world. Instead, we have to learn how to access different
          kinds.  Indeed,  in  different  circumstances,    we   may    need   to  use  very  different   means   to
          determine the same kind of information.

          A well-formed coordination class guarantees that the same type of information would be inferred across
different contexts and situations. A coordination class includes two parts: a perceptual part and an inferential part.
The perceptual part includes the methods by which information is collected from the world by means of selecting
attention  to specific aspects.   These  are  called "readout    strategies."  The  inferential  part  includes the   body of
knowledge     and reasoning   strategies that determine    the inferences   from   the readout   information.   This  body of
knowledge is called "causal net".

          While   diSessa  originally sketched  the  foundations   of   the theory,   several other   researchers  joined  the
enterprise of  building  a coherent   theory  that applies to  a wide   range   of contexts.  The  theory  originated  in two
sophisticated papers that lay the grounds for the theory in much detail and nuance (diSessa, 1991; diSessa, 1994).
The widely     cited paper  by   diSessa  &   Sherin (1998)    followed,    and attempted    to  outline  the necessary   and
foundational   theoretical constructs  of coordination  class    theory through    the  examination    of a single   freshman
physics student trying to make sense of the concept of force. The theory was picked by other researchers for its
perceived power to generate insights in specific research contexts. The use of the theory in a diversity of contexts
led to a genuine expansion of meaning and power.
          Wagner's dissertation (Wagner, 2003) focused on extended case studies of several undergraduate students
as they learned statistics and, in particular, "the law of the large numbers." This work applies coordination class
theory in at least three new directions. First, the domain explored is mathematics, which is new for coordination
class theory. Second, the larger theoretical framing of the work is the issue of knowledge transfer. Third, this was
the first attempt to demonstrate processes of learning as viewed from a coordination class perspective. Prior studies
that applied coordination classes only examined students' knowledge without necessarily observing real conceptual
change. These new directions drove the elaboration and modification of some pieces of the theory.

                                                            1078                                                    ICLS 2006
          Mestre,  et al. (2004),    based  on Thaden-Koch's      dissertation  (Thaden-Koch,     2003),   analyzed  students'
judgments   of  realism   of animations    of  different trajectories  among    physics-naïve   and   physics-knowledgeable
undergraduates. The study highlighted the important role that readout strategies play in this particular context. While
in prior research applying coordination classes the role of the causal net was highlighted in the process of conceptual
change,   this research presents   a specific  context  where    the causal net interacts  strongly   with readout  strategies,
resulting  in  the inability of most    of the physics-knowledgeable     students    to perform  accurate   readouts   (i.e., an
inability to detect anomalous motion that was detected by most of the physics-naïve students).

          Parnafes' dissertation (Parnafes, 2005) used coordination class theory in the context of studying students'
development     understanding   of   harmonic   oscillation through    the  use of   computer-based     representations.   This
research expands the theory to the use of representations. In addition, the idea of coordination clusters, mentioned
briefly in diSessa   &  Wagner   (2005),   becomes    a  central construct  in  some  of   the cases  explored  and is  further
developed (Parnafes, in review).

          Finally, Levrini   (Levrini,  2005;  Levrini,  in preparation)    implemented    coordination   class theory  in    the
context of proper time in special relativity. The particular case highlights span, alignment and concept projection as
keys for   interpreting the  process  of   conceptual change  activated    by  students in  transitioning  from a  Newtonian
conception of time to a relativistic one.

          Four  of  these attempts   to develop   and  extend the    theory are summarized     below.   Each  presentation,   in
addition to delineating the context and the theory extension, also refers to the following issues of communal theory
development:

          Theoretical fit: Why was coordination class theory a good candidate as a theoretical framework for this
case, and how is the theory mapped onto this particular case? Were there features in the data corpus that served as
particularly strong indicators?

          Theoretical   power:  In what    ways was   the idea   of  coordination class    insightful for the analysis  of this
particular case?   In other  words,  were   there some    important   insights  that wouldn't   have   been   possible without
coordination classes?

          Theory extension: How did the particular case suggest modifications or elaborations on the framework?

          Specificity and generality: What are the particular properties of the case that led to the particular extension
of the theory? In what sense did this case serves as a prototype for general classes of cases or contexts?

Presentations

Coordination Classes: Theoretical and Meta-Theoretical Issues
Andrea A. diSessa, University of California, Berkeley, disessa@soe.berkeley.edu

          This presentation aims to set a general frame for considering multiple lines of research--exemplified by the
work  of   the  other contributors   to  the   symposium--inspired     by   the idea    of coordination    classes (CC).   The
presentation gives a sketch of the basic ideas of CC theory and suggests some meta-theoretical issues relevant to the
core issue of how theories are developed by a community of people: Why do some theories "catch on" and why
don't others? Is it appropriate to consider some theories as more generative than others (without any presumption of
"correctness"), and how can generativity be judged or created in advance? Is there a tension between social and
epistemic aspects of theory building, and, if so, how do researchers manage the tension?

Coordination Class Theory
          Coordination class theory provides a rough model of a particular kind of concept (a coordination class) as a
complex    system.  The   model  answers    three primary   questions:  (1)   What   is the primary    function of  a  concept

                                                             1079                                                    ICLS 2006
(specifically, a CC)? (2) What are the performance characteristics that allow the concept effectively to perform its
function? (3) Structurally, can we decompose the concept (CC system) into parts? Thus:

         (1)  The  primary    function   of a  coordination   class  is to allow  one    to determine  a  particular    class of
information   in many  world   circumstances.      (2) The    main  difficulty that must    be overcome   is the   diversity  of
situations in which one needs to determine the relevant information. Information is never transparently available,
and people need opportunistically to use whatever is easily "read out" of a given situation, and then creatively to
infer the particular CC-characteristic information from that. However, all the diverse strategies must be coordinated
(hence the name) in order to determine reliably the same information in all circumstances. (3) A first-cut in terms
classifying parts of a CC is to distinguish perceptual-proximal strategies (more directly "seeing") from inferences
that may   be  made   on  the basis   of what   is seen.   The  perceptual-proximal    elements,   which  select  and   manage
attention, are called readout  strategies.     The post-perceptual   body  of  knowledge     and  reasoning  strategies,  which
takes readouts and infers the required information, is called the causal or inferential net. In the talk, I will give
examples and additional details of the model, including ideas of span, alignment, and concept projections

Meta-theoretical Properties of Coordination Classes
         Below I name several more-or-less "designed" characteristics of coordination class theory that might have
contributed to its apparent generativity and use by others.

     1.  The theory is inviting because of its explicitly tentative nature, allowing other researchers both to fill in and
         to adapt to their particular contexts. CC theory is self-consciously a rough sketch, and limitations have been
         as highlighted as defining aspects.
     2.  The theory makes progress by dividing off a subcontext from a complex, but perhaps intractably diverse
         terrain. CCs are only one type of concept, not all possible concepts. The theory is driven, in part, by the
         assumption of diversity in kinds of concepts, and it might draw some of its power from this "restricting of
         domain."
     3.  The theory went through a self-conscious phase of simplification--although, in its present form, it is still
         not, and was never intended to be, a "popularly accessible" idea. Simplification can be both sociologically
         and epistemologically powerful, although there may also be a tension--for example, over-simplifying to
         promote accessibility.
     4.  Coordination class theory is one of the few existing technical models of the internal structure of concepts as
         a  complex   system,  and    it allows  both    theoretical analysis  (e.g., of typical   difficulties) and  empirical
         tracking  of processes    of concept   use   and  development.   Here, the   value of the  theory  may   not be  in  its
         details, but primarily in a new grain size of analysis.
     5.  The theory may be productive mainly for introducing a focus on an, until-now, neglected characteristic of
         concepts: their perceptual aspects.

Transferring a Theory to a New Context
Joseph F. Wagner, Xavier University, wagner@xavier.edu

         In  setting out  to  take a  new   look   at  the problem   of  "knowledge    transfer"  (Wagner,   2003),   I had   no
expectation   that diSessa's  research    would    serve   as the  primary  theoretical  underpinning    for my      own. Early
considerations of my data--extended teaching interviews with undergraduate statistics students wrestling with their
understandings of the law of large numbers--led me to reconsider the way the problem of transfer has usually been
considered. Traditionally, the problem has been framed liked this: How is it that knowledge learned in one context
can be applied to a different context? I proposed in Wagner (2003) that a different question might be asked that just
as readily articulated as  the problem      of transfer: How   is it that individuals  come    to see two different   situations
(contexts) as alike, in that they might be considered examples of the same (mathematical) principle? This change of
focus--from the state of the knowledge to be applied in a new context to the individual's ability to perceive a new
situation as an instantiation of some concept--led me to diSessa's work on coordination class theory.

         Reframing the question in this way made inseparable "knowledge of a concept" and "the ability to perceive
a  concept in  particular situations."   The   coordination   class  components  of   readout  strategies and    the causal   net
together suggest that learning to recognize some concepts in the world involves learning very particular and context-
sensitive means of attending to information relevant to that concept. In other words, the ability to perceive a concept

                                                              1080                                                    ICLS 2006
as relevant to a particular situation is not due primarily, if at all, to the "abstract" nature of conceptual knowledge;
rather, learning to recognize and see as relevant a concept in a situation depends on an individual having acquired
appropriate   readout  strategies  suited  to  that  situation. In this   interpretation, it is  quite possible for  a   person to
develop    a  meaningful  understanding    of  some    concept   that  is consistently  useful   in some    situations but  is not
perceived as useful in other situations that may be relevant by normative standards. In our language, we would say
that it is common     for a learner  to construct    a concept   projection   for a particular   concept  that  suffices in some
situations, but not in others (diSessa & Wagner, 2005; Wagner, 2006). diSessa's theory predicts the very problem
that knowledge     transfer has   always   posed:   Why   is it that   some  people  make    good   use  of knowledge    in some
situations but not in others?

           In Wagner (2003; 2006) I showed how diSessa's coordination ideas, situated within his larger knowledge-
in-pieces epistemological framework, could be extended to offer some coherent and powerful insights to the long-
standing problem of knowledge transfer. Data were drawn from microgenetic analyses of in-depth interviews carried
out over several weeks with undergraduate students learning elementary concepts of probability and statistics. These
analyses revealed that knowledge transfer may be rooted in the construction of cognitive structures significantly
different from those traditionally assumed in the transfer literature. diSessa's insistence on the context-sensitivity of
different forms of knowledge was supported by the data. Analyses suggested that the key to knowledge transfer is
not  found    in the "abstractness"  of  knowledge     that  somehow      overlooks  contextual   differences,  but  through    the
increasing complexity of conceptual structures that include context-sensitive readout and coordination strategies that
account for contextual differences.

           The process of my own research reflected the very theory of transfer that diSessa's and my ideas suggested.
Coordination class theory was not simply "applied" to a new set of data in any abstract way. Rather, my ability to
perceive it as useful within the specific context of my work emerged only as I learned to attend to particular aspects
of my data that served as affordances for "seeing" aspects of diSessa's theory; as the theory itself suggested new
ways of looking at my data; and as the occasional lack of fit between the two suggested ways in which the theory
itself could be expanded.

Coordination clusters in oscillatory motion
Orit Parnafes, University of California, Berkeley, oritp@berkeley.edu

           In the context   of investigating   how   computer-based     representations   facilitate   conceptual change    in  the
domain   of   harmonic   oscillation (Parnafes,    2005),  the  application   of coordination    class theory  seemed    to be  an
appropriate fit. First, coordination class theory enables one to look at the process of conceptual change at a fine-
grained  level,   which   matches   the  type  of   analysis  that   I do,   aiming to  describe    mechanisms    of   developing
understanding.    Second,   since coordination    class theory   refers   to perceptual   processes  (in addition  to  conceptual
processes),   it was  particularly   suitable  for   analyzing  processes    of  learning  with  external   representations,   and
generated an opportunity to examine possible relations between representations and conceptual change.

           More specifically, through observation of eight pairs of students interacting with both physical oscillators
and a simulation of oscillatory motion, I examined how students differentiate the concepts of velocity and frequency
in oscillatory motion, facilitated by the use of representations. The close examination of this processes led to the
refinement of the idea of coordination cluster.

           The idea of a coordination cluster was motivated and developed through the analysis of students' efforts to
make sense of the term "fast" both with physical oscillators, and with a simulation of oscillation. Everyday talk
usually  refers   to both   velocity  and   frequency   as   "fast",   and   in  many  contexts   this   undifferentiated   use is
unproblematic. However, in a scientific context, the use of terms to denote certain concepts requires more precision
in order   to use  those  concepts  properly   in  a wide  range   of  contexts  and   relations and   with a  proper  alignment.
Moreover,     in the context   of oscillation, where   the   term  "fast"  denotes  at least two    different scientific concepts
(velocity and frequency), precise differentiation becomes even more crucial.           A proper differentiation between these
two  concepts    requires that    students develop   a  system    that  coordinates  two   coordination   classes:  velocity   and
frequency. This system is what we called a coordination cluster, which requires two-level coordination:
     1.    Coordinating information within one coordination class ­ students need to learn ways to get information
           from multiple situations about frequency (or about velocity, in the case of coordination class of velocity).

                                                                1081                                                     ICLS 2006
    2.   Coordinating  information   across    coordination classes ­  students need   to learn to  differentiate the   two
         concepts of velocity and frequency and to know when to use each concept and what the relations between
         those concepts are.    Even   if they   have a coordination  class of  frequency, and  they   know how      to get
         information about frequency, they still need to know that they are dealing with the concept of frequency
         and not with the concept of velocity.

         The construct of coordination cluster seems to be particularly useful for cases of concept differentiation, or
in cases where students use different concepts interchangeably. In these cases, the development of one coordination
class is constructed with the simultaneous construction of other coordination classes in the cluster.

The application of coordination class theory on Students' Judgments about Animated
Motion
Tom Thaden-Koch, University of Minnesota, ttkoch@physics.umn.edu
Jose Mestre, University of Illinois, mestre@uiuc.edu

         We will discuss an application of coordination class theory to a situation in which students were asked to
judge the realism of computer animations showing metal balls rolling on a pair of metal tracks.          The animations
were based on a variant of a common physics classroom demonstration, sometimes called "High Road/Low Road."
Given different sets of animations, students were asked to identify the "most realistic" one from the set.           When
presented with    animations of a single   ball, most  students  focused on the presence   or absence  of realistic  speed
changes.  Adding a second ball (moving in an adjacent track) to the animations drastically changed the strategies
that many students used, to the extent that they identified as realistic a particular (unrealistic) motion with two balls
that they had ruled out minutes before with one ball.       This motion featured a ball speeding up as it rolled uphill,
which the students found unrealistic in the one-ball context.    When both balls were present, this same motion (with a
ball speeding up while rolling uphill) showed one ball speeding ahead of the other before they reached the ends of
their tracks together (a pattern that many students identified as a characteristic of realistic motion on these tracks).

         We attempted a concrete (often phrase-by-phrase) mapping of student interview data onto the structures
postulated for coordination classes.   Students often repeated similar descriptions of similar motions, which allowed
us to identify several common expectations of realistic motion, and some of the sources for those expectations; these
we mapped onto the causal net.       The   same   repeated  descriptions of well-specified  stimuli allowed us    to make
plausible inferences about the readout strategies students used in different circumstances.

         Our analysis particularly highlights the effect that students' knowledge can have on the observations they
make.  The participants in the study were drawn from two different college courses.       Students from an introductory
physics course were especially prone to the problem of accepting anomalous motion as realistic, as described above.
In contrast, students from   an  educational     psychology class were   virtually immune   to  the problem.      Mapping
interview data onto coordination class structures facilitates an explanation in terms of the knowledge that students
brought to the task (causal net elements), and the sorts of observations (readout strategies) that they focused on
based  on that knowledge.     In  this explanation,   the readout  strategies evoked   were   strongly dependent    on  the
knowledge    that students brought   to   bear   on the task, and  on details  of  the context. The    emphasis   in other
applications of coordination class theory attends mostly to the use of readout strategies to gather information, on
which the causal net will operate.   In our case, different causal net inferences led to very different ways of observing
the world--that is, the causal net affected readout strategies.

         Another feature of this application of coordination classes is that virtually no attempt was made to identify
knowledge structures or concepts that could qualify as coordination classes.      To the extent that it is useful, the case
provides evidence that coordination, and the language of coordination classes, can be fruitful even in cases where
"coordination classes" are of only peripheral interest.    These issues are discussed in more detail in a recent article
extending our prior work (Thaden-Koch, Dufresne & Mestre, under review).

Summary
         Each  presentation  in  the symposium      demonstrates  the application  and  extension  of  coordination   class
theory. As researchers who attempt to apply this theoretical construct on a corpus of data, one thing that we must do

                                                            1082                                                ICLS 2006
is to refine our ability to recognize that construct in our research context. A number of researchers seem to agree that
coordination class is a powerful idea. However, it is not obvious that any two researchers would "see" the same
coordination  class in the  same data, or  even that they count   the same  thing  as a coordination   class. As part of
community theory building, we need to refine the ways in which we "see" things in our data through the lens of the
theory. In other words, we need to refine our coordination class of coordination class.

Discussant
Bruce Sherin, Northwestern University, bsherin@northwestern.edu

References
diSessa, A. A., & Wagner, J. F. (2005). What coordination has to say about transfer. In J. Mestre (Ed.), Transfer of
         learning from a modern multi-disciplinary perspective (pp. 121-154). Greenwich, CT: Information Age
         Publishing.
diSessa, A. A. (2002). Why "conceptual ecology" is a good idea. In M. Limon & L. Mason (Eds.), Reconsidering
         conceptual change: Issues in theory and practice (pp. 29­60). Dortrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.
diSessa,  A. A., &  Sherin  B. L.  (1998).  What  changes    in conceptual change?    International Journal   of Science
         education, 20(10), 1155­1191.
diSessa, A. A. (1994). Speculations on the foundations of knowledge and intelligence. In D. Tirosh (Ed.), Implicit
         and Explicit Knowledge: An Educational Approach. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1-54.
diSessa, A. A. (1991). Epistemological micromodels: The case of coordination and quantities. In J. Montanegro &
         A. Tryphon (Eds.), Psychologie Genetique et sciences cognitives.      (Volume from the Eleventh Advanced
         Course.) Geneva: Archives Jean Piaget, 169-194.
Levrini, O. (in preparation). Proper time as coordination class.
Levrini,  O. (2005).   Proper time as  coordination  class.  Unpublished    research  report, "Marco    Polo"  program,
         University of Bologna, Italy.
Mestre, J., Thaden-Koch, T., Dufresne, R. & Gerace, W. (2004). The dependence of knowledge deployment on
         context among physics novices.     In E. Redish & M. Vicentini (Eds.), Proceedings of the International
         School of Physics "Enrico Fermi", Course CLVI, Research on Physics Education.         Amsterdam: IOS Press,
         367-408.
Parnafes, O. (in review). These are at the same skinniness level but they're not as high - Understanding the Physical
         World through Representations.
Parnafes, O.    (2005).  The   development   of  conceptual     understanding through    the  use   of  computer-based
         representations. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California at Berkeley.
Thaden-Koch,    T.  (2003). A  coordination class analysis   of  college students' judgments  about    animated  motion.
         Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Nebraska.
Thaden-Koch,    T., Dufresne,  R. & Mestre,   J. (under review).   Coordination    of knowledge   in   judging animated
         motion.
Wagner, J. F. (2006).  Transfer in pieces. Cognition and Instruction, 24(1), 1-71.
Wagner,   J. F.  (2003). The   construction  of  similarity: Context   sensitivity and  the   transfer of mathematical
         knowledge. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

                                                         1083                                                  ICLS 2006
