             Unpacking the Mediation of Invented Representations

          Joshua A. Danish, Noel Enyedy, UCLA, 2341 Moore Hall, Box 951521, Los Angeles, CA 90095
                                    Email: jdanish@ucla.edu, enyedy@gseis.ucla.edu

          Abstract: In this paper we compare two contexts where students were inventing representations; a
          2nd and 3rd grade classroom creating a shared representation, and a kindergarten and 1st grade
          classroom creating unique representations.       Contexts  for   developing   shared representations   are
          those in which    a class attempts  to jointly  construct  one representational  form  to   solve a  given
          problem.    In  contrast,  contexts    for inventing   unique    representations  emphasize     individual
          representational choices with no explicit attempt to create a shared representational form. Drawing
          on and comparing data from two recent studies we use the Negotiated Representational Mediators
          (NeRM)   framework     to  analyze  young    children's   activities oriented  towards   the  production,
          evaluation,   and   modification  of   representational   forms.   Both  cultural  contexts     lead to  a
          convergence    toward normative    representations as  well   as continuing   to diverge in  the  form  of
          individual acts of creativity and agency.    We argue that despite these similar trends, the different
          contexts support unique aspects of representational practice.

          Material representations such as graphs and diagrams play a central role in learning and doing mathematics
and science. For this reason, numerous studies have examined the way in which particular representations play a
role in   cognition.    Many   of   these  examine    the difficulties  that   students have   understanding    a  normative
representation, or the benefits of using particular forms of representations or representational systems (cf., Greeno,
1987;  Kotovsky,   Hayes,   &  Simon,   1985;  Larkin  &  Simon,    1987;  Turner, Wilhelm,    & Confrey,   2000;   Zhang  &
Norman, 1994).     Recently, increasing attention has been paid to the role of invented representations where students
create or  re-invent  a  representation in response    to some   set of  task  demands.    Activities intended  to foster the
invention of representations can be described as falling into two general categories: shared or unique.         Contexts for
inventing shared representations refer to activities in which the objective is to have the students work as a group to
eventually create one shared representational form that will be used to coordinate the activity of the entire group (cf.,
Enyedy, 2005; diSessa, 1999).       Contexts for inventing unique representations refer to classroom activities where
there is no explicit goal of achieving a shared convention for the overall class (cf., Danish & Enyedy, under review).
Instead, students are encouraged to create unique representations of their own.         While previous work has shown the
power of invented representations as well as a number of factors that contribute to the effective use of invented
representations in classroom practice, we believe that some subtle but important differences that result from the
different contexts   for invented   representations  have  gone   unexplored.     This  paper  proposes   a new    theoretical
construct that illuminates these subtleties that are illustrated with examples from previous empirical research (ibid;
Enyedy, 2005).

          The goal of this paper will be to examine the impact of these two contexts for inventing representations--
shared and unique--to highlight the different kinds of representational activities that result from the negotiation of
mediating  factors   including  the  orientation  towards   invented    representations,   classroom   norms,   the  material
environment, and interaction with others.      In particular, we will highlight the fact that despite seemingly different
goals, students engaged in both representational contexts showed a tendency to converge upon a representation that
was conventional within the classroom as well as continuing to diverge in the form of individual acts of creativity
and agency.  We will discuss some of the causes of this convergence and divergence, as well as highlighting some
important differences in student activity that resulted from the different representational contexts.       It is important to
note that our goal is not to identify one context for invented representations as better than the other, but rather to
elaborate the different types of practice that are likely to occur within each context, and the way in which they are
elicited by the context.

Negotiated Representational Mediators (NeRM) as an Analytic Frame
          The notion of Meta-Representational Competence (MRC) has been shown to be a valuable analytic tool to
understand the process of inventing new representational forms (diSessa, 1999; Enyedy, 2005).             MRC describes the
resources that students' bring to bear across multiple representational acts, such as the ability to critique an existing
representation, an understanding of the function of a representation, and even the ability to draw, which students
frequently leverage   in  encountering    new  representational   challenges.    These   resources    are important  both  in

                                                             113                                                    ICLS 2006
inventing  representations  and in  effectively using   conventional    representations.  Elsewhere,     we have   proposed to
synthesize MRC with a practice-oriented notion to representational activity (c.f., Hall, 1996; Roth, 1997; Roth &
McGinn, 1998), by focusing on the negotiations and mediators for a representational practice as it develops within a
classroom    community   (cf., Danish  &  Enyedy,    under    review).   This    framework,    which   we   called  Negotiated
Representational Mediators (NeRM), attends to the situational and interactional contexts that are under-theorized in
MRC.    The NeRM approach assumes that any given representational act is mediated by multiple factors (Engestrom,
1987).    These  include  local norms    for representation,   the    activity that the  student   is engaged   in, individual
understanding and preferences, the physical environment in which an individual is creating their representation, and
the other people present   At any given moment multiple mediators may apply to a student's activities, and may even
conflict. By examining the way in which students and teachers negotiate these mediators, we argue it is possible to
describe a rich set of resources and contextual factors that lead to representational inventions and accomplishments.
The NeRM framework highlights the role of these mediators of the students' activity, conflicts or contradictions that
may  arise   between  them, and  the  process through   which     these conflicts   are resolved   in order to understand   the
students' representational practices.

Methods
          Our analysis is a retrospective comparison of two independent studies of classrooms oriented towards the
invention of representations where one was oriented towards creating a shared representation, and the other toward
creating unique representations.   The differences between these two classroom studies, which include age, task, and
content   domain among    other factors,  make  it  difficult to  conduct   a  direct empirical  comparison    between   them.
However, our goal is not to directly compare these two contexts.            Rather, our goal is to see the extent to which
NeRMs can be applied to different contexts and the insights it provides.        Therefore, the differences between the two
classrooms allow for a richer set of conjectures than would two classrooms which were more similar.

          First, we examine examples of inventing shared representations from a first and second grade classroom
(ages 7-9) in which 22 students re-invented the notion of topographical maps (for a full treatment of this study, see
Enyedy, 2005).   We will refer to this classroom as the mapping classroom. The mapping unit consisted of six major
activities spanning a total of seven days, for a total of approximately eleven hours.        The activity we focus on here is
one in which the students constructed and then mapped a city made of wood blocks.              After the blocks were cleaned
up they were asked what would be difficult about rebuilding the city based solely on the maps they had drawn.
During the discussion the students decided that the birds-eye-view approach that they had used in their maps lead to
a difficulty in identifying the height of the buildings.  They then collectively developed a system to show height on
their maps.   The task in this classroom was oriented towards creating one shared representational form that all 22
students could employ in their maps.      One   of  the teacher's     goals was  that   this shared   representational form be
similar to the one employed by professional mapmakers.

          Second, we examine examples of inventing unique representations within a kindergarten and first grade
(ages 5-7) science classroom (for a full treatment of this study, see Danish & Enyedy, under review).           We will refer
to this as the pollination classroom.  The classroom consisted of 21 students who were observed for 2 months while
creating  representations of   flower pollination.  Students     participated   in  pre and   post  interviews in  which  they
discussed and evaluated their representations and representational values.       Our analysis focuses upon video data of 2
case-study groups of 5-6 students as they created their representations.        The task in this classroom was for students
to each create a unique representation of pollination, so long as it included the important details necessary to show
pollination. Examples of these details included having two flowers of the same type showing the pistil (female sex
organ) and stamens (male sex organs), and a pollinator.       The students were otherwise given a great deal of freedom
in selecting how to represent those details.

Analytic Approach
          In order to analyze   our data, we  first examined      the field-notes   and video   logs  to identify instances of
potential theoretical interest in the corpus of video data--those in which it appeared there was a connection between
the representational context and the way in which individual students' activities were influenced by this orientation.
In each excerpt, we began by attempting to identify the mediators that were relevant to the participants (Goodwin,
2000), identifying the way in which multiple mediators were negotiated in interaction, and the impact that this has
upon students   representational  activities (Danish    & Enyedy,     under    review).      Examples    of mediators   include

                                                              114                                                    ICLS 2006
representational norms (such as a list of details which needed to be included in the representation), the students'
peers, teacher,    and the physical  materials that  the students  were   using.  We then traced the outcome of these
mediated activities upon students' local activities within the excerpt and in subsequent interactions.        Finally, when a
link of theoretical interest between specific mediators and outcomes was found, we examined the rest of the corpus
of  data for both     confirming  and  disconfirming  excerpts.   Confirming  evidence     takes   the form   of  both  similar
outcomes, and those situations in which a different outcome was remarked by the participants as out of the ordinary.
For example, if students were critiqued by their peers for not following what we as analysts had identified as a norm,
we took this as evidence that the participants in the classroom also saw this as a norm (Cobb, Stephan, McClain, &
Gravemeijer, 2001).

Analysis and Findings
         Our analyses converged upon two trends of interest.       First, we identified that in both classrooms there was
in fact a convergence upon a standard representational feature set.     Second, the inclusion and role of individual acts
of creativity were different in the two contexts.   However, a closer look at the data reveals that despite these trends,
the classroom   practices  in    which student engaged   were  quite   different in terms     of both  the mediators   and the
negotiations that appeared to guide their activities.

Convergence upon a standard representational feature set
         The    first similarity between the   two classrooms   was  that there   was   a noticeable   convergence    toward a
normative representation.      In the  inventing mapping    classroom   this was  an    expected   outcome    as the  teacher's
expressed goal was to lead the students to all create a representation similar to conventional topographical maps.           In
contrast, the students in the representing pollination classroom rarely discussed their representations with the entire
class, and were encouraged to make their own representational choices.        However, because the teacher consistently
promoted a specific list of features to be included, and because students saw the representations of other students
working   within   their groups   and  reminded  each  other   of this teacher's  list,   the end  result  was   that students'
representations did in fact converge upon a set of similar details.

Convergence When Creating Shared Representations: The case of mapping
         In the case of mapping, the convergence was encouraged by the fact that the students first agreed upon a
common problem to be solved before they began to work towards a specific solution.                 The teacher also played a
major  role  in mediating   these  conversations;  in some  cases  constraining   the   task,  at other times  asking   crucial
questions about the representations. For example, to get the students to "discover" that height was a problem the
teacher showed the class a student's map on which a rectangle was labeled "skyscraper."                This could be seen as
invoking a critical part of the students' shared history to push the conversation in the direction that she thought
would be productive. Other important mediators included the use of gesture to animate their representations, and the
use of a shared display where different strategies were compared.

         A second way convergence was encouraged in the mapping case was in the importance placed on public,
whole class discussions. Our analyses revealed that most of the consequential negotiations seemed to take place
during whole-class discussions.     While the content of the discussions were frequently raised by students it was the
teacher  who    was   mediating   and  scaffolding  how  they  interacted    with each    other.  For  example,   the  teacher
encouraged a debate between two students who had invented different ways to represent height by revoicing certain
ideas--elaborating important points they made so that they were clear to the whole class--and by positioning the
argument not as a competition between the two representations but as an opportunity to work together to refine the
representations so that they overcame the weaknesses that their classmates were identifying.           In this way, the teacher
facilitated a series of representational practices in which the students negotiated different aspects of the final shared
representation  collaboratively,   reaching  consensus   on both  the  representational    problems    to  be solved,  and the
preferred solution.

Convergence When Creating Unique Representations: The case of pollination
         In contrast to the mapping classroom, the students in the pollination classroom did not collectively develop
the problem     to solve;  they  were   assigned the  task  of representing   pollination     by  the teacher  in whole-class
discussions.    The   specific features that needed   to be included   in the  students'   representations    were    frequently

                                                            115                                                       ICLS 2006
discussed with the whole class while representational tasks were assigned.             However, it was the ways in which
students were   reminded   of  these details  and negotiated   the   relevance  of  these   contributions while  creating  their
representations   that appeared   to have  the  most    impact    upon   the students'   ongoing   representational    activities.
Reminders    took one   of three  forms: the  teacher   reminded     the student of  a feature   that was  missing  from  their
representation, the students reminded each other of important features, and students' overheard reminders which
were not directed at them.

         Teacher reminders were often couched in terms that linked the representation to the process that was being
represented.    For example,   questions such   as  "If we   don't   have  a pistil can  we   have pollination?"   appeared   to
highlight the link between pollination and the need for fidelity between the representation and the process.                 We
argue that this helped develop for students an important practice of evaluating the representations of pollination with
respect to their ability to describe the process as it occurs.       This was also evident in the interviews when students
were asked to critique a representation and often noted that the representation did not make sense because it did not
depict pollination accurately.    In this way, it appears that the practice of linking the representational choices to the
referent ultimately led students to appropriate understanding of the features of flowers as more than just a list of
necessary items.

         Students    also  reminded    each   other    of  the    representational   requirements     as  they   created   their
representations.    These  reminders   often  invoked   the  teacher   as  the  source   of the  comment,    and   therefore the
authority behind it.   We see this as an important opportunity for students to practice critiquing and evaluating each
others'  representations   based  upon a   series of norms    that   were   established  within  the  classroom    for how   the
representations should look. We also saw multiple instances where a student demonstrated that they overheard a
question or comment by moving to answer the question themselves, or contributing to the comment.                    Therefore,
while we cannot make causal claims from this data, it appears that the students were creating their representations in
a  rich environment    in  which  they were   constantly   reminded      and overhearing    ideas  about  what   needed   to  be
represented and how it could be done.

Implications of the Different Sources of Convergence
         A major difference between these two studies may lie in the fact that in the mapping case, students were
attempting to solve a shared problem that they first had agreed upon.           In contrast, in the pollination case, students
were instead attempting to satisfy teacher's requirements which implicitly included the problem of how to show
pollination, but  which   may   have been  understood     in different   ways   by  different students.  However,   during   the
interviews,  the  students often   identified the  details   that showed     pollination occurring    in the representation   as
important.   Therefore,    in both cases   students  appeared     to have  engaged   in,  and learned    about the  practice  of
designing and creating a representation that effectively communicates the object that it is designed to represent.
However, in the mapping classroom, solutions to this problem had to be negotiated collectively as students vied for
the best solution and students gained experience in a form of social practice that involved proposing and evaluating
specific solutions.    The students in the pollination classroom primarily had to identify the specific solutions that
fulfilled a given set of constraints and learned to participate in a social practice where the peers and the teachers
helped each other find a solution by monitoring how their own and others met or violated these constraints.
         One additional implication resulting from this difference in how the problem to be solved was defined--
collectively or individually--is the degree to which members in the given classroom had access to a shared history
of the problem definition and solution.    In the mapping classroom, this shared history became an important resource
in  helping  to  coordinate   the collective  activity  as the    members    of  the community     referenced   their  previous
representational challenges while developing a solution.       In contrast, the students in the pollination classroom had
privileged access to their own history with a given representation in that their peers and the teacher were not present
for many   of the   ongoing   negotiations and  resulting  decisions.     The   students  rarely revealed  this  history unless
specifically asked to, and so the motivation behind many of their representational choices often remained somewhat
opaque to their peers and the teacher.

Agency within students' representational activities
         As mentioned above, the students in the representing pollination classroom were encouraged in creating
individual representations according to their personal preferences, and it was therefore not a surprise to find a great
deal of  variability in  their representations.    However,    even   after  agreeing  upon   a  convention    for their shared

                                                              116                                                      ICLS 2006
representational form, the students in the mapping classroom also showed a great deal of individual innovation in
their final maps.

Agency When Creating Shared Representations: The case of mapping
         In the mapping case, an important step was the development of a set of standards which were then applied
in refining the shared representation.     Specifically, the students were engaged in debating the value of particular
representational forms, but to do this they had to develop the criteria which they were using to compare them--does
the system show height? Can it be used to compare heights? Does it distort or lose other types of information to
show  height?  Individual   agency  was    most visible   in these  discussions in the   fact that particular representations
invented and promoted by individuals were the vehicle by which these criteria were developed.              For example, one
invented representation was to add shadows to objects on the map to show that they were tall.               The invention of
shadows was critiqued on the grounds that it did not show exactly how tall an object was.               Therefore, it was the
invention of a  representation  by  an    individual that led to  a  collective criteria by which   all representations were
judged from then on.

Agency When Creating Unique Representations: The case of pollination
         In contrast,  in  the pollination   case,   individual  agency   and   personal  preference  were    important ideas
encouraged by the teacher, and leveraged by the students in their separate representational activities.          Early in the
study, students' personal preferences often filled the gaps in their content knowledge when making representational
choices.  For example, it was not necessary to use a specific pollinator, and therefore students created whatever
pollinator they preferred.   However, the teacher slowly added representational norms. Near the end of the study
students were required to depict a pollinator that was a good fit for the type of flower that they selected.             This
appeared to engender a rich set of negotiations in which students chose to balance their personal preferences with
the norms that were established, and frequently "anchored" their norm-satisfying choices in a personal choice.           For
example, students might choose to represent a hummingbird because it was their favorite pollinator (as reported
during the interviews).   However, they then chose flowers which matched the hummingbird (those where a long
beak is necessary to reach the nectar).    Over the course of the study, the interview results show a marked increase in
students citing details (such as the relationship between a pollinator and the flowers it can pollinate) as important
factors in their representational choices.    Students also cited personal preferences less often when describing how
they  made   their choices.     This  trend    appears    to have   paralleled  an   ongoing   transformation    in students'
representational practices.    Initially, students only needed    to attend to  a limited  set of  details to be represented,
relying upon their peers and the teacher for reminders as needed, and their own personal preferences to fill in the
gaps. Over time, however, as students appeared to appropriate this list of the details, the teacher added additional
important details  for the  students to   take into  account  in  their representations.   In this way personal preference
played an important role in facilitating students' invention of representations before they knew of all of the details
that they needed to include.

         The lack of focus on a shared representational form also lead many individual acts of creativity to stay local
in that only a handful of other students saw each particular student's choices, and there was no requirement that they
follow those innovations.   In fact, we argue that students were required, therefore, to actively negotiate, or choose
which suggestions (either implicit or explicit) to implement in their representations on their own (as opposed to
being facilitated by the teacher), which is an important representational practice.

Implications of the different roles of agency
         In the mapping case, individual agency was leveraged as individual's representations were negotiated and
then  sometimes   adopted   as the normative    representation   by  the collective.  The practice of presenting and then
defending or critiquing one's individual representation in the public space was important, and developed.           Individual
agency in the   pollination case   played  a very  different  role. Practices   centered on   the creation of representations
instead of debate.  In their design decisions students made use of personal preferences to fill in the gaps in their
understanding as they engaged in the process of reconciling their choices with the representational norms established
by the teacher. Individual agency was therefore central to the two different contexts, but for very different reasons.
In the one case, students developed and exercised the ability to contribute to the shared representation, while in the

                                                              117                                                   ICLS 2006
other, students work within  representational    norms  established for the   classroom by an   external force (i.e., the
teacher) was facilitated by their individual acts of agency and preference.

Discussion
         A  number  of important differences     can be  highlighted between    these two  contexts   in which  students
invented representations by examining both the negotiations and mediators which played a central role in students
ongoing activities. In the case of creating a shared representation the key negotiations occurred publicly, between
students (though facilitated by the teacher). This leveraged students' argumentation practices as they proposed and
evaluated various solutions to the representational problems which had been collectively established as important, as
well as giving importance to the representational form.      In contrast, the key negotiations in the case of creating
unique representations were those in which the student locally balanced their own personal preferences with the task
contingencies and their peers' influence.    While this occasionally occurred in public, it was still the author of the
representation  who ultimately weighed    the available  options and  competing   constraints and  made   a final choice
about how to proceed based on her own preferences and current level of understanding, giving primary importance
to the content being studied, as opposed to the specific representational form.

         In both  contexts  students' activities were   also mediated by    a number  of factors  including  a series  of
developing classroom norms, their peers, and the local physical materials.      However, even similar mediators played
a very different role in students' activities, particularly given the way they were involved in ongoing influential
negotiations. For example, in the case of creating shared representations, students' peers were central mediators who
provided important critiques, or served as an audience to be convinced of the power of a particular representational
solution. In contrast, the peers in the classroom oriented towards creating unique representations appeared to play a
role of providing suggestions and reminding each other of classroom norms (another important mediator) as students
struggled to represent their current understanding of the content.

         This analysis reveals the importance of taking a closer look at the mechanisms through which participants
within a given classroom invent different kinds of representations.     In addition to the impact that these activities
have upon students' math or science activities, there is a reciprocal relationship between students' representational
practices and activities involving invented representations.    Specifically, the organization of the invention activity
may leverage   or require a specific  set of  practices as well as  leading towards   students' development   of  similar
practices. It may also privilege either the representational form being developed, or the content being represented as
a topic for ongoing discussion, and possible learning.       The NeRM framework proved to be an effective way of
identifying these  subtle  differences between    representational  activities.  Attention to   these details  can  help
instructional designers to carefully select activities that build upon students existing representational practices while
also supporting researchers as they attempt to analyze students' representational activities, and the way in which
they may lead to their learning of new content.

References
Cobb, P., Stephan, M., McClain, K., & Gravemeijer, K. (2001). Participating in Classroom Mathematical Practices.
         The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10, 113-163.
Danish, J. A., & Enyedy, N. (under review). Remember, We Have to do all the Parts of the Rose: Negotiated
         Representational Mediators in a k-1 Science Classroom. Science Education.
diSessa, A. A. (1999). Meta-Representation: Native Competence and Targets for Instruction. In S. Strauss (Ed.), The
         development of notational representations.Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Engestrom, Y. (1987). Learning by Expanding: An Activity - Theoretical Approach to Developmental
         Research.Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit Oy.
Enyedy, N. (2005). Inventing Mapping: Creating cultural forms to solve collective problems. Cognition and
         Instruction, 23(4), 427-466.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and Embodiment Within Situated Human Interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32(1489-
         1522).
Greeno, J. G. (1987). Instructional Representations Based on Research about Understanding. In A. Shoenfeld (Ed.),
         Cognitive Science and Mathematics Education.Hilsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hall, R. (1996). Representation as Shared Activity: Situated Cognition and Dewey's Cartography of Experience.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(3), 209-238.

                                                           118                                                 ICLS 2006
Kotovsky, K., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1985). Why Are Some Problems Hard - Evidence from Tower of
       Hanoi. Cognitive Psychology, 17(2), 248-294.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a Diagram Is (Sometimes) Worth 10000 Words. Cognitive Science,
       11(1), 65-99.
Roth, W.-M. (1997). Graphing: Cognitive Ability or Practice? Science Education(81), 91-106.
Roth, W.-M., & McGinn, M. K. (1998). Inscriptions: Toward a Theory of Representing as Social Practice. Review of
       Educational Research, 68(1), 35-59.
Turner, E. E., Wilhelm, J., & Confrey, J. (2000). Exploring Rate of Change through Technology with Elementary
       Students. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New
       Orleans, LA.
Zhang, J. J., & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in Distributed Cognitive Tasks. Cognitive Science, 18(1), 87-
       122.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Doris Levy and Sara Wischnia for their invaluable assistance in conducting the studies
described in this paper. Portions of this work described in this paper were supported by a UCLA/UES Connect
Fellowship.

                                                         119                                               ICLS 2006
