                Collaborative Learning in a 3D Virtual Environment:
                          Design Factors and Evaluation Results

          Nicoletta Di Blas, Caterina Poggi, Politecnico di Milano, Via Ponzio, 34/5- 20133 Milano, Italy
          Thomas C. Reeves, University of Georgia, 603D Aderhold Hall, Athens, GA 30602-7144, USA
                         Email: diblas@elet.polimi.it, poggi@elet.polimi.it, treeves@uga.edu

         Abstract:   The  paper   describes   the design  and   evaluation of  three   collaborative  3D  virtual
         environments    for learning  (i.e. 3D worlds shared   through   the  internet in which  learners meet
         together at the same time). Since the first program was launched in 2002, more than 3,600 students
         and 180 teachers from Europe and Israel have been involved in these projects. The educational
         impact has been carefully monitored using a variety of evaluation strategies. The results ­ in terms
         of achieved knowledge, skills and attitudes, as well as in terms of overall satisfaction ­ exceeded
         our expectations. The design elements that make up these complex educational experiences will be
         described in a manner that highlights their interplay (rather than as isolated design details) and
         explains the achievement of both expected and unexpected benefits.

1. 3D for education: our experience
         Although online 3D virtual reality (VR) environments were initially applied primarily for military training
and medical education, online 3D VR has recently been explored in K-12 school environments (Barab et al., 2005;
Nelson et al., 2005). However, most of the early applications mainly involved simply showing people what things
look(ed) like, with a hope of involving them, rather than for teaching substantive knowledge, skills, and/or attitudes.
Early VR applications have rarely been used in a structured educational experience. The paper describes the main
design elements of three educational projects that have employed virtual reality to provide students (aged between
14 and 19) with a meaningful and robust educational experience. Since 2002, the three projects have involved more
than 3,600 students and 180 teachers from both Europe and Israel.

         PROJECT     1 -  SEE  (Shrine    Educational  Experience).   The  first project   was SEE   (Shrine Educational
Experience) and was developed by Politecnico di Milano in cooperation with the Israel Museum, Jerusalem; SEE's
topic were  the Dead   Sea   Scrolls (the famous   ancient manuscripts    held in the   Shrine of the Book   at the Israel
Museum) and related religious, historical, sociological issues. The SEE initiative stemmed from a previous project,
called "Virtual Leonardo" (see the works of Barbieri et al.), a 3D reproduction of an Italian museum (the Museum of
Science and Technology in Milan), in which online users could "visit" the museum together, through the internet
(Paolini et al., 1999). It turned out that people enjoyed meeting other online visitors and chatting with them, but the
environment was not structured to provide a meaningful learning experience. When building SEE (that addressed
schools), the designers therefore decided to stress cooperation and also to engage students in using the environment
through educationally meaningful activities (Di Blas, Hazan, & Paolini, 2003). Other features, such as the presence
of a  human  guide on-line   throughout   the  experience  and  the integration   of a  competition  based on   "cultural"
performances,   helped making   SEE   a successful  project  (see the works   of  Di Blas, Paolini,  & Poggi).  Customer
satisfaction and educational results were revealed through focus groups with teachers and questionnaires (Di Blas,
Paolini, & Poggi, 2005c).

         PROJECTS      2 and   3  -  Stori@Lombardia     and    Learning@Europe.     In  2004,  two   new  projects   were
developed: Stori@Lombardia (funded by the Regional Government of Lombardy, Italy) and Learning@Europe (in
cooperation with Accenture International Foundation). Both projects deal with history: Italian medieval history for
the first, European modern history for the second. Like SEE they both are based on a structured set of activities, the
core  of which  take the  form    of on-line  meetings in  a 3D   virtual world.  Both   programs   underwent   their first
experimental phase in spring 2005, involving 600 and 1000 students respectively.

2. The experiences' structure
         Each   "experience"   is a   complete  "path"  including   4 on-line    sessions, assignments   completion   and
interaction via forums. "Sessions" (i.e. virtual meetings) in a 3D world are blended with asynchronous cooperation
via forums (or mailing lists) and traditional school activities (studying, group work, research, etc.). Four classes

                                                            127                                                 ICLS 2006
from four different countries are involved at a time in each experience. Over a period of 6 to 8 weeks, students
progress from  a passing   acquaintance  with  the program's   topic   (session 1) to in-depth   knowledge of historical
issues, ending up    with their  own  reflection  concerning the issues   at stake  (session  4, completely devoted  to
homework discussion). Figure 1 shows the educational path of the Learning@Europe project.

                                  Figure 1. Learning@Europe educational path

3. Monitoring tools
         Although in SEE we only monitored customer satisfaction and self-reported educational results (through
questionnaires  to   teachers    and  students   and  focus    groups  with     teachers),  for  Learning@Europe    and
Stori@Lombardia, several monitoring tools were used to reveal educational impact. Data were (and still are for this
year's edition) collected using:
    ·    Surveys to teachers and students, before, during and after the project. Obtaining data from most of the
         participants is critical to understand what is actually happening in schools.
    ·    Reports, by online tutors (the guides) and supervisors, are written immediately at the end of each session.
         The tutors record problems and notable events that occurred in the 3D world and the chat.
    ·    Chat  transcripts  of  every synchronous    online session  are recorded  and  archived.  Notable excerpts are
         extracted for analysis.
    ·    Forum discussions are periodically evaluated. The online tutors evaluate all the forums they moderate.
         Reports are collected and analysed.
    ·    Student-produced artefacts. All the students' work is systematically collected and archived.
Other sources of information, that do not cover all participants, are:
    ·    Online sessions recorded with Camtasia from the point of view of the online tutor.
    ·    Students' interactions video-taped in schools during sessions.
    ·    Focus groups with teachers from all the participating countries.

4. Results (Spring 2005)
         We    refer  here  to   the  results  of  Learning@Europe       (SEE   was   evaluated   less  thoroughly  and
Stori@Lombardia, though it scored even better than Learning@Europe, may be of less interest to an international
audience). Learning@Europe is a collaborative educational project that blends advanced technology with innovative
learning methodologies to enhance and motivate learning. It addresses students from all over Europe, aged between
14 and 19, in learning about European history, in particular about the birth of nation-states.

         The core of the project involves 4 online meetings in a shared 3D world, in which students from far away
countries explore, discuss cultural issues and engage in competitive games together. Online forums allow students to
keep in touch and work together, during the project and even beyond its end.       Robust cultural content is provided to
students: all the discussions, games, activities taking place in the 3D world and in the forums are aimed at achieving
educational benefits.

                                                           128                                                  ICLS 2006
       Very high benefits have been achieved, but this can only be summarized in this brief paper. The reader can
find both the rough data and a more complete report in the project's website (www.learningateurope.net: L@E Final
Report). Results are presented from 2 different points of view: the students' and the teachers'. The scale ranged from
1 to 5, where 5 was best.

4.1 Benefits for students
       We asked teachers (and partially students themselves) to evaluate the students' improvement in terms of
knowledge, skills, attitudes. The overall educational impact on the students was rated in average by teachers 4.26
(with 42% rating it 5 and only 5% rating it 2).
       As regards knowledge, for example the improvements in understanding national history were rated 3.77 by
teachers (with 16% rating it 5, and 49% rating it 4) and 3.56 by students (with 15% rating it 5, and 39% rating it 4).
       As regards skills, the most important benefits were related to the use of technologies in learning processes
(rated 4.32 by teachers, 3.73 by the students), the use of functional English (rated 4.18 by teachers, 3.78 by the
students) and the capability of working in groups (rated 4.30 by teachers, 3.78 by the students).
       As regards attitudes, important results were achieved: teachers reported an increased motivation in school
activities (4.09) and ­  most  surprisingly ­  an  increased  proficiency  (3.58). Increase of curiosity  and tolerance
towards other cultures was another important result, given the project's topic: teachers rated it 4.05.
       Although     they  are self-reported in the  case  of the students, and based  on judgment  on    the part of the
teachers, the educational benefits are impressive. What must be stressed is that we asked both teachers and students
to evaluate their improvement and not the "absolute" value: we wanted to check the project's impact rather than the
pre-existing value of proficient students.

4.2 Benefits for teachers
       The participating teachers were relatively young: 45% less than 39 years old, and 20% over 50 years (none
above 59 years of age). The overall satisfaction for the project was 4.27 (with 43% rating it 5 and only 5% rating it
2). The benefits for teachers are related first and foremost to their students' improvements (see above), and then to
their own professional development: 100% of these teachers were able to successfully introduce ICT into curricular
activities even though, in most cases, they were not technology-experts.

5. The educational experience's main elements
       All   the  above  projects are the   result of the interaction among   various elements  that make    up   a quite
complex scenario, as shown in Figure 2.

                              Figure 2. The educational experience's main elements

                                                           129                                                 ICLS 2006
         Staff. The staff is in charge of running the experience: organization of the calendar, contacts with schools,
monitoring of the sessions (evaluation). It strongly interacts with the designers for changes on-the-go, according to
the feedback they receive.

         Designers.   In   that its goal   is to build  a  comprehensive     educational  experience, the    projects'  staff is
markedly multidisciplinary; the main areas are: humanities (communication sciences, learning sciences, philosophy,
history, literature), technology (computer science, industrial design), human-computer interaction (usability).

         On-line   tutors.  Each   on-line session  is  managed    by two  on-line  tutors: a  guide and   a   helper, with  the
following duties: keep the pace of the experience, ask questions and provoke cultural exchanges among the students,
introduce  new   topics of  discussion,  assign    scores for any  sort of positive  behavior   (correct   answers,  interesting
remarks,   good   interaction)  as  well   as  penalties  for  misbehavior   (e.g., offensive   language),     help in case   of
organizational/technical    problems.   From     a cultural/educational   point of  view,   the   tutors'  role is  to provoke
discussion among students but never put forth their own personal point of view.

         Forums' moderators. Learning@Europe and Stori@Lombardia offer students and teachers the possibility
to cooperate through on-line forums (following up to comments of teachers who had taken part in SEE: they wanted
to be allowed to keep in touch with their new remote friends). Forums are partly moderated by students themselves,
partly by the projects' staff: the role of the moderator is similar to that of the on-line tutors: enhance discussion,
sometimes putting forth new topics if students do not do it themselves, oversee the interaction to see that it runs
smooth. In forums students are allowed a wider space for their opinions and ideas and very often start interesting
threads  (e.g., in  Stori@Lombardia,       students  were   looking   for summer    readings   in a  thread    about   historical
contemporary narratives!).

         Experts. The programs' content is provided to schools by the staff and consists of a set of documents in the
form of  interviews  (a  sequence   of  questions   and   answers), derived  from   real interviews  made    by  the staff  with
renowned experts in history, sociology, politics, etc. The experts continue their "conversation" with the students
(who read   their  interviews   to  get ready  for  the  on-line discussion)   in a specially   dedicated   forum   ("Meet   the
experts").

         On-line sessions. The core of each educational experience are 4 on-line meetings lasting more or less one
hour each.  Students    are divided   into 2   teams   (each  composed    of 2  classes, from   different  countries)  and   are
immediately involved in a competition that lasts till the end of the experience. The sessions' key role is to create
enthusiasm and involvement. Being very fast paced, the online sessions cannot host an in-depth cultural discussion
(as the chat transcripts' analysis demonstrated): they provide the stimulus for studying the content and perform the
various assignments (see below).

         Forums     (asynchronous    interaction).  In  Learning@Europe      and  Stori@Lombardia,        students  interact via
forums between the sessions: forums can be used to perform the collaborative assignments, and for asking the guide
about "practical matters" (e.g. "how many points do we have?"), but their most important function is to allow a
deeper cultural discussion, even with the scholars.

         Off-line interaction (assignments). Students are asked to perform various assignments, ranging from their
class presentation, to a research in their surroundings of material evidence related to their country's history, to more
traditional investigations on a given topic. In all assignments they are asked to collaborate, within the class (group
work) as well as with their remote team members, using ICTs. They also have to prepare a presentation of their
works, suitable to be shown in the 3D environment (HTML pages).

         Teachers. Our experience has taught us that teachers play a crucial role in the success of the experience:
they are ­ each in her/his own environment ­ co-designers of the program. Data from surveys and focus groups
showed the many surprising ways in which the program was introduced, managed and steered in the classes, with
successful  results  by the teachers.   The   key  points are: (1)  the teacher becomes     a facilitator, not  being  involved
directly in any   of the activities  but supervising    (in various   degrees)  her/his  students work;    (2)  the teacher  can
successfully integrate ICT-based teaching activities in class even if s/he's not a technology expert her/himself.

                                                               130                                                     ICLS 2006
         Students. Students perform the following activities:
      ·   control the avatars (i.e. graphical representations of the users) in the 3D world; 2 users at a time for each
          class are engaged in the use of the 3D worlds
      ·   interact via chat; 1 or 2 users at a time for each class are engaged in the use of a specially dedicated chat
          while the on-line session takes place
      ·   study the background material (consisting of interviews to leading international experts; on the whole, 9
          interviews   are read, each  being maximum       6 pages long    ­ for elder  students ­  and  3  pages   long ­  for
          younger students)
      ·   complete the assignments (see above)
      ·   use the forums (either as a group or as individuals, if they want)
      ·   counsel and... cheer during the on-line sessions!

         Focus   groups    with  teachers revealed    that two   basic  strategies  were    applied  with   respect to   tasks'
distribution: either all the students  take  turns in all  the roles, controlling   the avatars  in the 3D,  using  the  chat,
studying all the interviews... so that everybody tries everything, or students get "specialized" in a specific activity,
according to their skills and preferences (e.g., some will be the content experts, others are selected because they can
quickly move the avatars, etc.).

6. Conclusion: the magic glue (and what matters not)
         In the light of the above results and of all the feedback collected during the various trials of the 3 projects,
we can summarize the key points of success as follows:

         Collaboration. One of the projects' keywords is collaboration: students (and even teachers) are pushed to
interact and work together in all the phases of the experience, from the assignment completion to the 3D games,
where they constantly have to consult each other, take decisions together, interact, etc. This enhances the sense of
responsibility: students realize that "the success of the whole team depends on everyone's contribution" (Italian
teacher) and they even "start understanding what a deadline is" (Polish teacher, quote from the surveys).

         Intercultural   exchange.  One   of the   most   fascinating  features  of the  projects   is the  meeting  between
different cultures: during the assignments students are invited to compare their everyday life (e.g. "How do you
spend the week-end? What kind of music do you like?") as well as their countries' histories, their festivals, etc.
Students  discover   interesting differences as  well  as  amazing    analogies,  broadening    their  horizons ("before    the
Learning@Europe      project my  students  felt French;    now they   feel French   and European";     French teacher,   focus
group).

         Virtual   presence. Collaboration   and   thick   exchanges   generate   what  in  literature  is  known   as virtual
presence (Mikropoulos & Strouboulis, 2004; Carassa et al., 2004; Johnson, 2005); students feel involved all together
in a situation, totally forgetful of the technological means that enable their being together. Time runs quickly and
when the session is over they do not want to log out (as shown by chat transcripts); they overcome linguistic barriers
("my students were so involved that I think they did not even notice they were chatting in English for an hour";
French teacher, surveys). The competition works as a powerful glue for keeping the team together: "when the guide
declared us winners, students roared as if they were at a soccer match" (Italian teacher, focus group).

         We also discovered which aspects are not so relevant for the success of the educational experience; for
example,  high  quality  graphics  (that  would    hinder  the technical   performance   in  any  case)  seems  to  be   of no
relevance at all. In spite of the simplistic graphics we used in all the projects, in no reports did anybody complain
about it: the focus is all on interaction/collaboration (Di Blas, Gobbo, & Paolini, 2005). The sense of being together
is so strong  that the chat  analysis, triangulated with   the  guide's  reports and    the surveys,   have shown   that even
organizational or technical failures do not limit enthusiasm.

                                                             131                                                    ICLS 2006
        Figure 3. Students during an on-line session        Figure 4. S@L: avatars in the Labyrinth space

         Our  aim  now    is  two-fold: on  one hand  we   want to better  understand    how students benefit from   the
programs as individuals (and not as a group), so as to better tailor the activities in order to involve everybody. On
the other hand, we want to understand how each of the above elements adds to the overall success of the programs:
we know they work well all together, yet we must better understand what is each element's specific contribution.

References
Barab, S., Thomas, M., Dodge, T., Carteaux, R., & Tuzun, H. (2005). Making learning fun: Quest Atlantis, a game
         without guns. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(1), 86-107.
Barbieri, T. & Paolini, P. (2001). Cooperation Metaphors for Virtual Museums. In D. Bearman & J. Trant (Eds.),
         Selected papers from Museums and the Web 2001. Pittsburgh: Archives & Museum Informatics.
Barbieri, T. & Paolini, P. (2000). CooperativeVisits to WWW Museum Sites a Year Later: Evaluating the Effect. In
         D. Bearman & J. Trant (Eds.) Selected papers from Museums and the Web 2000. Pittsburgh: Archives &
         Museum Informatics.
Barbieri, T., Garzotto, F., Beltrame, G., Gritti, M., & Misani, D. (2001). From Dust to StardDust: a Collaborative
         Virtual Computer     Science   Museum.  ICHIM   2001   International   Cultural Heritage Informatics Meeting,
         2001, Milano, Italy
Carassa, A., Morganti, F., & Tirassa, M. (2004). Movement, Action and Situation. In Proceedings of the Seventh
         Annual International Workshop Presence 2004, Universidad Politecnica de Valencia, Spain.
Nelson,  B., Ketelhut,  D.J.,  Clarke,  J., Bowman,    C., Dede,   C.   (2005). Design-Based   Research   Strategies for
         Developing a Scientific Inquiry Curriculum in a Multi-User Virtual Environment. Educational Technology,
         45(1), 21-27.
Di Blas, N., Gobbo, E., & Paolini, P. (2005). 3D worlds and Cultural Heritage: Realism vs. Virtual Presence. In D.
         Bearman & J. Trant (Eds), Museums and the Web 2005. Selected Papers from an International Conference.
         Toronto: Archives & Museums Informatics.
Di Blas, N., Hazan, S., & Paolini, P. (2003). The SEE experience. Edutainment in 3D virtual worlds. In D. Bearman
         & J. Trant (Eds.),   Selected  papers  from Museums    and the   Web   2003. Pittsburgh: Archives &  Museum
         Informatics.
Di Blas, N.,  P. Paolini, C.  &  Poggi,  C.  (2005). A Virtual  Museum    where   Students can Learn.  In L.  Tan &   R.
         Subramaniam (Eds.), E-learning and Virtual Science Centers. Hershey: Idea Group.
Di Blas,  N.,  Paolini,   P., &  Poggi,   C.  (2005)b. 3D   Worlds    for Edutainment:    Educational,  Relational   and
         Organizational   Principles. In PerCom   Workshops    2005   - Proceedings   IEEE  International Workshop   on
         Pervasive eLearning (pp. 291-295). New York: IEEE Press.
Di Blas, N., Paolini, P., & Poggi, C. (2005)c. Educational benefits: testing and evaluation of a collaborative 3D
         world. In Proceedings of ED-MEDIA 2005 - World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia &
         Telecommunications. Montreal: AACE.
Di Blas, N., Paolini, P., & Poggi, C. (2004). Learning by Playing. An Edutainment 3D Environment for Schools. In
         Proceedings of ED-MEDIA'04 - World conference on educational multimedia and hypermedia. Lugano:
         AACE.

                                                           132                                                 ICLS 2006
Di Blas, N., Paolini, P., & Poggi,  C.   (2003). SEE   (Shrine Educational   Experience): an  Online Cooperative  3D
         Environment  Supporting   Innovative Educational     Activities. In Proceedings  of ED-MEDIA'03     -  World
         conference on educational multimedia and hypermedia. Honolulu: AACE.
Hypermedia Open Center (2005). L@E final report. Retrieved March 10, 2006 from www.learningateurope.net/
         pdf_en/final_report.pdf
Johnson, B. (2005). Place-Based Storytelling Tools: A New Look at Monticello. In D. Bearman & J. Trant (Eds),
         Museums   and the  Web  2005.   Selected Papers   from an  International Conference.  Toronto: Archives   &
         Museums Informatics.
Mikropoulos, T. A., & Strouboulis, V. (2004). Factors that influence presence in educational virtual environments.
         Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 7(5), 582-591.
Paolini, P., Barbieri, T., Loiudice, P., Alonzo, F., Gaia, G., & Zanti, M. (1999). Visiting a Museum together: How to
         share a visit to a virtual world. In D. Bearman & J. Trant (Eds.), Museums and the Web, Selected papers
         from Museums and the Web99 (pp. 27-35). Pittsburgh: Archives & Museum Informatics.
AA.VV.   (2004). Presence    2004.  Proceedings     of the Seventh   Annual    International Workshop.  Universidad
         Politecnica de Valencia, Spain.

Acknowledgments
We  wish  to thank all the  people who    work   in the  projects described   above (the  development  staff of SEE,
Learning@Europe,   Stori@Lombardia),     and our  partners (the Israel Museum,    the Accenture  Foundation   and the
Regional Government of Lombardy).

                                                          133                                                 ICLS 2006
