     The Role of Domain-Specific Knowledge in Promoting Generative
                                           Reasoning in Genetics

   Ravit Golan Duncan, Rutgers University, Graduate School of Education 10 Seminary Place New Brunswick NJ
                                            08901, rgduncan@rci.rutgers.edu

          Abstract:   Promoting    the ability  to reason   generatively about   novel  phenomena      and   problems
          students may encounter in their everyday lives is a major goal of science education. This goal
          proves   to be  a  formidable  challenge    in domains,   such  as  molecular   genetics,   for  which  the
          accumulated scientific understandings are daunting in both amount and complexity. To develop
          effective instruction that fosters generative reasoning we need to have a sound understanding of
          the types of knowledge in the domain that are critical for such reasoning. In this study I examined
          the ensemble of knowledge undergraduate students employed in explaining genetic phenomena
          and solving   problems   about   them.   I characterized   two key   knowledge      types: domain-specific
          heuristics  and   domain-specific    explanatory   schemas     that are crucial     for understanding   the
          dynamics    and entities central  to  molecular   genetics  phenomena.     I then   developed   a  cognitive
          model   that  highlights   the role   of   these  powerful  conceptual     understandings    in  promoting
          generative reasoning in genetics.

Introduction
          One  of   the  main  challenges   of  science    education  is helping   students    become    scientifically literate
(American Association for Advancement of Science, 1993; National Research Council, 1996). It is clear that a
crucial aspect of such literacy is that students' understandings need to be generative. That is, we want students to be
able to   reason  not   only about   scientific phenomena     currently  taught   in   class, but  also  about   problems   and
phenomena     they are  likely to  encounter   outside   of the classroom   and   throughout   their  lives. The  challenge  of
fostering generative    understandings   is particularly    acute for domains     in which    scientific  advances  are   rapid,
phenomena are complicated, and the amount of information accumulated is daunting. One compelling example of
such a  domain   is   molecular  genetics.  Over   the past  several  decades  there   have   been  numerous    advances,  both
scientific and technological, in this domain (sequencing of the human genome, genetic screening, and stem cell
research, to name a few) and the knowledge base has grown tremendously. Given that we cannot possibly teach
students  everything,   we  need  to make   decisions    regarding what  to   include  in the  curriculum    in order  to foster
understandings that are generative. Furthermore, it is imperative that these decisions be informed by a thorough
understanding of the types of knowledge that are important for such generative reasoning in genetics.

          The study I describe herein examined the ensemble of knowledge students employed in reasoning about
genetic phenomena and the roles that different knowledge types played in promoting generative understandings in
this domain.  Towards this end I conducted several clinical interviews with nine undergraduate students enrolled in
an introductory molecular genetics course in a university in the Midwest. The rich data I obtained of students'
reasoning about and explanations of the mechanisms underlying molecular genetic phenomena allowed me to carry
out a fine-grained analysis of the knowledge types and reasoning patterns involved. Specifically, three questions
guided my analysis:
1.   What is the nature, in terms of defining form and content where possible, of the different knowledge types
     students used to reason in the domain?
2.   What are typical interactions between these domain-specific knowledge types in episodes of reasoning and
     problem solving in genetics?
3.   What is the role and contribution of these knowledge types to generative reasoning?
The third question, which builds upon the first two, strives towards important instructional implications. If we can
identify the knowledge elements that are most productive for generative reasoning in this domain we can attempt to
design instruction to foster the construction of that knowledge.

Understanding Molecular Genetics
          Molecular geneticists strive to explain how genes bring about their effects. While often the effects of genes
can be observed at the organ and organism level, molecular geneticists are primarily concerned with the underlying

                                                              147                                                     ICLS 2006
causal mechanisms at the cellular and molecular level. For the purpose of such explanations, it is critical to
understand that the genetic code does not directly specify the observable feature rather it specifies the first step in a
chain of events that results in the observable feature. More specifically, the information embodied in genes specifies
the composition of a central molecule in molecular biology: the protein. Simply put, each gene specifies the
structure of one protein; the protein in turn affects the structure and function of the cell, which affects the function of
the tissue, etc, resulting in the observable effect (i.e., symptoms of a genetic disease). Understanding this chain of
events is at the crux of explanations in molecular genetics.

         In contrast to the blossoming of scientific knowledge in genetics noted earlier, the state of affairs in terms
of students' understanding of genetics is rather bleak (Golan & Reiser, 2003; Marbach-Ad & Stavy, 2000; Marbach-
Ad, 2001;Venville & Treagust, 1998). Students are not prepared to understand and benefit from technological
advances in genetics that they may encounter in their everyday lives, such as genetic counseling and screening
(Lewis & Wood-Robinson, 2000); nor are students informed enough to understand and participate in current debates
involving genetic issues, such as genetically modified foods, stem cell research, and gene therapy (Garton, 1992;
Kindfield, 1992).

         Why is genetics reasoning so challenging? Prior research attributes students' difficulties to the complicated
structure of genetic phenomena, namely, the multiplicity of levels involved and the invisible nature of the entities
and process within them (Horwitz, 1996; Marbach-Ad & Stavy, 2000; Stewart & Van Kirk, 1990).                    Phenomena in
genetics  transverse  multiple   organization    levels: genes,    proteins,  cells,  tissues, organs,  etc. These    levels are
organized hierarchically such that elements at one organization level constitute the components of progressively
higher organization   levels   (for example,   cells constitute tissues   that constitute  organs).  In prior  research I  have
argued that it is not only the number, organizational structure and scale of the levels that contribute to students
reasoning difficulties but also the nature of the levels and the relationship between them.         In my work I characterize
the levels of genetic phenomena as containing entities that are from very different conceptual ontologies. In a sense
there are two   ontologically   distinct  levels in  genetic  phenomena:       an information    level containing   the genetic
information   (our  genes), and   a hierarchically   organized  biophysical    level  containing   proteins, cells, tissues  etc.
Therefore, genetic phenomena are especially complicated in that they are driven by an information level (the genetic
code) but are manifested through a myriad of biophysical entities. This characterization of genetic phenomena as
composed   of  two   ontologically   distinct levels provides   an  analytical  lens  that highlights   aspects of  the genetic
system   that are   likely  to be   conceptually   critical for generative     reasoning.  Namely,     understanding  how    the
information   level  brings about   effects of a   physical  nature. Moreover,     it is precisely this understanding    of  the
mechanisms through which genes bring about their effects that is at the crux of scientific literacy in this domain
(AAAS, 1993; NRC, 1996).

Methods
         I used clinical interview methodology to elicit student thinking about molecular genetics phenomena and to
analyze the knowledge resources employed in such thinking. I conducted the study in the context of an introductory
biology  course   at the   undergraduate    level. Instruction   in  this course     was typical  of   college  level teaching:
predominantly   lecture    format   using   PowerPoint      presentations  as  visual    aids. The   study   participants,   nine
undergraduate   students   were  mostly   sophomores     who  were   taking   the course   as  a requirement   for  pre-medical
education or biology major. The students varied in the extent to which they have studied molecular genetics in the
past. These students participated in weekly hour-long interviews throughout the course of relevant instruction (five
weeks). The interviews were composed of three kinds of tasks: 1) Questions about genetic phenomena in terms of
components and dynamics (these concepts were taught in class)- for example, I asked students: What genes code
for? What are proteins and what do they do? 2) Hypothetical tasks in which I gave students a description of a genetic
phenomenon at the observable level and asked them to reason about the underlying molecular mechanisms and to
speculate about how the information encoded in genes brings about the observable phenomenon. I chose phenomena
that students did not study in the class in order to see their ability to reason about genetic phenomena at-large as
opposed to their ability to recall a taught example; 3) The remaining tasks were taken from examples taught in class.
I showed students the PowerPoint slides used during lecture and asked the to explain the mechanism discussed.

         My data corpus consisted of video transcripts of 21 interview tasks that I analyzed in two complementary
and sequential steps. The first was a content analysis distinguishing between topics of the students' comments. In
this analysis, I segmented the transcripts based on the level of specificity (specific to molecular genetics, specific to
biology, or general and applicable across domains) and the content of ideas expressed (ideas about the genetic

                                                               148                                                    ICLS 2006
information, proteins, etc). The content analysis set the stage for the next analytical step that was based on DiSessa
(1996) and Sherin's (2001) versions of knowledge analysis. In this analysis I identified and characterized the sorts of
knowledge representations that seemed to underlie students' reasoning behavior, particularly in content analysis
segments    classified as  being   specific to  molecular   genetics.   I examined    the  frequency  of     use of the  different
knowledge types identified (Chi, 1997) and their role in promoting generative reasoning about novel and unfamiliar
phenomena (hypothetical tasks). This analytical process was iterative in that the coding categories were defined in
part by existing knowledge forms described in the literature (mental models, schemas, cases) and in part emerged
from the data and/or were refined to capture the different aspects of students' knowledge evident in the data (for
example,    the domain-specific    explanatory     schemas,    and the   domain-specific   heuristics).    I then   constructed a
cognitive   model   of  reasoning   in  molecular    genetics  showing      the different  knowledge    types    associated with
understanding    the mapping     between    the   information  and  biophysical    levels  and   the mechanisms       involved  in
mediating genetic effects.

Results and Discussion
         As  noted   earlier a   crucial   aspect of generative    reasoning    about molecular   genetics    phenomena    is  the
understanding of what the informational content specifies and how it is mediated by physical elements in the system.
The focus of this paper is the nature and interactions of the domain-specific conceptual resources that afford such
reasoning. I identified two domain-specific knowledge forms that played a key role in such reasoning: domain-
specific heuristics and domain-specific explanatory schemas. The domain-specific heuristics are a form of principles
that are applicable to a wide variety of phenomena in the domain. Their role in reasoning is to constrain and guide
reasoning by suggesting domain-appropriate entities and relationships. These heuristics can guide actions in the
sense that they direct the construction of the explanation core. For example, invoking the genes-code-for-proteins
heuristic prompts the reasoner to identify or suggest a relevant protein (or look for an entity that might be a protein),
given that a gene is involved in the phenomenon, thereby adding the protein element to the explanation.

         The domain-specific explanatory schemas are similar to the heuristics in that they also define important
aspects of genetic phenomena (and explanations about them), namely prevalent mechanisms that mediate genetic
effects. For example, the explanatory schema inhibit embodies the understanding of a very important mechanism in
molecular   biology:   inhibition.     The explanatory  schemas     are   more  specific,  or detailed,   in  comparison   to  the
heuristics and are constrained by them. Thus, values taken by the various slots in the explanatory schemas must
conform to the general principles embodied in the heuristics. In the following sections I shall discuss each of these
knowledge forms in turn, provide some illustrative examples of their use and conclude with a cognitive model of
reasoning with these knowledge types in molecular genetics.

Domain-Specific Heuristics
          I identified    three domain-specific     heuristics in  the  data    corpus: genes-code-for-proteins,      proteins-as-
central, and effects-through-interaction. The genes-code-for-proteins heuristic links the information and physical
levels by denoting the relationship between the genetic information and physical entities in the system. The proteins-
as-central heuristic emphasizes the central role of proteins in genetic phenomena and guides the reasoner to assume
that most   molecular     phenomena     involve   proteins. It is  often  invoked    along with   the genes-code-for-proteins
heuristic and seems to have a synergistic effect, strengthening the guidance of the former. The effects-through-
interaction heuristic defines physical interaction between molecules as the key mechanism by which effects are
brought  about   in  molecular   genetics   (protein-protein,  DNA-protein,     protein-substrate,   etc).   That is, in order  to
function and exert their effects, components in the system (often proteins) need to physically interact with each
other. The  results    of these  interactions   are defined   by   the explanatory    schemas,   yet  the  notion   that physical
interaction is necessary is embodied in the effects-through-interaction heuristic. Taken together these heuristics: 1)
constrain the nature of the genetic information to being about proteins; thus, defining the relationship between the
information  and    physical    levels of  genetic  phenomena,     and   2) posit  proteins   as being  the   central  mediating
(physical) agents of genetic effects, and 3) constrain the mechanisms of action in the system to being interaction-
based. Due to   space limitations I    shall only elaborate and illustrate the use of the genes-code-for-proteins heuristic.

         The    genes-code-for-proteins     knowledge   form    serves   to restrict the  informational    content  of   genes by
specifying that genes contain information specifically about proteins (as opposed to cells, organs, traits, etc). This
allows the reasoner to safely assume that if a gene influences a phenomenon, it is highly likely that the phenomenon
is mediated by a protein; even in cases in which the specifics are unknown. The following excerpt illustrates the use
of this knowledge form. Here Vera is reasoning about genetic antibiotic resistance in bacteria (antibiotic resistance

                                                               149                                                       ICLS 2006
was mentioned    in class but the  mechanism   was   not explained); initially    she provided  a very  general solution
claiming that the gene confers resistance through some unknown protection mechanism. When I pressed her to
suggest a specific mechanism for her general solution she invoked her heuristic of genes-code-for-proteins and
inferred that the "protective" gene likely codes for a protein. With more prompting she suggested that the protein is
involved in making a coat that protects the bacteria (this coat presumably prevents the antibiotic from entering the
bacteria).

           Interviewer:   How does this amphicilin resistance gene give the bacteria resistance, what is it
                          doing?
           Vera:          Umm, I have no idea. I don't really know the mechanism for how it protects it; I
                          just know that if it has the gene it protects it.
           Interviewer:   Could you speculate what a potential mechanism might be like?
           Vera:          Let's see, maybe if you have it, then you create some proteins...
           Interviewer:   Ok, so this would be coding for a protein?
           Vera:          Yeah, I think so. So maybe you make some proteins that umm..... maybe it makes
                          a protein that, I don't know, makes up the coating for the bacteria, I don't know.

          Her solution  was  based on the understanding   that genes  code     for proteins and  thus a protein must  be
involved in the protection mechanism. This is a significant step in reasoning about molecular genetics phenomena.
In previous work I conducted with high school students, none of the students provided protein-based mechanisms
(despite learning that genes code for proteins) to explain genetic phenomena. The idea that the coat is protein-based
(either made of proteins or made by proteins) is not trivial or obvious.        Rather, it indicates an understanding of
genetic phenomena as being mediated by proteins.

          Note that Vera   does  not know   exactly  how  the  resistance      mechanism   works  or  which  protein  her
speculative bacterial coat is really made of; however, in invoking the genes-code-for-proteins heuristic, she is able
to conjecture that a protein must be involved. This suggests that domain-specific heuristics are not necessarily a
product of detailed understandings of the elements and mechanisms they refer to. Thus, the strength of this and other
heuristics lie in their ability to constrain the space of reasoning in a productive and powerful way independently of
detailed knowledge of the phenomenon in question. This is an important point because it exemplifies the pivotal role
of these   knowledge   forms  in generative reasoning-   these heuristics     afford reasoning about   novel contexts in
genetics.

Domain-Specific Explanatory Schemas
          The domain-specific heuristics discussed above restrict the space of reasoning or problem solving in a very
powerful yet general manner. They do not dictate a mechanism; they merely restrict the realm of possible
mechanisms to those involving proteins. I argue that further specification is provided by another prominent and
important conceptual resource: the domain-specific explanatory schemas. This knowledge is of schema form
(Rumelhart, 1980) and provides the reasoner with an answer to the question of how: how do proteins confer
resistance to antibiotics, how do proteins cause disease, how do proteins regulate cell growth, and how is gene
expression regulated? Therefore, it is the schemas that provide the majority of domain-appropriate mechanisms and
therefore play a large role in the construction of domain-appropriate explanations. Moreover, it seems likely that the
acquisition of more schemas and perhaps refinement and elaboration of existing schemas is an important process in
the development of expertise. I identified ten explanatory schemas in the data: inhibit, activate, allosteric regulation,
translation, regulation-of-gene-expression, catalyze, transport, sense/detect, build, and structure-function. Due to
space limitations I shall elaborate on and illustrate only the inhibit explanatory schema.

          This schema specifies a mechanism by which one biological entity prevents another entity from carrying
out its function. The inhibit schema has three main slots: the inhibited element, the inhibiting element, and the
mechanism of inhibition. The domain-specific heuristic of proteins-as-central constrains the type of variables that
can fill these slots. Thus, at least one of these slots is a protein, usually the inhibited element (often an enzyme
protein). The effects-through-interaction heuristic constrains the mechanism of inhibition to one that involves the
binding of the inhibitor to a specific site on the inhibited element (often the active site of an enzyme; a type of
inhibition termed competitive). I illustrate the use of this knowledge form with an example taken from a task in
which I asked students to explain how virulence genes (found in disease-causing bacteria) cause a disease in the host
organism (a mouse in this case). In this example, Kim speculated that the virulence gene codes for an inhibitor that

                                                          150                                                    ICLS 2006
inhibits a critical biological process  in the   mouse.  She   invoked  the inhibit     schema  and has  rather   elaborate
knowledge   of the  mechanisms   of   inhibition (types of inhibition). In her schema,     the inhibited slot  is a protein
(enzyme), and the inhibitor slot contains a substance that she does not define. We do not know if the inhibitor is a
protein or not, albeit since Kim has the genes-code-for proteins heuristic (as evidenced by her responses to other
interview tasks), it is likely that she is assuming the inhibitor is a protein as well.

         Interviewer:    What are these genes?
         Kim:            Well, genes that just kill the mouse.
         Interviewer:    What would it code for that kills the mouse?
         Kim:            Umm, well, it could probably code for some kind of inhibitor in its own metabolic
                         cycle, maybe it could inhibit one of the enzymes that creates critical metabolite in
                         the mouse.
         Interviewer:    What is inhibition about?
         Kim:            Well, inhibition is where you don't let it perform the way it performs. And, umm,
                         there are different kinds of inhibitors though. It could be like competitively
                         binding to it or binding somewhere else allosterically.
         Interviewer:    What do you mean by somewhere else?
         Kim:            Well, umm, enzymes have active sites and you could bind to the active site of the
                         enzyme and not let substrate that is supposed to bind there bind, or you could bind
                         to different location like an allosteric site, which is like on the other side of the
                         enzyme and changing its conformation so it doesn't let anything else bind in
                         active site.

Kim's inhibit schema is rather elaborate; she has several potential methods of inhibition (competitive or allosteric)
and seems to know quite a bit about how those types of inhibitory mechanisms operate. In many cases when
students invoked a particular explanatory schema there was ancillary knowledge associated with it; in a sense, the
schema was annotated with additional information. Mostly, this knowledge was in the form of propositions
(declarative knowledge) and mental models (Gentner & Stevens, 1984). This knowledge helped in the elaboration of
explanations and often made them more accurate (or at least more detailed). However, this ancillary knowledge is
not an essential part of the schema since some students did not seem to have it and yet were able apply the inhibit
schema successfully. It seems that knowing that the mechanism of inhibition is mediated by direct binding of the
inhibitor to the inhibited is the critical part of the schema. Any elaboration on this mechanism allows the student to
provide a more detailed explanation but does not change the essence of it. Thus, overall the explanatory schemas
provide the majority of domain-specific mechanisms needed for explaining how genes bring about their effects.

         Before I present the cognitive model I would like sharpen somewhat the distinction between the heuristics
and the explanatory schemas. If we assume that knowledge representations can differ in three respects­ form,
content, and function­then these knowledge forms differ primarily with respect to function and somewhat with
respect to form. In terms of form, the heuristics are principle-like abstractions. It may be the case that they are very
simple schemas. The explanatory schemas, on the other hand, are more elaborate schemas, and they can be
associated with mental model or propositional knowledge that include details of particular instantiations of the
schema. In terms of function, the heuristics are most similar to production rules (Anderson, 1987), because they help
identify important entities and the relationships between them. The schemas are most similar to scripts (Schank,
1982) that define the event of a particular mechanism in action. Thus, the heuristics function as broad-stroke guiding
principles, whereas the schemas are more detailed instantiations of domain-specific mechanisms.

Cognitive Model
         My goal here is to present a conceptual model of reasoning in genetics at an abstract enough level for it to
be informative for other domains. By discussing some of the general features of the knowledge types and reasoning I
observed in the data, I hope to give the reader a sense of what comparable knowledge types in other domains might
look like. The model I present, illustrated in Figure 1, depicts the types of knowledge forms that played a key role in
students' reasoning, their function in the knowledge system, and the relationships between them. I also highlight the
level of specificity at which the knowledge forms exist in order to illustrate the relative contribution of more and less
contextualized knowledge.

                                                           151                                                    ICLS 2006
                       Figure 1. Conceptual Model of Reasoning About Genetic Phenomena.
       A prominent reasoning pattern I observed in the data (illustrated in Vera's reasoning) was a progression
from the general to the specific when constructing an explanation. Students often began by offering a general outline
of a potential solution to the problem- a solution frame. These frames served as placeholders to be filled with
domain-specific knowledge. The domain-specific heuristics and explanatory schemas provided that knowledge. The
heuristics are principle-like knowledge forms that define key entities and relations in the domain, such as proteins,
genes, and the coding relationship between them; thus constraining the space of reasoning. The schemas in turn
define more specific mechanisms and are themselves constrained by the heuristics. That is, the specific variables
that the schemas can take on are consonant with entities and relationships defined by the heuristics (for example
different types of interactions between proteins). Often, these schemas are annotated with ancillary knowledge
(either mental model or fact-like) that adds accuracy or case-specificity to the schema.

       Together the heuristics and schemas populate the space of reasoning with domain-appropriate entities and
mechanisms. Their power and utility stems from their generalizibilty within the domain and their relative
independence of context specific details. These forms can be used to reason about a myriad of phenomena and
problems in molecular genetics and are in essence a tool kit for generative reasoning. It is plausible that analogous
knowledge forms may be critical for generative understandings in related domains that feature complicated systems
and the dynamics within them- the domain of ecology with the focus on ecosystems would make a good candidate
for such a search.

Conclusions and Implications
       In the research presented herein, I have tried to characterize the knowledge resources used in reasoning
about molecular genetics. I have found that while both general and domain-specific knowledge forms play a role in
such reasoning, it is a crucial type of domain-specific knowledge that seems to drive reasoning by constraining the
problem-space and defining key components and mechanisms in the domain. These knowledge forms support
generative reasoning in that they are widely applicable within the domain and embody key understandings in it.
Moreover, there appears to be a rather small set of domain-specific heuristics and explanatory schemas that
comprise this critical body of knowledge. From an instructional perspective this is very encouraging as it suggests
that teaching for generative understandings may be an attainable goal despite the time constraints of the classroom.
While this cognitive model is a not a prescription for instruction it nonetheless highlights what students need to have
a in their conceptual toolkit in order to reason generatively in genetics and it suggests a focus for genetics
instruction.

                                                          152                                                   ICLS 2006
References
American   Association  for  the  Advancement   of   Science (1993).  Benchmarks   for Science Literacy, New   York:
         Oxford University Press.
Anderson, J. R. (1987). Skill acquisition: Compilation of weak-methods problem solutions. Psychological Review,
         94(2), 192-219
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the learning
         sciences. 6(3), 271-315.
diSessa, A. A. (1996). What do "just plain folk" know about physics? In D. R. Olson & N. Torrance (Eds.), The
         handbook    of education  and    human  development:   New   models  of learning,  teaching, and schooling.
         Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Garton, G.   L. (1992). Teaching genetics in the high school classroom. In M.U. Smith & P.E. Simmons (Eds.),
         Teaching    genetics: Recommendations    and  research  proceedings  of a national  conference  (pp. 20-23).
         Cambridge, MA: National Science Foundation.
Gentner, D., & Stevens, A. L. (Eds.). (1983). Mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Golan, R., & Reiser, B. J. (2003). Students' reasoning about phenomena generated       by complex systems: The case
         of molecular   genetics. In Zandvliet,  D.B., and   Anderson,  C. (Eds.), Proceedings  of the  2003  Annual
         General Meeting of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching. Philadelphia, PA.
Horwitz, P. (1996). Teaching science at multiple space time scales. Communications of the ACM, 39(8), 100-102.
Kindfield, A. C. H. (1992). Teaching genetics: recommendations and research. In M. U. Smith, and P. Simmons
         (Eds.), Teaching genetics: recommendations and research. Proceedings of a National Conference (pp. 39-
         43). Cambridge.
Lewis, J., &Wood-Robinson, C. (2000). Genes, chromosomes, cell division and inheritance -- do students see any
         relationship? International Journal of Science Education, 22, 177 - 195.
Marbach-Ad, G. (2001). Attempting to Break the Code in Student Comprehension of Genetic Concepts. Journal of
         Biological Education, 35(4), 183-189.
Marbach-Ad, G., & Stavy, R. (2000). Students cellular and molecular explanations of genetic phenomena. Journal
         of Biological Education, 34(4), 200-210.
National  Committee     on Science  Education   Standards and   Assessment    (1996) National  Education  Standards,
         Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Rumelhart, D. E. (1980). Schemata: The building blocks of cognition. In R. J. Spiro, B. C. Bruce and W. F. Brewer
         (Ed.), Theoretical issues in reading comprehension (pp. 33-58). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schank,   R.C.  (1982).  Dynamic   Memory:    A  Theory   of   Reminding  and  Learning  in Computers    and  People.
         Cambridge University Press.
Sherin, B. L. (2001). How students understand physics equations. Cognition and Instruction, 19(4), 479-541.
Stewart, J., & Van Kirk, J. (1990). Understanding and problem-solving in classical genetics. International Journal
         of Science Education, 12, 575-588.
Venville, G.   J., &  Treagust, D. F. (1998).  Exploring  conceptual   change in  genetics using a multidimensional
         interpretive framework. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35 (9), 1031-1055.

Acknowledgements
Research reported in this paper was partially supported by a Graduate Research Grant from the University Research
Grants Committee at Northwestern University. This research was also funded in part by a graduate fellowship from
the Center  for Curriculum     Materials in Science, funded  by  the National Science  Foundation  under  Grant ESI-
0227557.

                                                           153                                                ICLS 2006
