         Is Externally-Regulated Learning by a Human Tutor Effective
                          in Facilitating Learning with Hypermedia?
     Roger Azevedo, Jeffrey A. Greene, Daniel C. Moos, Fielding I. Winters, and Pragati Godbole-Chaudhuri,
     University of Maryland, Dept. of Human Development, 3304 Benjamin Building, College Park, MD 20742
        Jennifer G. Cromley, Temple University, Psychological Studies in Education, Philadelphia, PA, 19122
         razevedo@umd.edu, jgreene@umd.edu, moos@msn.com, fwinters@umd.edu, jcromley@temple.edu

         Abstract:   We     examined    the   effectiveness  of   self-regulated    learning    (SRL)  and   externally
         regulated   learning (ERL)    on  college students'  learning   about    a science   topic with  hypermedia.
         Eighty-two (N = 82) college students with little knowledge of the topic were randomly assigned
         either to the SRL or ERL condition.       Learners in the SRL condition regulated their own learning,
         while  learners   in the  ERL   condition     had access   to a human      tutor who    facilitated their self-
         regulated   learning.  We    converged    product   (pretest    to posttest   declarative    knowledge     and
         qualitative shifts in participants' mental models) with process (think-aloud) data to examine the
         effectiveness   of SRL    and  ERL    on  learning  about   the circulatory   system    during   a  40-minute
         session. Analysis of the declarative knowledge measures showed that the ERL condition group
         means were statistically significantly higher than the group means for the SRL condition on the
         labeling and flow diagram tasks. There were no statistically significant differences between group
         means   on   the   matching   task,  but  both    groups   showed   statistically    significant increases   in
         performance. Further analyses showed no statistically significant differences for the distribution of
         mental model shift between groups. In terms of self-regulatory processes, participants in the SRL
         condition engaged in more frequent use of sub-goals, self-questioning, selecting new information
         sources, re-reading, summarizing, free searching, and enacting control over the context of their
         learning.   In comparison,    the  ERL   participants  engaged     in more    frequent   activation   of  prior
         knowledge, utilization of feeling of knowing and judgment of learning, monitoring their progress
         toward goals, drawing, hypothesizing, coordination of information sources, and expressing task
         difficulty.

Objectives and Purpose of the Study
         Learning with a hypermedia environment requires a student to regulate his or her learning; that is, to make
decisions  about what   to  learn, how  to  learn  it, how  much    time to  spend   on   it, how  to access  other   instructional
materials, and  to determine    whether   he   or she  understands   the material    (Azevedo,    Cromley,    Winters,   Moos,  &
Greene,  2005;   Azevedo    &   Cromley,    2004).    Specifically, students   need    to analyze   the   learning  situation, set
meaningful learning goals, determine which strategies to use, assess whether the strategies are effective in meeting
the learning  goal(s),  and   evaluate  their  emerging    understanding    of the   topic.   They  also  need  to  monitor their
understanding and modify their plans, goals, strategies, and effort in relation to changing contextual conditions (e.g.,
cognitive, motivational, and task conditions; Moos & Azevedo, 2006; Pintrich, 2000; Winne, 2001; Zimmerman,
2000). However, most students experience some difficulty regulating their learning with hypermedia, which severely
affects their learning  about  challenging     topics  (Azevedo,  2005;   Hmelo-Silver        & Azevedo,   2006).  One   potential
solution is to examine the effectiveness of a human tutor as an external regulating agent who facilitates students'
learning  with hypermedia.     In  this study,    we   examine  the    effectiveness   of  self-regulated    learning (SRL)    and
externally-regulated learning (ERL) in facilitating both qualitative shifts in students' mental models and declarative
knowledge   gains  (from   pretest to posttest).  We   also examine    the  self- and  external   regulatory  processes   used by
students and tutors during learning about a complex and challenging science topic using hypermedia.
         Recent  research   has shown     that the potential  of  hypermedia      as a learning   tool may    be   undermined  by
students' inability to regulate several aspects of their learning (Azevedo, 2005; Lajoie & Azevedo, in press; Shapiro
& Neiderhauser, 2004). For example, students do not always deploy key metacognitive monitoring activities such as
FOK (feeling of knowing) and JOL (judgment of learning) during learning (e.g., Azevedo & Cromley, 2004). They
do not always engage in planning activities such as creating learning goals and activating prior knowledge, both of
which are needed to anchor their learning of new material in previously learned material (e.g., Azevedo et al., 2004a).

                                                               16                                                        ICLS 2006
When attempting to self-regulate their learning, students predominantly use ineffective strategies such as copying
information from the hypermedia environment to their notes and navigating the hypermedia environment without any
specific learning  goals  (e.g., Azevedo   et al., 2004b). Also,   they rarely  engage   in help-seeking   behavior such  as
requesting assistance with their emerging understanding (e.g., Azevedo et al., 2005). One method for understanding
students' regulation of their learning with hypermedia may be to examine how an external regulating agent such as a
human    tutor (external to the  student's cognitive   system   and thus part   of the   learning context) may facilitate a
student's self-regulated learning by prompting the student to deploy certain key SRL processes. Based on how the
external regulating agent facilitates self-regulated learning, guidelines for designing adaptive hypermedia learning
environments can be developed.
         In this  study, we  investigated  the  effectiveness   of SRL   (self-regulated  learning)  and   ERL (externally-
regulated learning) conditions in facilitating college students' ability to regulate their learning about a challenging
science topic (i.e., the circulatory system) with hypermedia. In this study we focused on three research questions--1)
Do different scaffolding conditions influence participants' scores on the matching, labeling, and blood flow diagram
posttests, after controlling for pretest ability? 2) Are different scaffolding conditions associated with participants'
ability to shift to more sophisticated mental models of the circulatory system? 3) Do learners utilize self-regulatory
processes differentially between conditions? Participants in both the self-regulated learning (SRL) and externally-
regulated learning (ERL) conditions were given an overall learning goal to guide their learning about the circulatory
system. However, in the (ERL) condition, participants also had access to a human tutor who provided very specific
adaptive scaffolding during the course of the learning based on a tutoring script. This script prompted participants to
deploy various specific self-regulatory processes at different stages of learning. The tutor used these SRL variables
dynamically and adaptively during learning.

Method
         Participants. Eighty-two (N = 82) undergraduate students (67 women and 15 men) from the University of
Maryland, received extra credit in their educational psychology course for their participation. Their mean age was 21
years (SD = 4.8) and their mean GPA was 3.3. The students were non-biology majors, and the pretest results
demonstrated that all participants had average or little knowledge of the circulatory system.
         Measures. The materials consisted of a consent form, a participant questionnaire, a pretest, and a posttest, all
in paper-and-pencil form. These materials were the same as those developed and used by Azevedo and colleagues
(Azevedo et al., 2005). The participant questionnaire collected information concerning age, gender, current GPA,
number and title of undergraduate biology courses completed, and experience with biology and the circulatory
system. The pretest was comprised of four parts, all having to do with the circulatory system: (a) a sheet on which
participants were asked to match 13 words with their corresponding definitions (matching task); (b) a color picture of
the heart with 14 components that participants were asked to label (labeling task); (c) a sheet which contained the
instruction, "Please write down everything you can about the circulatory system. Be sure to include all the parts and
their purpose, explain how they work both individually and together, and also explain how they contribute to the
healthy functioning of the body" (mental model essay); and (d) a diagram of the body with a question asking
participants to describe how blood flows through the body beginning and ending with the superior and inferior vena
cava (blood flow diagram). For the blood flow diagram, participants were given 8 terms to fill in the nine blank
spaces, and were told one item needed to be used twice. The posttest was identical to the pretest.
         Hypermedia      Learning  Environment     (HLE).  The     participants used   a commercially-based    hypermedia
learning environment to learn about the circulatory system. During the training phase, learners were shown the three
most relevant   articles in the  environment   (i.e., blood, heart, and  circulatory   system),   which contained   multiple
informational sources--text, static diagrams, photographs, and a digitized animation depicting the role of the heart
within the circulatory system. Together these 3 articles comprised 16,900 words, 18 sections, 107 hyperlinks, and 35
illustrations.
         Procedure. The fourth author acted as the tutor in the ERL condition, while the other authors participated in
individually testing subjects in the SRL condition. Informed consent was obtained from all participants, who were
then randomly assigned to conditions: SRL (n = 41) and ERL (n = 41).
         Commonalities    Across   Conditions.     Participants in both  conditions  were    individually  tested. Informed
consent was obtained from all participants. First, the participant questionnaire was handed out, and participants were
given as much time as they wanted to complete it. Second, the pretest was handed out, and participants were given 20
minutes to complete it. Participants wrote their answers on the pretest and did not have access to any instructional
materials. Third, the experimenter provided instructions for the learning task. Participants in the ERL condition had
the same overall learning goal as the participants in the SRL condition.

                                                             17                                                    ICLS 2006
        In both conditions, an experimenter sat with the participant for the entire condition, reminding participants
to verbalize if they were silent for more then three seconds (e.g., "Say what you are thinking"). Experimenters also
reminded participants of the global learning goal ("Make sure you learn about the different parts and their purpose,
how they work both individually and together, and how they support the human body") as part of their instructions
for learning about the circulatory system. All participants had access to the instructions (which included the learning
goal) during the learning session. Participants were free to takes notes or make drawings during the learning session,
although not all chose to do so. All participants were given 40 minutes to use the hypermedia environment to learn
about the circulatory system. Differences between the two conditions are presented next.
        SRL Condition. For the SRL condition, the instructions were: "You are being presented with a hypermedia
encyclopedia, which    contains textual information,  static diagrams,   and a digitized video  clip of  the circulatory
system. We are trying to learn more about how students use hypermedia environments to learn about the circulatory
system. Your task is to learn all you can about the circulatory system in 40 minutes. Make sure you learn about the
different parts and their purpose, how they work both individually and together, and how they support the human
body. We  ask you    to `think aloud' continuously   while you  use  the hypermedia   environment    to learn about  the
circulatory system. I'll be here in case anything goes wrong with the computer or the equipment." In this condition,
the participants could only ask the experimenter for procedural assistance, such as navigation information.
        ERL   Condition.   The  instructions for the ERL   condition were   identical to those  for the SRL   condition.
However, in this condition learners had access to a tutor who would help them learn about the circulatory system by
providing external regulation. The human tutor was allowed to facilitate participants' self-regulated learning (SRL)
by:
    (1) prompting participants to activate their prior knowledge;
    (2) prompting participants to plan their time and effort and monitor their progress towards goals,
    (3) prompting    participants to use several   effective strategies to learn, such   as summarizing,   coordinating
    informational sources, hypothesizing, drawing, and using mnemonics.
        We designed a tutoring script for our human tutor based upon the human tutoring literature (see Chi, 1996;
Graesser et al., 1995) and recent empirical findings on SRL and hypermedia (Azevedo & Cromley, 2004; Azevedo et
al., 2004a, 2004b, 2005). More specifically, the tutor used the following script to assist the learner in regulating
his/her learning:
    (1) Ask the participant what he/she already knows about the circulatory system, set some goals, and determine
        how much time to spend on each goal.
    (2) Suggest participant read introduction section of the circulatory system article, and then:
      Prompt participant to summarize; and use several strategies to learn about blood flow through the heart (e.g.,
        coordinating  informational  sources); ask several questions to  determine  participants'  understanding  of the
        various issues related to flow; make sure participant understands the purpose of lungs; suggest watching the
        animation to integrate all the information; and assess whether participant has good understanding (i.e., can
        he/she explain the entire process in his/her own words). If the participant does not have good understanding,
        then have participant draw and label a diagram of the heart and assess their understanding [repeat (2)]. If they
        have good understanding, then proceed to the blood vessel diagram.
    (3) Revisit global learning goal, give time reminder, state which goals have been met and which still need to be
        satisfied.
    (4) Suggest participant read text for the blood vessels diagram; prompt participant to summarize content; prompt
        participant to use a mnemonic to remember definitions of arteries, veins and capillaries. Assess participant's
        understanding.  If the  participant did  not understand, then   have him/her   re-read  the introduction, major
        components, and diagrams comparing veins and arteries, and then assess understanding again [repeat (4)]. If
        the participant demonstrates that he/she understood, then proceed to the blood article.
    (5) Revisit global learning goal, give time reminder, state which goals have been met and which still need to be
        satisfied.
    (6) Activate participant's prior knowledge about blood. Prompt participant to read about the role of blood and the
        components of blood in the blood article; prompt the participant to summarize, and take notes. Assess the
        participants' understanding. If the participant did not understand, then have him/her re-read the role of blood
        and components section, and then assess understanding again [repeat (6)]. If the participant demonstrates that
        he/she understood, then proceed to (7).
    (7) Assess progress towards global learning goal, give time reminder, and spend remaining time reviewing notes
        and drawings.
    The tutor was instructed not to provide extensive praise, nor to provide additional content knowledge beyond
that provided by hypermedia environment during the learning task.

                                                           18                                                  ICLS 2006
     Posttest Procedures. All participants were given 20 minutes to individually complete the posttest after using the
hypermedia environment to learn about the circulatory system. Participants were not allowed to use their notes or any
other instructional materials while completing the posttest. All participants completed the posttest by writing their
answers on the sheets provided by the experimenter.
     Coding and Scoring. The coding of the participants' answers to the matching, labeling, and blood flow tasks,
mental model essays, the segmentation of the participants' verbalizations while they engaged in the learning tasks,
along with the coding scheme we used to analyze the participants' regulatory behavior are described in detail in
Azevedo and colleagues (2005, p. 393-397).
         Participants' self-regulatory behavior. The raw data collected from this study consisted of 3,280 minutes
(54.7 hours) of audio and video tape recordings from 82 participants, who gave extensive verbalizations while they
learned about the circulatory system. Azevedo and colleagues' (Azevedo et al., 2005; Azevedo & Cromley, 2004)
model of SRL was used to analyze the learners' regulatory behavior. Their model is based on several recent models
of SRL (e.g., Pintrich, 2000; Winne, 2001; Zimmerman, 2000). This model includes key elements of Winne's (2001)
and Pintrich's (2000) view of self-regulation as a four-phase process, and extends these key elements to capture a
total of 35 different self-regulatory variables used by learners to regulate their learning of complex science topics
with hypermedia (see Azevedo et al., 2004a, pp. 364-367; based on Chi et al., 2001). Briefly, their coding scheme
consists of  35 self-regulatory  processes   related  to planning   (e.g., goal setting,  activating prior knowledge),
monitoring  activities (e.g., feeling of  knowing,   judgment   of learning), learning strategies (e.g., hypothesizing,
coordinating informational sources, inferences), handling task difficulties and demands (e.g., help-seeking behavior),
and interest in the task or the content domain of the task (see Azevedo & Cromley, 2004, p. 533-534). We used
Azevedo and colleagues' SRL model to re-segment the data from the previous data analysis phase. This phase of the
data analysis yielded  7,532   segments  (M  = 91.85  per  participant) with  corresponding  SRL   variables. A trained
graduate student used the coding scheme to code all of the transcriptions by assigning each coded segment with one
of the 35 SRL variables. Inter-rater agreement was established for the mental models was .96 (agreement on 157/164
mental model essays), and participants' and tutors' coded verbalizations was .98 (agreement on 4,242 out of 4,285
segments yielding). Inconsistencies were resolved through discussion among the co-authors.

Results
         Question  1:   Do    different scaffolding  conditions    influence  participants' scores   on  the  matching,
labeling, and blood flow diagram posttests, after controlling for pretest ability? To analyze changes in scores on
the matching, labeling and flow tasks, we used a 2 (condition: SRL vs. ERL) X 2 (time: pretest, posttest) repeated
measures mixed design. For each of these analyses, scaffolding condition was a between-groups factor and time was
a within-subjects factor.  Box's  test  of  equality of  covariance  matrices  showed  that  the  data  were  robust for
multivariate analyses.
         Matching task. A 2 X 2 repeated measures MANOVA on the pretest and posttest data showed a significant
main effect of time (Pillai's Trace = .635, F [1, 80] = 138.936, p < .001, 2 = .635), but no significant main effect for
condition or  any significant   interaction between   condition  and time.   Learners  in both conditions  significantly
improved their scores on the matching task from pretest to posttest. Follow up t-tests by condition showed significant
differences from pre- to posttest by condition (for SRL: t [41] = -7.709, p < .001, 2 = .598; for ERL: t [41] = -8.978,
p < .001, 2 = .668), with posttest scores being higher than pretest scores in both conditions (see Table 1).
         Labeling task. A 2 X 2 repeated measures MANOVA on the pretest and posttest data showed a significant
main effect of time (Pillai's Trace = .821, F [1, 80] = 366.334, p < .001, 2 = .821), a significant main effect of
condition (F [1, 80] = 6.047, p < .017, 2 = .070) and a significant interaction between condition and time (Pillai's
Trace = .094, F [1, 80] = 8.329, p < .006, 2 = .094). T-tests showed no significant differences between the conditions
at pretest, but there were significant differences at posttest (t [80] = -3.018, p < .004, 2 = .102). In addition, follow
up t-tests by condition showed significant differences from pre to posttest by condition (for SRL: t [41] = -11.715, p
< .001, 2 = .774; for ERL: t [41] = -15.291, p < .001, 2 = .854), with posttest scores being higher than pretest scores
in both conditions. The results indicate that while both the SRL and ERL conditions led to significant improvements
from pre to posttest, the ERL group had a significantly higher posttest mean than the SRL group (see Table 1).
         Flow Diagram. A 2 X 2 repeated measures MANOVA on the pretest and posttest data showed a significant
main effect of time (Pillai's Trace = .295, F [1, 80] = 33.448, p < .001, 2 = .295), a significant main effect of
condition (F [1, 80] = 4.694, p < .034, 2 = .055) and a significant interaction between condition and time (Pillai's
Trace = .100, F [1, 80 = 8.871], p < .005, 2 = .100). T-tests showed no significant differences between the conditions
at pretest, but there were significant differences at posttest (t [80] = -2.731, p < .009, 2 =.085). In addition, follow up
t-tests by condition showed significant differences from pre- to posttest by condition (for SRL: t [41] = -2.499, p <

                                                            19                                                ICLS 2006
.0181, 2 = .135; for ERL: t [41] = -5.293, p < .001, 2 = .412), with posttest scores being higher than pretest scores in
both conditions. The results indicate that while both the SRL and ERL conditions led to significant improvements
from pre- to posttest, the ERL group had a significantly higher posttest mean than the SRL group (see Table 1).

Table 1: Means (and Standard Deviations) for the Pretest and Posttest Learning Measures by Scaffolding Conditions.

                                    SRL (n = 41)                                       ERL (n = 41)
                       Pretest M (SD)          Posttest M (SD)           Pretest M (SD)            Posttest M (SD)
Matching Task           54.59 (29.5)              82.36 (26.3)           52.72 (27.9)                84.23 (19.8)
Labeling Task             6.44 (12.4)             49.13 (23.9)             8.01 (16.9)               65.86 (26.2)
Flow Diagram              7.34 (17.6)             17.00 (28.5)             8.37 (18.3)               38.54 (41.7)

          Question 2: Are different scaffolding conditions associated with participants' ability to shift to more
sophisticated mental models of the circulatory system? Given that the mental model categories are qualitative in
nature, we utilized non-parametric statistics to analyze mental model category changes. Specifically, we expected no
statistically significant differences in the distribution of mental model categories at pretest across conditions, and this
hypothesis was supported (2 [2, N = 82] = .469, p =       n.s.). This provides validation for the random assignment of
participants  to conditions,  allowing for an  examination   of posttest   scores to answer  our  Question    2. The results
indicate that while ERL students were more likely to have a higher mental model at posttest than SRL students, the
data were not statistically significant (2 [2, N = 82] = 4.671, p =      n.s.). These results suggest that approximately
equal  numbers   of students  in both  conditions   were able   to reach intermediate  and  high  levels   of mental model
understanding.
          Question  3: Do    learners  utilize self-regulatory  processes   differentially  between    conditions?   In  this
section we present the results of a series of chi-square analyses that were performed to determine whether there were
significant differences in the distribution of undergraduate students' use of SRL variables across the two conditions,
SRL and ERL. The details of the data transformation and statistical analyses are presented in Azevedo and colleagues
(2004a, p. 356). We examined how learners regulated their learning of the circulatory system by calculating how
often they used each of the variables related to the five main SRL categories of planning, monitoring, strategy use,
handling task difficulty and demands, and interest. The number of learners using each SRL variable above the median
proportion across conditions and the results of the significant chi-square tests are presented in Table 2. Of the 82
participants, the audio recording for 3 were not usable, thus the total N for these analyses is 79.
          Planning. Chi-square analyses revealed significant differences in the number of participants who used 2 of
the 4  planning  variables  above  the median     proportion across  the two  conditions.   Overall, a significantly larger
number of participants in the SRL condition planned their learning by creating sub-goals. By contrast, the learners in
the ERL condition more often planned by activating their prior knowledge.
          Monitoring. Chi-square analyses revealed significant differences in the number of participants who used 4 of
the 7 variables related to monitoring above the median proportion across the two conditions. Participants in the SRL
condition monitored their learning by self-questioning. However, participants in the ERL condition monitored their
learning  by  using feeling  of knowing   (FOK),   judgment  of learning   (JOL), and  monitoring    their progress  toward
goals.
          Strategies. Chi-square analyses revealed significant differences in the number of participants who used 8 of
the 16 strategies above the median proportion across the two conditions. More learners in the SRL condition learned
by engaging in selecting new information sources, re-reading, summarizing, and free searching. By comparison, a
significantly larger  number    of learners    in the ERL    condition   used drawing,   hypothesizing,    coordination   of
information sources, and finding a location in the environment to learn about the circulatory system.
          Task difficulty and demands. Chi-square analyses revealed significant differences in the number of learners
who used 3 of the 5 SRL variables related to task difficulty and demands above the median proportion across the two
conditions. More learners in the SRL condition handled task difficulties by enacting control over the context of their
learning. In  comparison,   a significant number   of participants  in the ERL    condition dealt with task   difficulty and
demands by engaging in help-seeking behavior with the tutor and expressing task difficulty.

                                                             20                                                    ICLS 2006
Table 2: Proportion of Undergraduate Learners Using Self-Regulated Learning Variables Above the
        Median Proportion, by Condition.

                                                                  Condition
 SRL Variable                                        SRL (n = 41)           ERL (n = 38)            2              p
 Planning
   Sub-Goals                                          24(59%) a               13(34%)              4.687          .030
   Prior Knowledge Activation                           8(20%)               32(84%) b           33.026           .000
 Monitoring
   Self-Questioning                                   12 (29%)a                2 (5%)              7.794          .005
   Feeling of Knowing (FOK)                            11(27%)                29(76%)b           19.322           .000
   Monitoring Progress Toward Goals                    10(24%)               28(73%) b           19.196           .000
   Judgment of Learning (JOL)                          12 (29%)              27(71%) b           13.775           .000
 Strategy Use
   Selecting New Informational Source                 31(76%) a                7(18%)            25.837           .000
   Re-Reading                                         [28(68%)a               12(32%)            10.635           .001
   Summarization                                      [28(68%)a               12(32%)            10.635           .001
   Free Search                                        15(37%)a                 3(8%)               9.227          .002
   Draw                                                11(27%)                29(76%)b           19.322           .000
   Hypothesizing                                        1(2%)                 16(42%)b           18.374           .000
   Coordinating Informational Sources                  14(34%)                26(68%)b             9.269          .002
   Find Location in Environment                        7(17%)                 17(45%)b             7.136          .008
 Task Difficulty and Demands
   Control of Context                                 32(78%)a                 7(18%)            28.052           .000
   Help Seeking Behavior                               4(10%)                 36(95%)b           56.978           .000
   Task Difficulty                                     8(20%)                 20(53%)b             9.454          .002

Note: Degrees of freedom = 1 and n = 79 for all analyses.
Note. The bold type indicates the variable was used above the median frequency by more than 50% of learners.
a SRL group made the greatest contribution to chi-square for this variable.
b ERL group made the greatest contribution to chi-square for this variable.

Educational and Scientific Contributions
       Our results illustrate that hypermedia can be used to enhance learners' declarative knowledge of a science
topic if they are provided with a human tutor who can externally regulate their learning. We have demonstrated the
effectiveness of external regulation   by  a human   tutor in  facilitating participants' learning as indicated by   both
performance and process data. Providing college students with a human tutor whose role is to prompt them to deploy
key self-regulatory processes during macro-phases of learning and individualized micro-tutoring, both designed to
foster learning of a science topic, led to significant increases in their declarative knowledge of the circulatory system.
Verbal protocols provide evidence that learners who had access to the human tutor effectively deployed the key SRL
processes and mechanisms that lead to significant gains in the declarative knowledge of the topic. However, while
numerous participants increased their mental model through engaging in the learning task, there was no statistically
significant difference between     groups on this  measure. These  results   have led to   our ongoing   research project
examining the role of different types of scaffolding aimed at deploying key SRL processes which may be necessary
to facilitate mental model shifts.
       The    current  results show  that students experience  certain difficulties when   regulating their own learning
about a challenging science topic with hypermedia. By contrast, ERL provided by a human tutor led to statistically
significant higher group mean on two declarative knowledge measures as compared to the SRL group. Based on the
four SRL categories of planning, monitoring, strategy usage, and task difficulties and demands, we propose design
guidelines for how specific SRL variables can be addressed to foster students' SRL with hypermedia. Within the
category of planning, our results suggest that prior knowledge activation and planning are key SRL variables that a
hypermedia environment should scaffold. To foster prior knowledge activation, the students could be asked to recall
everything they can about the topic being learned, prior to beginning the learning task. Our results also indicate that
several monitoring activities such as feeling of knowing (FOK), judgment of learning (JOL), and monitoring progress
towards goals are particularly crucial to learning. To foster judgment of learning, a prompt could be inserted to have

                                                            21                                                  ICLS 2006
the  students  periodically  rate  their understanding     on  a  Likert-type   scale. Lastly, there    are numerous   effective
strategies that could be scaffolded in a hypermedia environment, including hypothesizing, coordinating informational
sources,  and  drawing.   To  close,    our findings  have  led   us to   design guidelines  for how    self-regulated  learning
processes  can    be  implemented     in hypermedia      environments     to  foster students' conceptual     understanding   of
challenging science topics (Azevedo, 2005; Azevedo & Hadwin, 2005; Brusilovsky, 2004; Jacobson, in press).

References
Azevedo,   R.  (2005). Using   hypermedia     as a  metacognitive    tool for  enhancing  student learning?   The  role  of self-
          regulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 40(4), 199-209.
Azevedo,   R., &   Cromley,   J.G.   (2004).  Does   training on    self-regulated learning  facilitate students' learning  with
          hypermedia? Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3), 523-535.
Azevedo,   R.,   Cromley,    J.G., Winters,   F.I., Moos,   D.C.,    &   Greene, J.A.  (2005).   Adaptive   human    scaffolding
          facilitates adolescents' self-regulated learning with hypermedia. Instructional Science, 33, 381-412.
Azevedo, R., Cromley, J.G., & Seibert, D. (2004a). Does adaptive scaffolding facilitate students' ability to regulate
          their learning with hypermedia? Contemporary Educational Psychology, 29, 344-370.
Azevedo,   R.,   Guthrie, J.T.,    & Seibert,  D.   (2004b).  The    role of  self-regulated learning    in  fostering students'
          conceptual   understanding     of  complex     systems    with  hypermedia.    Journal  of  Educational    Computing
          Research, 30(1), 87-111.
Azevedo, R., & Hadwin, A.F., (2005). Scaffolding self-regulated learning and metacognition: Implications for the
          design of computer-based scaffolds Instructional Science, 33, 367-379.
Brusilovsky, P. (2004). Adaptive navigation support in educational hypermedia: The role of student knowledge level
          and the case for meta-adaptation. British Journal of Educational Technology, 34(4), 487-497.
Chi, M.T.H.    (1996).   Constructing    self-explanations    and   scaffolded explanations  in  tutoring.   Applied   Cognitive
          Pscyhology, 10, S33-S49.
Chi, M.T.H., Siler, S., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., & Hausmann, R. (2001). Learning from human tutoring. Cognitive
          Science, 25, 471-534.
Graesser, A.C.,   Person, N.K.,    &  Magliano,     J.P. (1995). Collaborative   dialogue   patterns in naturalistic one-to-one
          tutoring. Applied Cognitive Pscyhology, 9, 495-522.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding complex systems: Some core challenges. Journal of the
          Learning Sciences, 15(1), 53-61
Jacobson,  M.    (in press). From    non-adaptive   to   adaptive   educational  hypermedia:   Theory,   research,   and  design
          issues.
Lajoie, S.P., & Azevedo, R. (in press). Teaching and learning in technology-rich environments. In P. Alexander & P.
          Winne (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Moos, D.C., & Azevedo, R. (2006). The role of goal structure in undergraduates' use of self-regulatory variables in
          two hypermedia learning tasks. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 15(1), 49-86.
Pintrich, P.R.   (2000). The  role   of goal orientation   in self-regulated   learning. In M. Boekaerts,    P. Pintrich, &  M.
          Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 451-502). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Shapiro, A., & Niederhauser, D. (2004). Learning from hypertext: Research issues and findings. In D. H. Jonassen
          (Ed.).  Handbook    of   Research  for  Education   Communications       and   Technology   (2nd   ed). Mahwah,    NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum.
Winne, P.H. (2001). Self-regulated learning viewed from models of information processing. In B. Zimmerman & D.
          Schunk (Eds.), Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 153-189).
          Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zimmerman, B. (2000). Attaining self-regulation: A social cognitive perspective. In M. Boekaerts, P. Pintrich, & M.
          Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 13-39). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by funding from the National Science Foundation (Early Career Grant REC# 0133346)
awarded to the first author.

                                                                 22                                                    ICLS 2006
