        Effects of an individual's prior knowledge on collaborative
     knowledge construction and individual learning outcomes in
                                          videoconferencing

                                Dr. Bernhard Ertl, Bundeswehr University Munich,
                 Werner-Heisenberg-Weg 39, D-85577 Neubiberg, Germany, papers@ertl.org
                        Prof. Dr. Heinz Mandl, Ludwig Maximilian University Munich,
                Leopoldstr. 13, D-80802 München, Germany, mandl@edupsy.uni-muenchen.de

         Abstract. This paper deals with collaborative knowledge construction in videoconferencing.
         The   main   topic for investigation  is how   to predict  individual  learning  outcomes,  and  in
         particular the degree to which an individual's prior knowledge and collaborative knowledge
         construction can influence individual learning outcomes. In this context, the influence of prior
         knowledge and two measures of instructional support (a content scheme and learners' resource
         interdependence)    were analyzed  with   respect  to collaborative   knowledge   construction. An
         empirical study was conducted using 171 university students. Students worked collaboratively
         in groups  of three    within a case-based  videoconferencing     learning environment   and   were
         supported by instructional support measures. Results indicate that both an individual's prior
         knowledge as well as the quality of collaborative knowledge construction strongly impact
         individual learning outcomes.

         During the last decade, research in the area of computer supported collaborative learning has increased
notably (see Koschmann, Suthers & Chan, 2005). In this context, many researchers focus on how learners use a
learning environment,   on   supporting   collaborative  learning  or on   the processes   involved in   collaborative
learning. However, research often fails to consider individual prerequisites (cf. Dochy, 1992; Ertl, Kopp &
Mandl, 2005; Kalyuga, Chandler & Sweller, 2001; O'Donnell & Dansereau, 2000; Shapiro, 2004), which may
impact the learning environment. This study focuses on individual prerequisites--in particular an individuals'
prior knowledge--and how these influence the process and outcome of collaborative knowledge construction in
computer supported collaborative learning. The study uses two measures of instructional support to analyze the
influence of the individual's prior knowledge with respect to the quality of collaborative knowledge construction
and individual learning outcomes.

Collaborative Learning in Videoconferencing
         Collaborative learning in small groups means that groups act relatively independent of a teacher with
the goal of acquiring knowledge or skills (cf. Cohen, 1994). One major goal of collaborative learning is to
support  social interaction   and to   encourage   the  learners'  cognitive   processes. In this context,   learners'
elaborations are seen to play a crucial role for expressing knowledge, ideas and beliefs to their partners (cf.
O'Donnell & King, 1999): learners work to co-construct knowledge collaboratively (cf. Fischer, Bruhn, Gräsel
& Mandl 2002). In addition, learners externalize and elaborate on learning material by taking notes (cf. Gould,
1980), e.g. in a shared computer application. In collaborative learning environments, learners often create these
written representations collaboratively (cf. Dillenbourg & Traum, 1999; Suthers, 2001). During this process,
they create  a  shared external   representation  of the   subject matter, which    can help facilitate  collaborative
knowledge construction (Ertl, Fischer & Mandl, in press). When constructing a shared external representation,
learners must externalize their knowledge, that is, they must elaborate on and comprehensibly explain their
knowledge   to  their  learning  partners (cf. Peper   &   Mayer,   1986).   Furthermore,  creating shared   external
representations can encourage learners to overcome conceptual or structural problems they may have with the
subject matter (cf. Gould, 1980) and may encourage the co-construction of knowledge (cf. Fischer & Mandl,
2005). In videoconferencing, shared applications play a prominent role in such externalization processes: The
shared applications offer a shared externalization forum, which is common to all the dispersed learning partners
(Dillenbourg & Traum, 1999). Furthermore, shared applications are often built as tools for the learners (cf.
Suthers, 2001). Such tools support the active representation of knowledge and can support learners content-
specifically (cf. Dillenbourg & Traum, 1999), reduce consensus illusions and foster the integration of prior
knowledge (cf. Fischer et al., 2002). However, studies show that it is not enough to simply provide learners with
a collaborative learning environment (see Lou, Abrami & d'Apollonia, 2001). The collaborative learning process
and outcomes can be improved greatly when appropriate additional support is provided.

                                                         161                                                ICLS 2006
Outcomes of Collaborative Learning
         In this context, it is necessary to first consider the conceptualization of learning outcomes. There are
two main methods of assessing the benefits of a collaborative learning scenario: either individually on the learner
level or collaboratively on a group level. However, there are differences in the interpretation of such learning
outcomes  (cf. Anderson,   Reder  &  Simon,  1996;  Greeno,     1997; Hertz-Lazarowitz,    Kirkus    & Miller,   1992;
Salomon & Perkins, 1998). The main questions surround the degree to which individual knowledge assessments
can evaluate the effects of collaborative knowledge construction and the degree to which group assessment can
evaluate an individual's learning progress. For individual learning outcomes, one can distinguish between factual
knowledge and applicable knowledge (cf. De Jong & Fergusson-Hessler, 1996). According to this distinction,
the term factual knowledge is used if learners can appropriately recite facts about the subject matter, while
applicable knowledge means that learners can also apply their knowledge, e.g. in problem solving. With respect
to the assessment of learning outcomes on the group level, Hertz-Lazarowitz et al. (1992) suggest that the
product of the collaboration process, e.g. a final collaborative problem solution, should be considered "group
knowledge" to assess the quality of collaborative knowledge construction. According to Salomon and Perkins
(1998), it is important when investigating collaborative learning to analyze both collaborative and individual
learning outcomes in order to ensure all the effects of the collaborative learning scenario are considered.

Support Measures for Collaborative Learning
         Support measures often accompany collaborative learning in computer supported learning environments
in order to  help prevent  dysfunctional  group   phenomena,     to improve   the   learning  process  and  to   foster
knowledge acquisition. Well-known examples for such support are scripts (cf. Baker & Lund, 1997; Weinberger,
Ertl, Fischer & Mandl, 2005) and content specific support (cf. Dobson, 1999; Ertl et al., in press; Fischer et al.,
2002). A further anchor to support learning is the provision of a positive interdependence of the learners (see e.g.
Johnson & Johnson, 1992) through distributed resources (see Aronson, Blaney, Stephan, Sikes, & Snapp, 1978;
Cohen, 1994). Support measures are mainly directed at collaborative knowledge construction and are thought to
substantially improve the process of collaborative knowledge construction. This is reflected in many studies (e.g.
Baker & Lund, 1997; Weinberger et al., 2005; Fischer et al., 2002; Rummel & Spada, 2005). However, despite
the fact that many of these studies were able to reveal effects regarding the quality of collaborative knowledge
construction, there are often mixed results regarding individual learning outcomes (cf. Baker & Lund, 1997;
Fischer et al., 2002; Weinberger, 2003). One reason for this may be the influence of an individual's prior
knowledge.

The Role of an Individual's Prior Knowledge in Collaborative Learning
         An individual's prior knowledge is known to be an important prerequisite for individual knowledge
construction and  learning outcomes.   Many    theoretical  approaches   stress the  importance    of  learners' prior
knowledge when acquiring knowledge from new learning material (see Shapiro, 2004). Many empirical studies
also highlight the influence of prior knowledge on individual learning outcomes (cf. Dochy, 1992; Kalyuga et
al., 2001; O'Donnell & Dansereau, 2000). When assessing learning outcomes, the structure of an individual's
prior knowledge may negate the effects of the collaborative knowledge construction.

         In research on  collaborative   learning environments,   an  individual's  prior knowledge    is  frequently
neglected with respect to learning outcomes. Varying degrees of learners' prior knowledge are mainly used to
explain group phenomena (cf. Salomon & Globerson, 1989), to describe the quality of explanations (cf. Webb,
1989) or as a control variable for ensuring that learners do not differ significantly. In studies on supporting
collaborative learning, an individuals' prior knowledge often plays an important role in group composition (cf.
Cohen,  1994).  However    the influence  of prior  knowledge    as   a prerequisite for  collaborative   knowledge
construction and  individual learning outcomes    often remains   unclear. Studies   by  O'Donnell    and Dansereau
(2000) that  investigate the effects of  prior knowledge     in collaboration   indicate that   an individual's  prior
knowledge also influences learning outcomes in the collaborative learning context (see also Shapiro, 2004).

         In summary,  results  of studies show    that prior knowledge    influences  individual   and   collaborative
knowledge construction. To date, there have been no findings on the interaction between an individual's prior
knowledge   and  support  measures   for collaborative  knowledge     construction. There    is also  no information
concerning the extent to which an individual's prior knowledge and collaborative knowledge construction may
influence individual learning outcomes.

                                                        162                                                 ICLS 2006
Research Questions
To gain insights on these issues, we conducted an empirical study based on the following research questions:
          Research question 1: To what extent do prior knowledge and instructional support affect the quality of
          collaborative knowledge construction?
          Research  question  2:  To   what extent  do  prior knowledge,   instructional  support and  the quality  of
          collaborative knowledge construction affect learners' individual learning outcomes?

Method
          To answer  the   research questions,  an  empirical  study was   conducted   in the  laboratory  of Ludwig
Maximilian University with the participation of 171 first year students of educational science. The experiment
was comprised of an individual and a collaborative learning unit. During the individual learning unit, learners
acquired knowledge about the attribution theory on the basis of a theory text. After working on this text, the
learners' prior  knowledge    was   assessed  using  an individual   case  solution and   a short-answer   test  about
conceptual   knowledge.     For    the  collaboration,  three   learners   were     connected  through     a  desktop
videoconferencing system, which included an audio- and video-connection and a shared application. Using this
videoconferencing environment, learners had to collaboratively solve a learning case according to attribution
theory. This collaborative case solution was assessed and used as a measure of the quality of collaborative
knowledge    construction.  After the  collaborative learning  unit, the  learners' knowledge    was  assessed   on an
individual basis by asking them to solve a case.

          During   collaboration, groups of  three  learners  worked  in one   of four conditions  of a 2x2-factorial
design (cf. Figure 1). The support measure was either content-specific or related to the learners' resources. For
content specific   support, we    compared  a content   scheme  with  an  enhanced   content  scheme.   For   learners'
resources, we compared normal vs. strong interdependence.

                                                                           Content-specific support
                                                                      Scheme                   Enhanced scheme
        Resources              Normal interdependence         N = 15 Triads (45 Part.)      N = 15 Triads (45 Part.)Strong interdependenceN = 14 Triads (42 Part.)N = 13 Triads (39 Part.)
                                            Figure 1. Design of the study.

          Content-specific support. The participants received a content scheme, which pre-structured the shared
application  (text editor). Learners   followed the  structure  of the table,  which   was  divided  into  three main
categories (see Figure 2): Cause, for collecting the causes for the problem described in the case, Information for
finding case information and providing supporting evidence for the cause and Attribution for making the correct
attribution  of the  cause.  The   categories  Information    and  Attribution each    contained  two  subcategories:
Information was divided into columns for Consensus and Consistency for making these two aspects of the
attribution theory salient. Attribution was split into Kelley and Heider for guiding learners to attribute according
to both theories. Using this scheme, learners were able to record complete attributions according to Kelley and
Heider with causes and case information about consensus and consistency.

        Cause                            InformationConsensusConsistency          Attribution according toKelleyHeider

                                     Figure 2. Structure of the content scheme.

          The enhanced content scheme implemented all the features of the content scheme, but split each row
into two further aspects: theoretical concepts and case information (cf. Figure 3). This structure was aimed at
supporting the learners in assigning consensus and consistency and in providing the case information to support
this assignment.

                            Cause                   InformationConsensusConsistency  Attribution according toKelleyHeider
  Theory concepts
 Case information
                                Figure 3. Structure of the enhanced content scheme.

                                                         163                                                 ICLS 2006
         Resources.    With    respect  to  the   learners'   resources,  the    study  provided     normal    and  strong
interdependence. Learners with normal interdependence received information about all causes, either relating the
cause itself, to information about consensus or to consistency (cf. Figure 4). When learners worked with strong
interdependence, the resource distribution was structured such that each learner had causes with the respective
information regarding consensus and consistency (cf. Figure 5). Thus, each learner had the same amount of
information units, but these units were distributed differently.

            Cause        Consensus     Consistency                               Cause           Consensus    Consistency
Cause 1     Learner A    Learner B     Learner C                    Cause 1      Learner A       Learner A    Learner A
Cause 2     Learner C    Learner A     Learner B                    Cause 2      Learner B       Learner B    Learner B
Cause 3     Learner B    Learner C     Learner A                    Cause 3      Learner C       Learner C    Learner C
      Figure 4. Normal interdependence.                                      Figure 5. Strong interdependence.
Data Sources
         For the analysis, several data sources were included to assess the individual's prior knowledge, the
quality of collaborative knowledge construction, and individual learning outcome. A treatment check was also
conducted.

         An individual's prior knowledge: factual knowledge. Factual knowledge was measured by a multiple-
choice test on theoretical facts. Learners had to select the right answer from four choices. This test consisted of
12 items (M = 82.98; SD = 25.60; max. = 120). The reliability of this test was sufficient (Cronbach's  = .64).

         An   individual's prior knowledge:     applicable  knowledge.   To   assess   an  individual's   prior  applicable
knowledge, learners worked on a case individually. For the assessment, this case solution was analyzed with
respect to theory concepts and case information. Items used correctly for the individual case solution were
summed together as a score (M = 33.91; SD = 14.49; empirical max. = 79). For ensuring the inter-rater reliability
of data, two evaluators marked analysis 10%. The consistency between these evaluations was high w = .91).

         Quality  of   collaborative   knowledge    construction.   The     case  solution   which      resulted from  the
collaboration was used to assess the quality of the collaborative knowledge construction. As the product of the
collaborative knowledge    construction,   the case solution   was  analyzed     with  respect   to correctly  used theory
concepts and case information. According to the different categories of the attribution theory, a coding system
was developed in which all causes, information and attributions were listed in an identifiable way without any
overlap. On basis of this coding scheme, a sum was defined as a measure of the quality of the collaborative
knowledge construction (M = 50.53; SD = 16.13; empirical max. = 89). For ensuring inter-rater reliability of
data, two evaluators marked analysis 10%. The consistency between these evaluations was high (r = .87).

         Individual  learning   outcome    (only   applicable   knowledge).      For  determining     individual   learning
outcome, following collaboration, learners worked individually to solve a case. The post-test case was similar to
the pre-test case and was analyzed with respect to correctly used theory concepts and case information. Scores
were given for case information and theoretical concepts (M = 63.71; SD = 21.26; empirical max. = 100). For
ensuring inter-rater reliability of data, two evaluators marked analysis 10%. The consistency between these
evaluations was high w = .90).

         Data  analysis.   For verifying   the effects of   content-specific  support   and   resource   interdependence,
analysis of   variance (ANOVA)        were  calculated  with   respect   to  the quality   of    collaborative   knowledge
construction  and the  individual  learning    outcomes.    To identify  predictors    for   the quality of   collaborative
knowledge   construction,  a   linear regression  was  calculated   on   the group    level. With   respect to   individual
learning outcomes, we calculated an HLM.

Results
         Treatment check. A treatment check was conducted to ensure that there were no differences in learning
prerequisites within   the four  experimental     conditions.  This served   as  a   control  for   the individual's prior
knowledge (factual knowledge: F(3,167) = 1.66; n.s.; applicable knowledge: F(3,166) < 1; n.s.). The treatment check
disclosed that there were no significant differences regarding prior knowledge between the four experimental
conditions. A further treatment check was conducted for the learning outcomes in each of the four conditions.
With respect to learning outcome measures (see Table 1), the treatment check revealed that there were also no
significant differences, in either the quality of collaborative knowledge construction (F(3,52) < 1; n.s.), or in the
individual learning outcome (F(3,167) < 1; n.s.).

                                                          164                                                     ICLS 2006
Table 1: Means and SDs of the outcome measures.
                                                         Quality of                     Individual Learning Outcome
                                           Collaborative Knowledge Construction
                                                 M                    SD                       M           SD
Average                                        50.53                  16.13                  63.71       21.26
Max.                                           89.00                                       100.00
Content / normal interdep.                     50.53                  18.18                  63.24       23.12
Content / strong interdep.                     49.93                  10.01                  67.85       19.21
Enhanced content / normal interdep.            52.07                  20.92                  60.89       21.80
Enhanced content / strong interdep.            49.38                  14.33                  63.03       20.61

        Research question 1. Regarding research question 1, 29% of the variance could be resolved with respect
to the quality of  collaborative knowledge  construction.  In the     context of  the  different measures  for prior
knowledge, only prior factual knowledge proved to be a significant predictor (see Table 2). The measures of
instructional support did not prove to be a further significant predictor.

Table 2: Regression for predicting the quality of collaborative knowledge by prior knowledge and support.
                                              Quality of Collaborative
                                              knowledge construction
                                             -weight                p
Prior knowledge (applicable)                    --                n. s.
Prior knowledge (factual)                      .54                .001
Enhanced scheme                                  --               n. s.
Strong interdependence                          --                n. s.
R²                                                       .34
Adjust. R²                                               .29

        Research question 2. With respect to research question 2, the model could predict 34% of the variance
of the individual learning outcome. The highest predictor could be found in the individual's prior knowledge
(see Table 3). Factual knowledge had a higher impact than applicable knowledge. The impact of the quality of
collaborative knowledge construction lies between prior applicable knowledge and prior factual knowledge.

Table 3: HLM for predicting the individual learning outcome by prior knowledge, the quality of collaborative
knowledge construction and the instructional support.
                                           Individual Learning Outcome
                                             -weight                p
Prior knowledge (applicable)                   .39             < .001
Prior knowledge (factual)                      .29             < .001
Quality of collaborative knowledgeconstruction .34             < .001
Enhanced scheme                                --               n. s.
Strong interdependence                         --               n. s.
R²                                                       .38
Summary and Discussion
        The results of the study indicate the influence of an individual's prior knowledge on the quality of
collaborative knowledge construction as well as on the individual learning outcomes. The results further indicate
that the quality of collaborative knowledge construction has an impact on the individual's learning outcome.
These results replicate the effects found in a prior study by Ertl et al. (2005) with respect to the influence of the
individual's prior knowledge and the quality of collaborative knowledge construction.

        The results of the studies can be viewed from both an individual and a collaborative perspective. From
an individual  perspective, one  could argue  that  collaborative   learning  scenarios   rely heavily  on learner's
prerequisites, which have to be included in collaborative learning research (see also Shapiro, 2004). In contrast,
from the perspective of collaborative learning research, one could argue that collaboration is more than simply a
stimulus for an individual's cognitive processes. Collaboration creates something new, which goes beyond the
individual skills of each  member   of the group   (see Hertz-Lazarowitz      et al., 1992). Therefore, one  should

                                                       165                                                 ICLS 2006
consider both the individual and the collaborative aspects of collaborative learning scenarios when dealing with
collaborative learning (see also Salomon & Perkins, 1998).

          A second aspect is instructional support. In this study, support measures had no significant effects. In
contrast, the support  measures     Ertl et al. (2005)   used were highly   effective for  collaborative knowledge
construction. This   difference may  have   its roots in the  different ways in  which   the support measures were
applied. One could assume that some support measures facilitate collaborative knowledge construction quite
strongly while others only have a slight impact on the outcomes (see Weinberger et al., 2005). Therefore, one
has to analyze  the   process   of  collaborative knowledge    construction  in more  detail  to come  to  powerful
conclusions. This should be a focus of future research.

Conclusions
          Prior knowledge is an important factor for collaborative learning research. The quality of collaborative
knowledge construction largely influences an individuals' learning outcomes. This means that when assessing
the outcomes of collaborative learning scenarios, one should be aware that the collaboration process itself is only
one aspect of learners' knowledge acquisition that interacts with others (see Shapiro, 2004). Based on these
results, the effects of many studies that found differences regarding collaborative knowledge construction and
the individuals' learning outcomes can be explained (e.g. Rummel & Spada, 2005; Weinberger, 2003).

          The educational importance of this work relates to the design and assessment of collaborative learning
environments. When assessing collaborative learning, one should pay attention to both the individual and the
collaborative aspects of learning. Focusing only on one aspect may either cause learners not to relate their prior
knowledge to the subject of collaborative knowledge construction (see Renkl, Mandl & Gruber, 1996) or may
result in dysfunctional group phenomena, because learners may focus only on individual knowledge gains (see
Salomon & Globerson, 1989). Our results show that collaborative knowledge construction may have an impact
that is similar to the impact of learners' individual prerequisites. This means that carefully designed learning
environments may balance out the differences in learners' individual prerequisites. However, such mechanisms
have to be verified by differentiated process analyses.

          A further  aspect  is the  impact  of instructional support.  In learning environment   research, support
measures are often either directed at achieving a better collaboration process (see Baker & Lund, 1997) or an
improved    learning outcome    (see O'Donnell    &   Dansereau, 2000).    However,   to build sustainable  learning
environments, one has to consider the effect of interventions, the collaborative problem solving process and an
individual's prior knowledge.

References
Anderson, J. R., Reder, L. M., and Simon, H. A. (1996). Situated learning and education. Educational
    Researcher, 25, 5-11.
Aronson, E., Blaney, N., Stephan, C., Sikes, J. & Snapp, M. (1978). The jigsaw classroom. Beverly Hills, CA:
    Sage.
Baker, M., and Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a CSCL environment. Journal of Computer
    Assisted Learning, 13, 175-193.
Cohen, E. G. (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review of
    Educational Research, 64, 1-35.
De Jong, T., and Ferguson-Hessler, M. G. M. (1996). Types and qualities of knowledge. Educational
    Psychologist, 31, 105-113.
Dillenbourg, P., and Traum, D. (1999, January). Does a shared screen make a shared solution? Paper presented
    at the Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL), Stanford.
Dobson, M. (1999). Information enforcement and learning with interactive graphical systems. Learning and
    Instruction, 9, 365-390.
Dochy, F. J. R. C. (1992). Assessment of prior knowledge as a determinant for future learning. The use of prior
    knowledge state tests and knowledge profiles. Utrecht: Uitgeverij Lemma B.V.
Ertl, B., Fischer, F. & Mandl, H. (in press). Conceptual and socio-cognitive support for collaborative learning in
    videoconferencing environments. Computers & Education.

                                                          166                                              ICLS 2006
Ertl, B., Kopp, B. & Mandl, H. (2005). Effects of individual's prior knowledge on collaborative knowledge
  construction and individual learning outcomes in videoconferencing. In T. Koschmann, D. D. Suthers & T.
  Chan (Eds.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2005. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., and Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering collaborative knowledge construction with
  visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12, 213-232.
Fischer, F. & Mandl, H. (2005). Knowledge convergence in computer-supported collaborative learning - the role
  of external representation tools. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 405-441.
Gould, J. D. (1980). Experiments on composing letters: Some facts, some myths, and some observations. In L.
  W. Gregg and E. R. Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive processes in writing (pp. 97-127). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong questions. Educational Researcher, 26, 5-17.
Hertz-Lazarowitz, R., Kirkus, V. B., and Miller, N. (1992). Implications of current research on cooperative
  interaction for classroom application. In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz (Ed.), Interaction in cooperative groups: The
  theoretical anatomy of group learning (pp. 253-280). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, D. W., and Johnson, R. T. (1992). Positive interdependence: Key to effective cooperation. In R. Hertz-
  Lazarowitz (Ed.), Interaction in cooperative groups: The theoretical anatomy of group learning (pp.
  174-199). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., and Sweller, J. (2001). Learner experience and efficiency of instructional guidance.
  Educational Psychology, 21, 5-23.
Koschmann, T., Suthers, D. & Chan, C. (Eds.). (2005). Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2005: The
  next 10 years! Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates.
Lou, Y., Abrami, P. C., and d'Apollonia, S. (2001). Small group and individual learning with technology: A
  meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 71, 449-521.
O'Donnell, A. M., and Dansereau, D. F. (2000). Interactive effects of prior knowledge and material format on
  cooperative teaching. Journal of Experimental Education, 68, 101-118.
O'Donnell, A. M., and King, A. (Eds.). (1999). Cognitive perspectives on peer learning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Peper, R. J., and Mayer, R. E. (1986). Generative effects of note-taking during science lectures. Journal of
  Educational Psychology, 78, 34-38.
Renkl, A., Mandl, H., & Gruber, H. (1996). Inert knowledge: Analyses and remedies. Educational Psychologist,
  31(2), 115-121.
Rummel, N. & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
  problem solving in computer-mediated settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 201-241.
Salomon, G., and Globerson, T. (1989). When teams do not function the way they ought to. International
  Journal of Educational Research, 13, 89 - 99.
Salomon, G., and Perkins, D. N. (1998). Individual and social aspects of learning. Review of Research in
  Education, 23, 1-24.
Shapiro, A. M. (2004). How including prior knowledge as a subject variable may change outcomes of learning
  research. American Educational Research Journal, 41, 159-189.
Suthers, D. D. (2001). Towards a systematic study of representational guidance for collaborative learning
  discourse. Journal of Universal Computer Science, 7, 254-277.
Webb, N. M. (1989). Peer interaction and learning in small groups. International Journal of Educational
  Research, 13, 21-39.
Weinberger, A. (2003). Scripts for computer-supported collaborative learning. [Dissertation, Ludwig-
  Maximilians-Universität München].
  Available: http://edoc.ub.uni-muenchen.de/archive/00001120/01/Weinberger_Armin.pdf.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F. & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
  collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33, 1-30.
Acknowledgements
       This research was funded by DFG (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft), project number MA 978/13-3,
MA 978/13-4.

                                                      167                                               ICLS 2006
