                              From Wikipedia to the Classroom:
                       Exploring Online Publication and Learning

                                           Andrea Forte, Amy Bruckman
                       GVU Center, College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
                                        85 5th Street, NW Atlanta, GA 30332
                                     aforte@cc.gatech.edu, asb@cc.gatech.edu

        Abstract: Wikipedia represents an intriguing new publishing paradigm--can it be used to engage
        students in authentic collaborative writing activities? How can we design wiki publishing tools
        and  curricula to  support  learning   among     student  authors?    We suggest   that wiki    publishing
        environments   can create   learning  opportunities    that   address four dimensions     of authenticity:
        personal, real world, disciplinary, and assessment. We have begun a series of design studies to
        investigate links  between  wiki   publishing    experiences   and  writing-to-learn. The    results of an
        initial study in an undergraduate government course indicate that perceived audience plays an
        important role in helping students monitor the quality of writing; however, students' perception of
        audience  on  the  Internet is not straightforward.      This preliminary  iteration  resulted  in several
        guidelines  that are  shaping  efforts to     design and    implement  new    wiki publishing   tools  and
        curricula for students and teachers.

Wikipedia: This Just Doesn't Make Sense
        A perplexing phenomenon has emerged online. Thousands of individuals have come together in one online
community with the goal of building an encyclopedia of all human knowledge. This community relies on the work
of volunteers, does not solicit contributions from experts, employs no formal review process, and allows people to
change the  content of the encyclopedia    at any     time without  even  identifying themselves.    The   reaction of most
individuals is that it simply should not work. Yet, astonishingly, it seems to be working reasonably well.

        Wikipedia is a collaboratively written, freely editable online encyclopedia built on a wiki. The first wikis
were introduced by Ward Cunningham in the mid 1990s as a platform for supporting fast, productive collaboration
online (Leuf & Cunningham, 2001). Each page on a wiki website has an edit button that allows readers to edit its
content. Wikipedia's authority rests in the ongoing, collective review of anyone with an Internet connection. In
earlier studies, we found that Wikipedia contributors generally begin as seekers of information, but gradually adopt
the practices of proofreading, fact checking, and eventually of authoring new content (Bryant, Forte & Bruckman,
2005). The low barrier to participation on Wikipedia has mobilized thousands of volunteer editors since the project
began in January 2001. As of March 2006, it has produced over 980,000 articles. Stylistically, these articles closely
resemble those in a traditional, print encyclopedia (Emigh & Herring, 2005) and are generally factually accurate
(Giles, 2005). The flexible, relatively lightweight wiki medium has allowed for social norms and rituals to emerge
that regulate characteristics of writing on the site.

        Many studies of Wikipedia have focused on the quality of its content and the processes that sustain content
production  and surveillance  (Viegas,  Wattenberg      &  Dave,    2004; Lih, 2004).  These   are   important  concerns  if
Wikipedia is to serve as a reliable information resource. For the learning sciences, Wikipedia represents something
potentially more exciting than an online resource. In Wikipedia, a kind of global learning community has emerged;
individuals from around   the world  are mutually      engaged   in constructing knowledge.    It has   been  observed  that
resources like textbooks often conceal from students the disciplinary practices, passion and effort that authors invest
in producing  texts (Linn, Davis    &  Bell,  2004);    in Wikipedia,   the   process is both   visible and   open  to new
collaborators. In our earlier work, we learned through interviews that some Wikipedians explicitly treat participation
in Wikipedia as a learning experience:

        I look up and read books about the subject and I'll look something up. It's not that I'm doing all of
        this in order to develop an encyclopedia, although I am, it's more that I'm doing this because I
        want to learn and you have to learn in order to contribute knowledgeably to Wikipedia.

                                                             182                                                  ICLS 2006
         These interviews further suggested that the process for negotiating content includes features of knowledge
building discourse    (Scardamalia  &  Bereiter, 1996)   such  as  proposing   new     ideas, requesting  evidence, and
synthesizing divergent points of view:

         What happens is each side starts insisting that the other have clear citations for everything they're
         saying and you can end up with some really strengthened articles out of these disputes.

         The process is really messy. It means there's a lot of conflict--some interpersonal conflicts, some
         conflicts over content, a lot of conflict over emphasis. But in the process it means that people are
         exposed to ideas and information that they wouldn't be otherwise.

         Collaborative publishing on Wikipedia offers an interesting model for creating authentic classroom writing
activities. Writing can be a powerful tool for constructing knowledge. Researchers of writing-to-learn have long
suggested that the process of written composition can empower students to reflect on what they know and integrate
existing knowledge with new knowledge (Emig, 1977; Britton et.al., 1975). Research also suggests that authentic
activities can impact motivation and learning outcomes (Harel & Papert, 1991). Shaffer and Resnick (1999) propose
that a thick description of "authentic" activities includes four different dimensions:

         ·   personal (students care about it),
         ·   disciplinary (aligned with the intellectual tools and practices of the domain),
         ·   real world (connected to the world outside the classroom), and
         ·   assessment (assessment aligned with learning activities).

         Writing assignments often address personal authenticity well--students are generally encouraged to write
about  aspects of   a domain   they  find  interesting. Unfortunately, such    assignments     frequently neglect   other
dimensions of authenticity. Disciplinary authenticity suffers because the traditional writing assignment is often a
contrived literate act. The purpose, content, and form of written artifacts emerge from students' understanding of
teachers' instructions rather than from a natural need to communicate a message well in a particular discipline
(Edelsky & Smith, 1984). Moreover, such assignments often maintain only tenuous connections to the real world,
since they are often irrelevant beyond the classroom setting. Finally, although process is a critical feature of writing-
to-learn (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987), assessment of the writing process is difficult and teachers often grade only
the final product.

         Researchers and educators who have grappled with the problem of inauthentic classroom writing have
proposed publication as a solution. Efforts to integrate student publication with school curricula have succeeded in
motivating student writers and sustaining engagement over time (Wigginton, 1986). When the Internet became a
subject of educational research, student publication was a natural analog. Early research suggested that Internet
publication could   increase student motivation  and    even lead to better writing    (Cohen   & Riel,  1989). Internet
publication has been used as a way of breaking down the classroom walls and providing students with a diverse
readership (Bos & Krajcik, 1998).

         To create authentic writing experiences for students, we have begun a project that leverages the Wikipedia
model of collaborative authorship with added support for disciplinary practice and authentic assessment. Students
write about topics that interest them and publish their work in an online information resource, thereby creating a real
world venue for writing. Moreover, assignments are structured to encourage disciplinary practices like citation and
evaluation of information sources. Finally, teachers are encouraged to not only assess students' final product, but to
also consider collaboration and revision as critical features of high-quality work. This project is in its early stages.
Will students respond to our innovation with as much enthusiasm as Wikipedia volunteers around the world? How
will a real world   audience  and  purpose impact  students'  writing-to-learn experiences?     Will the  kind of social
moderation that governs writing quality on Wikipedia similarly provide social support for student writing?

Pilot Study
         We have begun a series of iterative design studies (see Barab & Squire, 2004) to examine wiki tools in the
classroom context and to reflexively use this evaluation as an opportunity to improve the tools for science writing.
This paper describes an important first step in defining a design and research space. To familiarize ourselves with

                                                          183                                                   ICLS 2006
the potential challenges of researching wiki publishing and learning, we conducted a semester-long pilot study. In
this preliminary iteration, we sought     to establish guidelines for   design and to explore the  relationship between
publishing and learning in a natural academic setting. Two further design study iterations including a comparison
class study are planned for the next two years.

         For the exploratory trial, students in a freshman-level, college American government class published essays
about a public policy issue using a type of wiki called CoWeb (Rick & Guzdial, 2006). Participating students were
informed of our intention to use their papers as content in a new public policy online resource for students. They
used the wiki as a staging ground to choose issues, share resources, critique one another's research, and publish their
final essays. The feasibility of asking students to interact online using wikis has been amply established (Guzdial,
Rick & Kehoe, 2001; Bruns & Humphreys, 2005). We set out to understand what barriers exist with respect to
investigating students' perceptions of their potential audience, their process for writing, and how interacting online
influenced their learning. We aimed to answer three basic questions about students' experiences:

     1.  To what extent do students' interactions online affect their reasoning and writing?
     2.  How does publishing influence students' beliefs about their writing and motivation to write well?
     3.  How does publishing influence the content and tone of students' writing?

Methods and Participants
         Investigating student publishing as a literate activity is challenging because the written product reveals only
glimpses of process. To some extent, using a wiki mediates this difficulty because every edit made in the online
environment is archived; however, many students chose to revise extensively offline. Our methods stem from our
commitment to understanding learning as a situated, social phenomenon (Lave & Wenger, 1991). This perspective
suggests that writing research should seek to understand learners' ability to adapt to the linguistic conventions of an
intellectual community and identify ways to support this process. For this investigation, we conducted interviews at
three points in the semester to capture students' experiences and process throughout the activity of researching and
composing their papers. We also recorded each change that students made to online resource lists, evaluations of
resources, to their own papers, and comments on others' papers.

         Forty-seven students out of 127 volunteered to participate; however, five ceased participation before the
assignment  was   complete  and were      removed  from    the dataset. We  conducted   interviews with twelve   of  the
remaining students. We surveyed students at the beginning of the semester to establish demographic information
such as year, GPA and gender. We also asked them to describe their attitudes toward several different writing tasks
using a Likert-style scale to ensure that we interviewed individuals with a broad range of attitudes toward writing
and feelings of self-efficacy as writers.

Table 1: Description of Student Activity Online

                                                                    Sample                  Interviewees
                                                                    42 Students             12 Students
     Average number of edits                                        28.45   stdev = 17.35   28.25 stdev = 15.27
     Average number of pages edited                                 10.14 stdev = 3.95      10.92 stdev = 4.48
     Average number of resources contributed                        3.00   stdev = 2.13     2.33  stdev = 1.15
     Average number of evaluations written                          2.29   stdev = 0.89     2.50  stdev = 0.90
     Average number of evaluations received                         2.17   stdev = 1.22     1.83  stdev = 1.27
     Students who addressed at least 1 peer comment                 78.9%                   80%

Results
         Quantitative measurements of students' participation on the site, such as number of edits and number of
pages edited, suggest highly variable editing practices (See standard deviations in Table 1). Editing trends over time
indicated that the largest edits (posting whole drafts) happened just before due dates. Smaller contributions like
sharing resources and giving evaluations were more consistently spaced out over many days preceding due dates.
These   kinds of quantitative descriptions    characterize the  duration and   frequency of engagement  with    the site;
however, we sought to understand aspects of students' experiences like perception of audience and the impact of

                                                            184                                                 ICLS 2006
online interaction. Our most meaningful data came from interviews with the students and examination of their online
interactions.

Students' Online Interactions Helped Improve their Writing
         Our first research question asks to what extent students' interactions with peers on the wiki supported their
efforts to identify and rectify problems   in their reasoning  and writing. The wiki   environment  itself offered  no
procedural scaffolding for writing a political essay. To mediate the complexity of the assignment, it was given in
five stages that included collaborative research, evaluation of sources, composition of a first draft, evaluation of
others' drafts, and revision. We expected to find evidence of students supporting one another throughout the writing
process. One way of understanding how students influenced and helped one another is through the analysis of their
written interactions on the site. We examined first and final drafts of students' essays alongside evaluations that
were written by their peers to identify the kind and quantity of revisions based on peer review. We found that about
80% of students used peer evaluations to refine their papers (See Table 1). Of these, 90% addressed issues of
argument form or content.

         Our most interesting findings about the effects of peer review came from the students' reflections about the
experience. Examining artifacts alone did not provide sufficiently rich data to understand how their interactions
affected students' abilities to respond to research challenges. Students' verbal descriptions of interactions with other
students revealed how these experiences affected their research and writing practices. For example, in one instance,
a student who chose to write about the rights of foreign nationals in the U.S. explained that he had not thoroughly
considered the definitions of the terms that he was using, but another student suggested he do so, which led him to
refine the concepts in his paper. He reported that, although he was only "a little off on the definition," he had to
make that change in order for his paper to make sense.

         In another case, a student described how others' evaluations affected his ability to evaluate appropriate
information sources:

         One guy liked [the draft]. Another mentioned something about one of my sources having a liberal
         bias... I cited an ABC article, which quoted a Pentagon official. So instead, I could never find the
         Pentagon quote, but I went to a Supreme Court document that cited the same thing so I could have
         a less biased quotation. (student 5)

         This would initially seem to be a fairly low-level change; however, later, the same student described how
this realization impacted his understanding of how media sources are perceived more generally and how his research
practices are changing as a result of his experiences online. While describing his interactions with peers who held
different points of view, he explained:

         I know they respect, they enjoy Fox news as their resource but I still do not respect it as a credible
         news resource... they opened my eyes to seeing they think the exact same thing about CNN,
         which I think is crazy but I never really thought about it, so it was thought provoking and I do
         respect that, I can understand. So I try not to quote CNN as much and look for more neutral
         parties. (student 5)

Online Resources Are Not Always Perceived as Public
         Our  second  question  asked   how   publishing would   influence students' beliefs about their writing   and
motivation to write well. We assumed that students would understand the website where they published their writing
as a public place with a potential readership. We repeatedly cautioned them not to reveal their identities online
because it is a public site. To reinforce the sense that their work would serve as a resource for others, students who
consented to participate in the study were explicitly asked for permission to continue using their work when the
site's final design was launched. We were surprised that, despite the numerous cues about the public nature of the
site, some  interviewees expressed    uncertainty about  its publicness. Although they  were  well aware    that  other
students would read their papers (some first drafts were accompanied by disclaimers), many did not perceive their
participation on the site as public.

         Some interviewees suggested that their work was not important enough to attract readers. When asked to
comment on the potential audience for their papers, many students' comments suggested that they didn't believe

                                                           185                                                ICLS 2006
their writing was of sufficient quality or interest to serve as a resource for someone else. Interviewees generally
exhibited a low level of confidence in the quality of their work. Sentiments such as the following were typical:

       I don't know who would read them. Maybe other students looking for ideas for papers. I can't
       imagine that anyone would take our advice as expert advice. (student 7)

       Most interviewees did not make the connection that because the work was online, it was public. The fact
that online places are public does not mean that people perceive them as such (see Hudson & Bruckman, 2005). One
interpretation suggests that this reflects students' naïvete with respect to the privacy of online actions. One might
also construe students' reactions as adroit cynicism--an indication that they understand perfectly well the enormity
of the Web and are skeptical that anyone could find their ideas buried in a wiki with an obscure domain name.

Perceived Audience Plays an Important Role in Revision
       Our final research question asked how the public nature of the site would influence students' writing. As
stated above, the public nature of the site was not apparent to students, so their perception of audience was limited to
the class. Still, this limited audience provided sufficient diversity of readership to influence some students' writing.
One student who chose to write about gender equality in sports discovered that some of her peers held views that
were in extreme opposition to her own. She explained:

       I chose [to write about] Title IX and it was something that I felt pretty strong about because it
       relates to pretty much the equality of women, or it did. And I'm a pretty big feminist. (laughs) I
       get made fun of for being a feminist a lot of times, so, it was what mostly closely related to what I
       have personal experience with. (student 10)

When she described the views of two classmates whose papers she reviewed, she explained that:

       He was very blunt and like "physically women should not be--are not athletes, it's obvious they
       can't run as fast." And he's like "and they're meant to--their purpose is to have babies and not to
       run a full mile or whatever in four minutes." He's like, "men can just perform better so why waste
       our energy on women." And he's like, "We should just put all the money dumped into the men."
       So this is the paper I was reading. (student 10)

       In this case, the experience led a student to engage in precisely the kind of audience-aware writing that we
hoped online interaction would engender:

       I could tell [they] were guys, just because of the way they wrote. Well, and what they were talking
       about too. They were also talking about Title IX. And, they brought out something that I found
       was very interesting. They brought out the point that it's almost like, ah, the men are starting to get
       discriminated about. I never thought about it that way before. It kind of made me a little bit more
       giving in my paper when I wrote it... if [those two] were reading my paper I wanted to make sure
       that they weren't going to read the first couple of sentences and be like, "huh, this person's crazy,
       I'm not reading this." Because I was exactly the very opposite of what they wrote. (student 10)

       Confronted with a real, potentially   diverse    audience, this student adopted sophisticated strategies        for
presenting her ideas. While writing, she invoked that broad audience to guide her revisions. Likewise, the student
whose resources were critiqued for being too liberal adopted the practice of invoking audience to consider what
kinds of information resources could best support his arguments given a diverse readership. In his interview, he
explained that he has begun using this critical practice in other writing assignments, too. It is interesting to note that,
in these cases, a review of the artifacts created by students would have failed to reveal their changed practices. The
actual papers and reviews contained nothing as extreme as the interviewees described. It appears that affective
response to others' views was what influenced their writing, especially in the case of the feminist. Her learning
experience was only obtainable through direct questioning.

       Finally, one student explicitly stated that having an audience who can comment on what is written directly
supports efforts to write clearly and to write well. Interestingly, the final line of her statement indicates that getting
feedback from peers is, to this student, ultimately in service of the professor's experience as a reader of the paper:

                                                        186                                                ICLS 2006
       When people read what you have down... they haven't researched it, they don't know anything
       about it and whether they understand it or not is your whole thing. If they don't understand it, then
       you have to go by whatever they say. And I think it's a good system because they're going to tell
       you "well, I would understand it better if you did this." And then that's what you need to do.
       Because the professor's not going to have done research on all this stuff. (student 8)

Lessons Learned and Design Guidelines for Future Work
       This pilot study represents the initial iteration in a series of design studies that explore connections between
authentic   writing experiences   and the effectiveness   of  writing-to-learn activities. Several lessons  and   design
guidelines will shape our work moving forward. With respect to real world authenticity, we learned that audience is
both critical and elusive. Even on the Internet, if we hope to influence student writers by creating a public venue for
their work, exposing the very existence of a reader is something that needs to be considered in the design of the
publishing environment.

       We      supported  authentic   academic writing   practices--careful  citation and   evaluation  of  sources--by
structuring the assignment. One of our ultimate goals is to create flexible, lightweight software that can support
disciplinary writing   practices for student authors.  By using  existing  technology  and   creating  structure through
classroom practice rather than by loading the software with features, we were able to evaluate how much structure to
embed in the software. Wiki software is ill-equipped to consistently depict relationships among information types;
we determined    that, at a minimum,    the  interface should  make  clear connections     among  students' writing, the
resources they use, and feedback about their writing and those resources. If students cannot find peers' comments or
resources, they cannot learn from them. When using a wiki with a large number of students, it is essential to provide
features for organizing the inevitable information sprawl--our study generated over 700 unique pages. We are
currently developing a sourcing toolkit that will standardize relationships among articles, sources and evaluations.

       To    align  assessment   with the learning activities  (authentic assessment), we   gave   the course instructor
information about students' editing activity to help him assess their participation over the course of the semester.
This information was generated from log files and was not available to the instructor within the wiki system on
demand. We are currently developing teacher tools to organize information about class participation and student
contributions in the wiki system.

Wiki as a Paradigm and Its Potential to Support Learning: Moving Forward
       Although wiki-supported information resources are not without problems, they signal a unique opportunity
for student writers to enrich public discourse in a way that serves a real purpose and engages a real audience. The
success of Wikipedia in engaging volunteer writers and editors to do complex and intellectually demanding work
can serve as an inspiration for creating publication venues that support writing-to-learn. Despite the absence of a
traditional formal  review  process,  Wikipedia  writers  produce  a highly    standardized  form  of  academic  writing
(Emigh & Herring, 2005). We propose that this model can be leveraged to engage students in authentic collaborative
academic writing activities.

       Our pilot work suggests that audience plays a critical role in creating meaningful and effective writing-to-
learn experiences. A sense of audience is a vital part of written communication. Academic writing is an act of
meaning making not by the writer alone or even by the writer for the benefit of a particular reader. Creating meaning
through written language is a process supported by the understanding and disposition of both the reader and the
writer (Long, 1990). Instead of viewing texts as autonomous, immutable containers of information, we can regard
written communications of all kinds as (sometimes painfully) human efforts to invite collaborative meaning making.
Some students who participated in our study reported that they reflected on the potential audience for their writing
and that it affected their revisions. These results suggest that publishing can encourage students to adopt the view
that writing is one part of a collaborative process that involves both their efforts and the disposition and ability of
their readers.

       Moving forward, we are creating a new wiki publishing environment based on the software underlying
Wikipedia. Science Online will be an online science encyclopedia collaboratively authored by high school and
undergraduate students. Using design guidelines derived from our pilot study, we are currently developing two
extensions to existing wiki software: teacher tools for assessment and class management, and a citation toolkit to

                                                           187                                                 ICLS 2006
provide explicit support for academic writing practices like citation and source evaluation. In future work with the
Science Online system, we intend to further explore the relationship between perceived and invoked audience and
characteristics of collaborative publishing on wikis that can give rise to more powerful learning experiences for
student writers.

References
Barab, S. & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences 13(1), 1-14.
Bereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
        Associates.
Bos, N. & Krajcik, J. (1998). Students' awareness of audience in web-published science writing. Paper presented at
        the American Educational Research Association, 1998, San Diego, CA.
Britton, J., Burgess, N, McLeod, A. & Rosen, H. (1975). The development of writing abilities. London: Macmillan.
Bruns, A. & Humphreys, S. (2005). Wikis in teaching and assessment: The M/Cyclopedia project. Proceedings of
        the ACM WikiSym 05: International Symposium on Wikis, San Diego, CA, 25-32.
Bryant, S., Forte, A. & Bruckman, A. (2005). Becoming Wikipedian: transformation of participation in a
        collaborative online encyclopedia. Proceedings of ACM GROUP: International Conference on Supporting
        Group Work, Sanibel Island, FL, 1-10.
Cohen, M. & Riel, M. (1989). The effect of distant audiences on students' writing. American Educational Research
        Journal 26(2), 143-159.
Emig, J. (1977). Writing as a mode of learning. College Composition and Communication, 28, 122-127.
Emigh, W. & Herring, S. (2005). Collaborative authoring on the web: A genre analysis of online encyclopedias.
        Proceedings of the Hawai'ian International Conference on System Sciences.
Giles, J. (2005). Internet encyclopaedias go head to head. Nature, 438, 900-901.
Guzdial, M., Rick, J. & Kehoe, C. (2001). Beyond adoption to invention: Teacher-created collaborative activities in
        higher education. Journal of the Learning Sciences 10(3), 265-279.
Harel, I. & Papert, S. (1991). Software design as a learning environment. Constructionism (pp. 41-84). Norwood:
        Ablex.
Hudson, J. M. & Bruckman, A. (2005). Using empirical data to reason about Internet research ethics. Proceedings of
        the European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
        University Press.
Leuf, B. & Cunningham, W. (2001). The wiki way. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Lih, A. (2004). Wikipedia as participatory journalism: Reliable sources? Metrics for evaluating collaborative media
        as a news resource. Paper presented at the Fifth International Symposium on Online Journalism, Austin,
        TX.
Linn, M. C., Davis, E. & Bell, P. (2004). Internet environments for science education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
        Erlbaum Associates.
Long, R. (1990). The writer's audience: Fact or fiction? In Kirsch, G. and Roen, D. (Eds.), A sense of audience in
        written communication (pp. 73-84). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Rick, J. & Guzdial, M. (2006). Situating CoWeb: A scholarship of application. International Journal of Computer-
        Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(1).
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. In Koschmann, T.
        (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 249-68). Mahwah, NJ; London: Lawrence
        Erlbaum Associates.
Schaffer, D. W. & Resnick, M. (1999). "Thick" authenticity: New media and authentic learning. Journal of
        Interactive Learning Research 10(2), 195-215.
Viegas, F., Wattenberg, M. & Dave, K. (2004). Studying cooperation and conflict between authors with history flow
        visualizations. Proceedings of CHI 2004, Vienna, Austria, 575-582
Wigginton, E. (1986). Sometimes a shining moment: The Foxfire experience. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books.

Acknowledgements
The Science Online project is supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (#0537251) and the GVU
center at Georgia  Institute of Technology. We  also thank   Amruta Lonkar  for   her valuable contributions to    the
development of the Science Online site.

                                                         188                                                ICLS 2006
