 From Evidence to Explanations: Engaging undergraduate geology
                                              students in inquiry
                                                    Xornam S. Apedoe
                         Learning Research & Development Center, University of Pittsburgh
                                         3939 O'Hara St., Pittsburgh, PA, 15260
                                                     xapedoe@pitt.edu

         Abstract: This paper reports the synthesis of six case studies of students' engagement in inquiry-
         based learning activities in an undergraduate geology course. Details of how students engaged in
         the scientific inquiry practices of formulating explanations from evidence, and communicating and
         justifying  proposed    explanations    are    presented.  Data    for  this   study  included  classroom
         observations   and  archival  data  (i.e., student   work  samples)    collected   during a  semester-long
         investigation. The results suggest that students were able to appropriate these inquiry practices
         with varying degrees of success, however, it was not without its challenges.         A detailed discussion
         of the ways in which students were successful, and where they had challenges engaging in these
         inquiry practices   is presented,  with    the goal  of helping guide   practitioners  and  researchers in
         creating learning environments that can take full advantage of the pedagogical strategy of inquiry-
         based learning.

Background
         [G]eology is both a body of knowledge and a way of thinking and doing things.             That is, there are
         things that we do operationally as well as things we know. Often in undergraduate education there
         is a tendency to emphasize the knowledge but not the way of thinking and doing.
                                                                                          (Buchwald, 1997, p. 327)

         Blueprint  for Change:   A    Report from   The  National    Conference    on  the Revolution  in Earth and   Space
Science Education (Barstow & Geary, 2002) details a new vision for teaching and learning in the earth sciences.
Blueprint for Change advocates adopting a `science-as-a- verb' perspective that emphasizes the human elements
(e.g., successes, failures and emotional dispositions) that are associated with engaging in science as inquiry (Yore,
Florence, Pearson,  &   Weaver,   2002).   This  is in  direct opposition   to  the `science-as-a-noun'  perspective,  which
stresses textbook   knowledge,   lists and procedures    about   scientific processes.  Geoscience    education  should  help
students develop thinking skills such as inquiry, visual literacy, understanding of systems and models and the ability
to apply knowledge and problem solving to a range of substantive, real-world issues (Barstow & Geary, 2002). To
accomplish such goals, Blueprint for Change recommends that science educators emphasize using inquiry-based
learning  and visualization     technologies  in the    classroom,  laboratories,    and  other  environments    to   promote
understanding of the earth as a system of processes. These recommendations are based on the National Science
Education  Standards    (NSES)    (National   Research    Council,    1996)  and    the Benchmarks     for  Science   Literacy
(American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1993) (Barstow & Geary, 2002).

         Although the NSES were aimed specifically at K-12 students and teachers, the recommendations contained
in the reforms can and should be generalized to college science teaching (McIntosh, 2000). There are a number of
undergraduate  geoscience    educators  that  have   utilized  inquiry-based   teaching   methods  in their courses   (Keller,
Allen-King, & O'Brien, 2000), but integrating inquiry-based teaching methods in undergraduate science instruction
may be even more difficult than integrating inquiry methods into K-12 learning environments. Inquiry as a teaching
methodology   and   learning experience    emphasizes    providing  students    with  opportunities  to engage  in  activities
similar to those required for real-world scientific research.      When learners are engaged in inquiry-based learning
environments they should (National Research Council, 2000): (a) be engaged in scientifically oriented questions;
(b) give priority to evidence, allowing them to develop and evaluate explanations that address scientifically oriented
questions; (c) formulate explanations from evidence to address scientifically oriented questions; (d) evaluate their
explanations  in light  of alternative  explanations,    particularly those    reflecting scientific understanding;   and (e)
communicate and justify their proposed explanations. These five elements are essential characteristics of an inquiry-
based learning environment.

                                                               2                                                    ICLS 2006
         The   majority of research  and  development    on   inquiry-based      programs and    curricula  have  been  at   the
elementary and secondary school levels (Cavallo, Potter, & Rozman, 2004) and have focused on demonstrating the
benefits of inquiry for the development of students' cognitive abilities such as critical thinking, scientific reasoning,
and  understanding   of scientific concepts.  However,    with    the current    emphasis on    learning not  only  scientific
knowledge, but also the processes and procedures that produced such knowledge (inquiry), educational researchers
have become increasingly interested in students' understanding and ability to appropriate scientific inquiry practices
(Kanari & Millar, 2004).   It is important that we know what is being done, and how it is being done, when students
are engaged in inquiry activities (Wheeler, 2000), so that we can develop guidelines for successfully incorporating
inquiry activities into classrooms at all educational levels.

         Although    there is  currently  little research  examining        how  students    are engaging    in   inquiry  and
appropriating specific inquiry practices, research studies like those conducted by Krajcik et al. (1998), Hofstein,
Shore,  and   Kipnis (2004),  and  Kanari and    Millar (2004)    are  examples    of  what  is  needed.    While these   three
noteworthy studies provide much needed insight into how students at the middle and high school level are engaged
in inquiry, and what they are doing while engaged in inquiry activities, research is still needed to illuminate the
experiences of students pursuing inquiry in higher education. The value of such research is that it can be used to help
inform educators of appropriate instructional practices to promote effective learning through inquiry (Krajcik et al.,
1998).  By examining students' engagement in inquiry at all levels of education, educational researchers will be able
to begin to develop guidelines and recommendations for ways to effectively utilize support from teachers, peers, or
technology to enhance student participation in inquiry processes.

         This  paper  reports the  synthesis of  six case  studies    of students' engagement     in inquiry-based   learning
activities in an undergraduate   geology  laboratory  that utilized   teaching   and  learning   strategies supportive  of   the
recommendations    found   in Blueprint  for Change.  Thus,     a goal   of this research is to  describe   realistically what
college students do, and where they experience challenges, when engaged in the inquiry practices of formulating
explanations and communicating and justifying their findings. Studies such as this are necessary if we are to begin to
help practitioners and  researchers  create  learning environments       that can take  full advantage   of  the  pedagogical
strategy of inquiry-based learning.

The Study
         The data for this paper was derived from a semester-long investigation of the use of inquiry-based learning
activities supported by access to, and use of, resources in a digital library. Although data was collected documenting
how students engaged in the various inquiry practices outlined in the NSES, of primary interest here is how students
appropriated   and engaged    in the scientific  inquiry  practices    of   formulating explanations     from   evidence   and
communicating    and  justifying  proposed   explanations.    The  inquiry    practice of formulating    explanations     is of
particular interest because research suggests that although students are able to appropriate the inquiry practices of
designing and carrying out simple investigations, they often state conclusions that are inconsistent with or are not
warranted by their data (Kanari & Millar, 2004).     The ability to draw and justify conclusions, is an inquiry practice
that may be especially difficult for students to appropriate as it requires sophisticated thinking with which students
from middle school through graduate school may be expected to have difficulty (Krajcik et al., 1998). Thus, the
following research questions were addressed:
     1.  How do students appropriate and engage in the inquiry practice of formulating explanations from evidence
         in an inquiry-based undergraduate geology laboratory?
     2.  How do students appropriate and engage in the inquiry practice of communicating and justifying proposed
         explanations in an inquiry-based undergraduate geology laboratory?

Research Design and Methods
Research Design
         The analysis described in this paper stems from a larger interpretive qualitative study that utilized a layered
case-study approach which included both an analysis of one macro-level case and cross-case analyses of several
individuals (Patton, 2002). The unit of analysis for the investigation reported here was the individual student.

                                                              3                                                     ICLS 2006
Context and Setting
         This  research  was  conducted    in an upper-level    undergraduate  geology  course  consisting of  2  hours of
lecture and 3 hours of lab per week, taught at a large research university located in the southeastern USA.            The
author worked collaboratively with the course instructor to design the inquiry-based activities used in the laboratory
component of the course.

Course Description
         The   course  that served  as the context  for    this study focused  on  principles of paleobiology,    including
biostratigraphy, paleoecology, taphonomy, and macroevolutionary dynamics. Content for the course and laboratory
was presented in a manner consistent with inquiry-based pedagogical approaches, that is, students were given the
opportunity  to interact  with   numerous  rock  and   fossil   samples  while conducting   scientific investigations.  In
addition, students were encouraged to access dynamic and static resources available in a digital library for earth
sciences (DLESE ­ www.dlese.org).
         The inquiry tasks were structured according to guidelines for creating inquiry-based learning environments
suggested in the NSES. The inquiry-tasks used in this course were more "guided' than "open" inquiry tasks, in that
students were provided with an inquiry question to pursue and provided with a multitude of data from which to
formulate their explanations.    Unlike traditional `cookbook' laboratory activities in which all the important decisions
such as which data should be collected, how data should be analyzed, what the data means, etc. (Clough, 2002),
these inquiry tasks were designed to encourage students to actively engage in cognitive activities that are integral to
engaging  in   inquiry (e.g.  developing   alternative  explanations,    interpreting data, selecting  among    alternative
hypotheses, etc.) (Clough, 2002).   The following is an example of an inquiry task from Inquiry Assignment 1:

         Rock samples have been collected from the American west, comprising what is now Oregon and
         Washington, U.S.A. (see map provided).     The Problem: A major problem concerns whether these
         rock samples provided contain any information in regard to plate tectonics --that is, do the rocks
         indicate the assembly of western North America in any way?        Given the suite of rocks, would you
         conclude that western North America was an active or passive margin?          Additionally, do the rocks
         indicate any major environments that occurred in these areas in the past? You can use the map
         information   to interpret geologic time and/or environments as well.    For selected rock types found
         in this lab, how are they related to the rock cycle?

Participant Selection
         All students were invited to participate in this research on a voluntary basis. A total of 8 students were
enrolled in the course, of which 7 students agreed to participate in the study. One participant was excluded from the
final analysis  presented   here due to an    insufficient number   of  work samples.   Participants have  all been given
pseudonym names.

Data Collection & Sources
         For the analysis reported in this paper, student work samples were collected and used as the primary source
of data. Of the eight inquiry assignments that students completed throughout the course, four inquiry assignments
were chosen for analysis here. In addition, both the midterm and final exam (which were also inquiry-based) were
analyzed to help provide a rich picture of students' appropriation of the inquiry practices.

Data Analysis
         A  deductive   analysis  (Patton, 2002)  approach,     in which  several  questions  that related to  the inquiry
practices of interest (formulating explanations, and justifying proposed explanations), guided analysis of students'
inquiry assignments    and  exams    (See  Table  1).  These    analysis questions were   developed    based   on  research
conducted by Krajcik et al. (1998).

                                                              4                                                   ICLS 2006
Table 1. Inquiry Practices, Analysis Questions, and Data Sources

     Inquiry Process                          Analysis questions                             Data Sources
Formulate explanations from       What data did students use to formulate                  Inquiry assignments
evidence                          explanations and how did they use it?                       (lab reports)

                                  Were students accurate in interpreting the             Midterm exam (in class)
                                  data?
                                                                                         Final exam (take home)
Communicate and justify           How did students present their conclusions?              Inquiry assignments
proposed explanations                                                                         (lab reports)
                                  Did they use the data to justify their
                                  conclusions?                                           Midterm exam (in class)

                                                                                         Final exam (take home)

         Next, cases were created for each student, consisting of a summary of each student's proficiency with the
inquiry  practices of formulating     explanations from   evidence    and communicating    and   justifying  proposed
explanations.   Students  performance    on  inquiry  assignments      inquiry-based exams   were    characterized  as
demonstrating a level of `high proficiency', `moderate proficiency', or `low proficiency' for each inquiry practice.
Proficiency level was determined based on the characteristics described in Table 2.

Table 2. Proficiency Level Characteristics for Inquiry Practices

                      Formulate explanations from evidence                  Communicate and justify proposed
                                                                                        explanations
   High            Accurate in interpretation of the data                 Conclusions presented in a clear, concise
Proficiency        Provide detailed explanation of data used              manner
                   Demonstrate clear link of how data is                  Explicit reference made, and appropriate
                   connected to the presented explanation                 data used to support conclusions

 Moderate          Interpretation of data accurate the majority of        Explicit reference made, and appropriate
Proficiency        the time                                               data used to support conclusions the
                   Some explanation of data that is used                  majority of the time (but not always)
                   Attempt to connect data to explanation but may
                   be unclear or unspecific

   Low             Incorrect interpretation of data majority of the       Conclusions presented in convoluted
Proficiency        time                                                   manner
                   Little or no explanation of data that is used is       Conclusions stated without reference to
                   provided                                               data collected
                   Unclear how data collected is connected to
                   explanation presented

Results
Formulate explanations from evidence

         As to be expected, students were able to appropriate this inquiry practice with varying levels of success.
Table 3 presents a summary of each student's proficiency with the inquiry practice of formulating explanations from
evidence for each inquiry assignment and exam.      A  more  detailed   description of students' proficiency with  the
inquiry practices is described below.

                                                          5                                                   ICLS 2006
Table 3. Participants' Proficiency Formulating Explanations from Evidence

Assignments                                                    Participants
 & Exams              Karen             Jake           Jackson            Melanie             Robin           Kyle
      1               High             High               Low            Moderate             High           Moderate
      2               High             High               High           Moderate             Low             Low
      3               Low              High               Low               N/A               High            High
      4               High             High               High           Moderate             High            High
  Midterm          Moderate            High            Moderate          Moderate             High           Moderate
    Final             High            Moderate         Moderate          Moderate             Low             Low

         Amongst all the students, Karen, Jake and Robin demonstrated the highest levels of proficiency with this
inquiry practice. Karen, Jake, and Robin, throughout the semester most consistently demonstrated their ability to
formulate explanations based on evidence.    In each of their lab reports, and on their exams, these students most often
provided detailed explanations of the data they used, demonstrated how this data was connected to the explanation
they put forth, and were highly accurate in their interpretation of their data. The following is a brief excerpt from
Jake's 1st lab report, demonstrating his high level of proficiency with this inquiry practice:

         ...The first thing we would examine was the rocks locality, in order to obtain the context of this
         rock's formation within the suite of 30.    Then we would try and determine what type of rock we
         were   looking at, a process  which  has  a  method   to it as  well.  For this, we would determine
         whether the rock was sedimentary, igneous, or metamorphic, as the processes associated with the
         creation of each is very telling about the environment that they were created in.       If the rock was
         sedimentary, we would see if the rock would react with HCL, as a reaction would tell us that there
         was carbonate sediments in the rock, which suggest a marine setting...

In this excerpt, Jake describes the type of data collected (i.e., rock locality, type of rock) and how it can be used to
formulate explanations.  This excerpt from Jake's lab report is representative of the quality of Karen and Robin's
work samples as well.

         Jackson,  Kyle  and  Melanie   demonstrated   moderate    levels  of  proficiency in  appropriating  the inquiry
practice of formulating explanations from evidence. Each student faced a different challenge in trying to appropriate
this inquiry practice, resulting in varying levels of successful appropriation. For example, although in class Jackson
was an   active participant with  his group  and quite able   to verbally  connect   the data he was collecting   with his
explanations, he failed to translate this to his written lab report.    Thus, he would often lose points on his inquiry
report for omitting such details. For example, on his first lab report Jackson states: "After examining the given rock
samples, it is evident that the rocks in question tell us much about the formation of southwestern North America..."
Although this may be considered a good introductory sentence, Jackson does not provide further details regarding
how the rocks were examined, or the types of data that were obtained from the rock samples to warrant making such
a claim.  However, as the semester progressed Jackson made great strides in appropriating this inquiry practice,
providing more details, and connecting his data to his explanations.        Despite Jackson's propensity to neglect to
supply detail, he was often accurate in his interpretation of the data (e.g., rock type, depositional environment, etc.).

         Kyle's challenges to appropriating this inquiry practice were similar to those of Jackson's, in that Kyle
often provided   only a vague  explanation   of  the data he  used   to generate his  proposed   explanation.  Kyle  also
experienced some   difficulty in  correctly identifying   and interpreting  his data.    Although he made great strides
throughout the semester, Kyle's final exam performance was the lowest grade of the group, suggesting that he may
not have adequately appropriated the inquiry practice after all.

         Finally, Melanie    demonstrated   only  moderate    success   in  appropriating  the   practice of  formulating
explanations from evidence. Her performance was consistent throughout the semester, that is, she demonstrated very
little improvement in her appropriation of the inquiry practice of formulating explanations from evidence.         Of the
three students  characterized as  demonstrating  moderate   proficiency   with  this inquiry  practice, Melanie  could be
characterized as being the least proficient of the three. Melanie often only vaguely explained what data she used to
reach her explanations, however her interpretation of the data was highly accurate the majority of the time.     Below is
an excerpt from Melanie's 1st lab report:

                                                            6                                                    ICLS 2006
         ...Upon  examination    of   [the samples   from] both  roads  T   and  S,  it was   determined  that both
         Arizona and New Mexico were part of an active margin...although there are some discrepancies
         in order  which    may    be explained    with further  research,  there   is  solid evidence of   oceanic
         activities...

In this excerpt Melanie briefly mentions that based on the data she collected from the samples representing rocks
along roads T and S, she was able to make some conclusions regarding the geological past of the area. However,
Melanie is not specific about what data she has collected that has allowed her to formulate such an explanation.
This excerpt is representative of the amount of detail that Melanie would typically provide in her reports.

Communicate and justify proposed explanations
         Overall, the students became increasingly competent with this inquiry practice, becoming more familiar
with scientific discourse and methods for presenting their findings.       With detailed feedback from the instructor, the
students were able to appropriate this inquiry practice fairly well.    A few students (i.e. Jake and Karen) were quite
proficient  with this  practice  almost    from  the outset   of the  course.  For   other  students  (i.e. Jackson)  steady
improvement in appropriating and engaging in this practice was documented. Unfortunately, for at least one student
(i.e. Melanie) no change was documented in her ability to appropriate or engage in this inquiry practice. Table 4
presents a  summary     of each    student's  proficiency  with  the inquiry  practice   of   communicating    and  justifying
proposed explanations for each inquiry assignment and exam.

Table 4. Participants' Proficiency Communicating and Justifying Proposed Explanations

Assignments                                                      Participants
 & Exams               Karen               Jake           Jackson           Melanie            Robin             Kyle
     1                 High             High               Low                Low                High            High
     2                 High             High               High               Low             Moderate         Moderate
     3                 High             High               Low                N/A                High          Moderate
     4                 High             High               High               Low             Moderate           High
  Midterm              High             High             Moderate          Moderate              High          Moderate
    Final              High             High             Moderate             Low                Low             Low

Discussion & Conclusions
         Although, the students in this study occasionally made incorrect interpretations of their data, this did not
seem to  be  the crux   of their difficulty   engaging  in the  inquiry practice  of   formulating explanations  from  data.
Rather, difficulty for some of the students seemed to stem from their inability to express in writing what they often
times were able to express verbally.    Research with eighth-grade students suggests that the use of a writing heuristic
can facilitate students'   ability to generate   meaning    from  data, thus  making     connections   between  procedures,
evidence and claims (Hofstein, Shore & Kipnis, 2004).          Thus, it may have been beneficial to utilize more direct
instruction in strategies  for generating   explanations,  or  perhaps  the instructor  could  have  modeled   this on more
occasions.  Alternatively,  scaffolding    of this outcome    could  have   been  provided    in the  form  of examples   of
exemplary lab reports to help foster students' abilities to express in writing the connection between their data and
explanations.

         The students in this study showed varying levels of competence communicating and justifying proposed
explanations initially, but all made great strides by the end of the course.     Difficulties with this inquiry practice did
not appear to stem from lack of scientific knowledge, but rather a difficulty in expressing their knowledge in an
appropriate scientific form.   However, with feedback from the instructor and TA on their final lab reports, most
students developed proficiency with this inquiry practice by the end of the course. Thus, appropriate modeling and
feedback may be essential for students to successfully appropriate this practice.

         This  research  has   provided a   much-needed    description  of  how  undergraduate    science   (geology) majors
engage in inquiry practices in an inquiry-based course. The benefits of engaging in inquiry are well documented,
however inquiry-based teaching and learning approaches pose challenges for both instructors and students (Krajcik
et al., 1998). For the most part, these students appeared to truly engage in inquiry, rather than superficially engaging
in the science activities, thus lending support to the notion that inquiry-based learning approaches can, and should be
utilized in undergraduate science courses. Studies such as this are necessary if we are to begin to help practitioners

                                                              7                                                     ICLS 2006
and researchers create learning environments that can take full advantage of the pedagogical strategy of inquiry-
based learning.

References
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1993). Benchmarks for science literacy. New York, NY:
         Oxford University Press.
Barstow,  D., &    Geary, E.  (Eds.).  (2002).  Blueprint for   change: Report   from the  national  conference  on  the
         revolution in earth and space science education. Cambridge, MA: Technical Education Research Center.
Buchwald, C. E., 1997, Undergraduate geology education: The Carleton College experience. Journal of College
         Science Teaching, v. March/April, p. 325-328.
Cavallo, A. M. L., Potter, W. H., & Rozman, M. (2004). Gender differences in learning constructs, shifts in learning
         constructs, and their relationship to course achievement in a structured inquiry, yearlong college physics
         course for life science majors. School Science and Mathematics, 104(6), 288-300.
Clough, M. P., 2002. Using the laboratory to enhance student learning. In Bybee, R. W., editor, Learning science
         and the science of learning, Arlington, VA, National Science Teachers Association, p. 85-96.
Ezzy, D. (2002). Qualitative analysis: Practice and innovation. Crows Nest, NSW: Routledge.
Gerber, B. L., Cavallo, A. M. L., & Marek, E. A. (2001). Relationships among informal learning environments,
         teaching  procedures  and   scientific reasoning ability. International Journal  of Science Education,    23(5),
         535-549.
Haury,    D.    L.   (1993).   Teaching     science    through     inquiry.  Retrieved     March    28,  2005,     from
         http://www.ericdigests.org/1993/inquiry.htm
Hofstein, A., Shore,  R., &   Kipnis,  M.  (2004).  Providing   high school  chemistry   students with  opportunities to
         develop   learning  skills in an inquiry-type   laboratory: A  case  study.  International Journal  of Science
         Education, 26(1), 47-62.
Kanari,  Z., &  Millar,   R. (2004).   Reasoning   from   data: How   students   collect and interpret  data in science
         investigations. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(7), 748-769.
Keller, C. K., Allen-King, R. M., & O'Brien, R. (2000). A framework for integrating quantitative geologic problem
         solving into courses across the undergraduate geology curriculum. Journal of Geoscience Education, 48(4),
         459-463.
Krajcik, J., Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., Bass, K. M., Fredricks, J., & Soloway, E. (1998). Inquiry in project-
         based science classrooms: Initial attempts by middle school students. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,
         7(3&4), 313-350.
McIntosh, W. J. (2000). Beyond 2000- The changing face of undergraduate science education. Journal of College
         Science Teaching, 379-380.
National  Research  Council.  (1996).  National   science education  standards.  Washington,   DC:  National   Academy
         Press.
National Research Council. (2000). Inquiry and the national science education standards: A guide for teaching and
         learning. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Wheeler, G. F. (2000). The three faces of inquiry. In J. Minstrell & E. H. van Zee (Eds.), Inquiring into inquiry
         learning and teaching in science (pp. 14-19). Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement
         of Science.
Yore, L. D., Florence, M. K., Pearson, T. W., & Weaver, A. J. (2002). Written discourse in scientific communities: A
         conversation with   two scientists about  their  views of science, use  of language, role  of writing  in doing
         science, and compatibility between their epistemic views and language. Paper presented at the International
         Conference on the Ontological, Epistemological, Linguistic and Pedagogical Considerations of Language
         and Science Literacy: Empowering Research and Informing Instruction, University of Victoria, Victoria,
         Canada.

Author Note
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0304895. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

                                                             8                                                 ICLS 2006
