Exploring Differences Between Gifted and Grade-Level Students' Use
           of Self-Regulatory Learning Processes with Hypermedia
                       Jeffrey A. Greene, Daniel C. Moos, Roger Azevedo, Fielding I. Winters
                    University of Maryland, 3304 Benjamin Building, College Park, MD 20742
             Email: jgreene@umd.edu, danmoos@msn.com, razevedo@umd.edu, fwinters@umd.edu

         Abstract: Research comparing gifted and grade-level students has shown they display differences
         in their knowledge of self-regulatory strategies. However, little research exists regarding whether
         these students differ in their use of these strategies. This study aimed to address this question by
         examining think-aloud data collected from gifted and grade-level students engaging in a complex
         learning task while utilizing a hypermedia environment to learn about the circulatory system. We
         also examined both declarative knowledge and mental model measures of learning to determine
         whether these groups differed in their actual performance. Our results show that gifted students
         did outperform grade-level students in all outcome measures. In addition, gifted students more
         often utilized more sophisticated self-regulatory strategies than grade-level students. Grade-level
         students were  more  likely to use  less effective  strategies that  do not promote  the   encoding   of
         knowledge. Recommendations for future intervention studies are based upon these findings.

         Special  educational programs    for gifted  students exist    because   these   students seem    to learn  more
successfully than their grade-level  peers.  However,  the   question   as to why  these  students  are more    successful
remains somewhat of a mystery. Numerous authors have suggested that students in general are more successful
when they  engage   in self-regulated learning  (SRL;  Azevedo,   2005;    Boekaerts    & Corno,   2005;   Pintrich, 2000;
Winne, 1995). Recent research examining how students learn complex and challenging tasks has suggested that
successful students deploy   key self-regulatory  strategies  and processes    (Azevedo   &  Cromley,    2004;  Azevedo,
Cromley, & Seibert, 2004; Azevedo, Cromley, Winters, Moos, & Greene., 2005). These studies have focused on
actual learning tasks and utilized more objective data-collection techniques such as think-aloud protocols. In this
study, we aim to determine whether gifted students deploy SRL more effectively than their grade-level peers by
using think-aloud protocols and a pretest-posttest design to analyze students' learning of a complex and challenging
task with a hypermedia environment. If gifted students do perform more successfully, we assert that their use of
SRL may be one reason why gifted students outperform their grade-level peers. If true, then this suggests specific
interventions for helping grade-level students learn complex and challenging tasks.

Gifted versus Grade Level Students
         Definitions of gifted students have focused upon the interaction of creativity, task commitment, and above-
average ability (Renzulli, 2002), More recently, however, researchers have been examining differences in the use of
metacognition between gifted and grade level students. For example, research has found gifted students possess
more declarative  knowledge   regarding   metacognitive   strategies, and  more   complex   strategies  in general   (Carr,
Alexander, & Schwanenflugel, 1996; Alexander, Carr & Schwanenflugel, 1995). This elaborate understanding and
use of more complex strategies may be what causes gifted students to be more likely to transfer these strategies to
other domains (Carr et al., 1996). Based upon these studies, gifted students clearly possess more metacognitive
skills, but the question remains as to how this influences their learning.

         Surprisingly, while  these  studies have  found  a  difference  in   students' understanding   of  metacognitive
monitoring strategies, they have not found significant differences between gifted and grade level students in terms of
their actual use of metacognitive skills and monitoring processes (Carr et al., 1996; Zimmerman & Martinez-Ponz,
1990). It is counter-intuitive that gifted students would possess more knowledge of SRL strategies than grade-level
students but  not actually deploy    them differentially. However,      much   of the   research in  this  area has   been
correlational, focusing on surveys rather than learning tasks or objective measures of learning. In addition, many
studies of SRL have relied upon student self-report data, as opposed to more reliable methods such as think-alouds
(Azevedo   & Cromley,   2004;  Azevedo    et al., 2005).  Therefore,  while   theory  would  suggest   that   one possible
explanation for the greater success of gifted students is their understanding of metacognitive skills and processes, the
current research does not support this claim. We hypothesize that the utilization of actual learning tasks, coupled

                                                          210                                                    ICLS 2006
with the collection of think-aloud data, would reveal differences in both performance and use of SRL strategies and
processes between gifted and grade-level students.

Contributions of Current Study
         This study contributes to the literature on gifted and grade level students by gathering both product and
process data regarding students' learning of a complex and complicated task such as learning about the circulatory
system. The use of a pretest-posttest design allows for the analysis of knowledge gains for each group to determine
whether the gifted students truly are learning more as expected. In addition, the collection of think-aloud data allows
us a more objective tool for collecting data regarding student use of SRL processes. We believe that our research
design, including an actual learning task with pretest and posttest measures coupled with think-aloud data collection
procedures, will demonstrate that one key difference between gifted and grade level students is their use of SRL
strategies and processes.
         The hypotheses of this study are as follows:
         (1) Gifted students will be more likely to display a more sophisticated mental model of the circulatory
             system at posttest than grade-level students.
         (2) Gifted students' posttest scores on measures of declarative knowledge will be statistically significantly
             higher than those of grade-level students, after controlling for pretest scores.
         (3) Gifted students will utilize key SRL strategies and processes more frequently than grade-level students,
             after  controlling for    variations in the total number  of  SRL     strategies and processes used   by each
             student.

Method
Participants
         Ninety-  eight  (N=98)   middle-school    (7th grade) students  from  a   secondary   school located  in the mid-
Atlantic region received community service credit for participating in the spring of 2004 and 2005. Forty-nine of the
students attended regular, grade-level instruction classes. The mean age of these students was 12.2 years (28 girls
and 21 boys).

         The  other 49   students were    in a gifted   program  that provides highly   able,  middle  school  students an
interdisciplinary educational program that goes beyond the local school gifted and talented programs. The mean age
of the 7th grade gifted students was 12.2 years (17 girls and 32 boys). The students in both programs had had little
exposure to the circulatory system in science class, and the pretest confirmed that all participants had average or
little knowledge of the circulatory system.

Measures
         The paper-and-pencil materials consisted of a parental consent form, a participant questionnaire, a pretest,
and a posttest. All of the paper-and-pencil materials were identical to the ones previously used by Azevedo and
colleagues (in press, 2005, 2004). The parental consent form had been signed prior to students' participation in the
study. The participant questionnaire solicited information concerning age, gender, number of science classes taken,
and if the circulatory system was covered in those classes.

         The pretest and posttest were constructed in consultation with a science teacher and nurse practitioner.
There were   four  parts to the pretest:  (a)  a  sheet  on  which students  were   asked to   match  13 words  with  their
corresponding definitions related to the circulatory system (matching); (b) a color picture of the heart on which
students were asked to label 14 components (labeling); and, (c) a sheet which contained the instruction, "Please
write down everything you can about the circulatory system. Be sure to include all the parts and their purpose,
explain  how  they  work  both  individually   and   together,   and  also explain  how   they  contribute  to the healthy
functioning of the body" (mental model essay); (d) an outline of the human body on which the students were asked
to list in order eight structures (a list of terms was provided) related to the circulatory system to represent the flow of
blood through the body (flow diagram). The posttest was identical to the pretest.

Hypermedia Learning Environment
         The participants used Microsoft Encarta's Reference SuiteTM (2003) hypermedia environment installed on a
laptop to learn about the circulatory system. During the training phase, learners were shown the three most relevant
articles in the environment     (i.e., circulatory   system, blood,  and   heart), which  contained   multiple  sources of

                                                             211                                                  ICLS 2006
information, including text, static diagrams, photographs, and a digitized animation depicting the structure, behavior,
and functioning of the circulatory system. Together these three articles comprised 16,900 words, 18 sections, 107
hyperlinks, and 35 illustrations. During learning, participants were allowed to use all of the features incorporated in
Encarta such as the search functions, hyperlinks, and multiple sources of information, and were allowed to navigate
freely within the environment.

Procedure
         After the parental consent form was collected, participants were pulled out of their regular class and tested
individually. First, the participants filled out the questionnaire. Second, the pretest was handed out, and participants
were given 20 minutes to complete it without access to any instructional materials. After the pretest, an experimenter
gave each participant a short introduction to using and navigating within Encarta. Finally, the experimenter read the
following instructions for the learning task to the participants, and provided it to them in writing: "You are being
presented  with a  hypermedia   encyclopedia, which   contains   textual information, static  diagrams,   and  a  digitized
video clip of the circulatory system. We are trying to learn more about how students use hypermedia environments
to learn about the circulatory system. Your task is to learn all you can about the circulatory system in 40 minutes.
Make sure you learn about the different parts and their purpose, how they work both individually and together, and
how   they  support the   human   body. We  ask  you  to  `think aloud'  continuously   while you  use    the hypermedia
environment to learn about the circulatory system. I'll be here in case anything goes wrong with the computer or the
equipment. Please remember that it is very important to say everything that you are thinking while you are working
on this task."

         Participants then began the learning session, and an experimenter remained nearby to remind them to keep
verbalizing when they were silent for more than three seconds (e.g., "Say what you are thinking"). All participants
were given a 40-minute learning time to use the hypermedia environment, and they had access to the instructions
during the learning session. Participants were allowed to takes notes and draw during the learning session, although
not all chose to do so. After the learning session, all participants were given 20 minutes to complete the posttest
without their notes or any other instructional materials.

Coding and Scoring
    In this section we describe the coding of the students' mental models, the students' answers for the matching
task, the labeling of the heart diagram and the flow diagram, the segmentation of the students' verbalizations while
they were learning about the circulatory system, the coding scheme we used to analyze the students' regulatory
behavior, and inter-rater agreement.

Mental models
         Our analyses focused on participants' mental models at pretest and posttest. We followed Azevedo and
colleagues' method (Azevedo & Cromley, 2004; Azevedo, Cromley, & Seibert, 2004; Azevedo, Guthrie, & Seibert,
2004; Azevedo et al., 2005) for analyzing the participants' mental models, which is based on Chi and colleagues'
research (Chi et al., 1994, 2000, 2005). A student's initial and final mental models of how the circulatory system
works  were  derived   from their  statements on  the pretest  and posttest  essays, respectively.    The coding  scheme
consists of 3 mental model categories which represent the progression from a low level of understanding to a high
level of understanding.   The model   categories  were   designed  to capture qualitative,  not quantitative   changes in
participants' understanding of the circulatory system. A participant was placed in the "low" mental model category
if he or she   did not demonstrate  an  understanding   above  a single-loop  path of   the circulatory system,   with no
mention of the lungs. A participant with an "intermediate" understanding of the circulatory system demonstrated he
or she understood that the circulatory system was a single loop with lungs. Finally, a participant placed in the "high"
mental model category demonstrated he or she understood the double-loop concept of the circulatory system.

         Due   to  the qualitative nature of  the mental   models  used   to  measure   learners' understanding    of  the
circulatory system   (for pretest and posttest), we  examined    whether  there was   a statistically significant relation
between group and the distribution of participants' mental models at pretest and posttest. Our hypotheses were that
there would be no such relation at pretest, given that the students had little to no prior knowledge of the circulatory
system, but that the posttest would reveal differences.

Matching task, labeling of the heart diagram, and blood flow diagram

                                                           212                                                   ICLS 2006
                                                                            The matching task was scored by giving each student either a 1 (for a correct match between a concept and
its corresponding definition) or a 0 (for an incorrect match between a concept and definition) on his/her pretest and
posttest (range 0-13). Similarly, the heart diagram was scored by giving each student either a 1 (for each correctly
labeled component of the heart) or a 0 (for each incorrect label) (range 0-14). The flow diagram was scored by
giving each student a 1 (for correct placement of a provided term) or a 0 (for incorrect placement of a provided term)
(range 0-8).

Students' verbalizations
U

         The raw data collected from this study consisted of 3,920 minutes (65 hours) of audio and video tape recordings
      from 96 of the participants, who gave extensive verbalizations while they learned about the circulatory system. Two
      students'                                                                    audio  tapes                                                                 were                                                              not  transcribed due  to poor  audio quality. During  the first                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   phase of data analysis, a
      graduate student transcribed the audio tapes and created a text file for each participant.

  Learners' regulatory behavior
  U

         Azevedo and colleagues' (Azevedo & Cromley, 2004; Azevedo, Cromley, & Seibert, 2004; Azevedo, Guthrie,
      & Seibert, 2004) model of SRL was used to analyze the learners' regulatory behavior. Their model is based on
      several recent                                                                   models                                                                    of                                                        SRL         (Pintrich, 2000; Winne,   2001; Winne    & Hadwin,    1998;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Winne   &   Perry, 2000;
      Zimmerman,                                                                     2000,                                                                    2001).                                                              It includes key  elements of  these models (i.e., Winne's    [2001]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 and  Pintrich's   [2000]
      formulation of self-regulation as a four-phase process), and extends these key elements to capture the major phases
      of self-regulation. These are: (a) planning and goal setting, activation of perceptions and knowledge of the task and
      context, and the self in relationship to the task; (b) monitoring processes that represent metacognitive awareness of
      different aspects of the self, task, and context; (c) efforts to control and regulate different aspects of the self, task,
      and context; and, (d) various kinds of reactions and reflections on the self and the task and/or context. Azevedo and
      colleagues' model also includes SRL variables derived from students' self-regulatory behavior that are specific to
learning with a hypermedia environment (e.g., selecting a new informational source).

                                                                            We       used                                                                     Azevedo                                                             and  colleagues'  SRL    model to  re-segment the   data from the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  previous    data analysis
phase. This phase of the data analysis yielded 5,930 segments (M = 61.77 per participant) with corresponding SRL
variables. A graduate student was trained to use the coding scheme and coded all of the transcriptions by assigning
each coded segment with one of the SRL variables. Two transcripts from the grade-level students could not be coded
due to poor audio quality. Thus, the analyses for students' regulatory behavior were based on 96 students.

    Inter-rater agreement
    U

                                                                            Inter-rater agreement was established by training two graduate students to use the description of the mental
models developed by Azevedo and colleagues (Azevedo & Cromley, 2004; Azevedo, Cromley, & Seibert, 2004;
Azevedo, Guthrie, & Seibert, 2004). For a complete description of the mental model coding rubric see Azevedo and
Cromley                                                                            (2004, Appendix                                                                                                                                B,  pp. 534-535).  They  independently  coded   all selected protocols                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (pre- and  posttest
essays of the circulatory system from each participant). There was agreement on 188 out of a total of 196 student
descriptions, yielding an inter-rater agreement of .96. Inter-rater agreement was also established for the coding of the
learners' regulatory behavior by comparing the individual coding of the two coders. Of the 5,930 coded protocol
segments, 5,106 were independently recoded (86%). There was agreement on 5,009 out of 5,106 segments yielding
an inter-rater agreement of .98. Inconsistencies were resolved through discussion among the coders.

      Results
      Hypothesis 1: Gifted students will be more likely to display a more sophisticated mental
                                                                                                                                                            U

  model of the circulatory system at posttest than grade-level students.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  U

                                                                            To analyze changes in students' conceptual understanding we examined students' mental models using two
2 X 2 (mental model by group) chi-square test. First, we examined the students' mental models on the pretest. The
chi-square test revealed a non- significant difference in the frequency distribution of the students' mental model by
group (2 [2, N = 98] = 1.47, p > .050) This indicates that the distribution of pretest mental model scores was not
                                                                                 P
                                                                          P

      statistically significantly different across gifted and grade-level students. We then examined the students' mental
      models on the posttest. The chi-square test revealed a significant difference in the frequency distribution of learners'
      mental model by group (2 [2, N = 98] = 16.667, p < .001). The results of this test indicate that the distribution of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P

      gifted and grade-level students significantly differ on their mental model scores for the posttest. Of the 49 gifted
      students, 18 (37%) had a high mental model on their posttest, 16 (33%) had an intermediate mental model on their

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                213                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ICLS 2006
    posttest, and 15 (31%) had a low mental model on their posttest score. On the other hand, of the 49 grade-level
    students, only 6 (12%) had a high mental model on their posttest and 8 (16%) had an intermediate mental model on
    their posttest, while 35 (71%) had a low mental model on their posttest score.

    Hypothesis         2:                                                                                                                         Gifted                               students'                                                                                                                                  posttest   scores                                                                                                                                             on                                                                            measures                                                                                            of                         declarative                                                                                                                                  knowledge
                                                                                                                                                                      U

    will    be      statistically                                                                                                                                                      significantly                                                                                                                                    higher     than                                                                                                                                          those                                                                            of                                                                                   grade-level                                                                                                                           students,                                                                 after
    controlling for pretest scores.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U

              To analyze changes in scores on the matching, labeling tasks, and flow diagram tasks, we used a 2 (group:
SRL, ERL) X 2 (time: pretest, posttest) mixed design. For these analyses, group was a between-groups factor and
time was a within-subjects factor.

    Matching task
    U                                                                                                                                          U

              Given we had a 2 X 2 mixed design with equal sample sizes and that we could retain the hypothesis of
sphericity,         we performed                                                                                                                                                     a repeated                                                                                                                                 measures ANOVA                                                                                                                                              on the pretest                                                                        and                                                           posttest                                                      data.   The                                                                                                 results                                                 showed   a
significant main effect of time (F [1, 96] = 153.11, MSE = 250.64, p < .001, 2 = .62), and a significant interaction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P

        between group and time (F [1, 96] = 46.92, MSE = 250.664, p < .001, 2 = .33), and a significant main effect of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P

group (F [1, 96] = 11.363, MSE = 1075.661, p = .001, 2 = .11). These results indicate that the gifted students had
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P

        statistically significantly higher posttest mean than the grade-level students, taking into account each group's pretest
scores (see Table 1).

Labeling task
U                                                                                                                                     U

              We also used a 2 X 2 repeated measures ANOVA on the pretest and posttest data for the labeling task.
        Results showed a significant main effect of time (F [1, 96] = 162.72, MSE = 217.02, p < .001, 2 = .63), and a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P

        significant interaction                                                                                                                                                   between group                                                                                                                                 and time  (F [1,   96]                                                                                                                                       =  23.41,                                                                         MSE                                                            =                        217.02,                                p <   .001,                                                                                                 2                               =                      .20), and a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P

significant main effect of group (F [1, 96] = 5.306, MSE = 487.978, p = .023, 2 = .05) These results mirror the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P

matching task results, showing the gifted students had statistically significantly higher posttest mean than the grade-
level students, taking into account each group's pretest                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (see Table 1).

      Flow Diagram
      U                                                                                                                                      U

              Again, a 2 X 2 repeated measures ANOVA on the pretest and posttest data was used for the flow diagram
        task. The results showed a significant main effect of time (F [1, 96] = 45.99, MSE = 3.282, p < .001, 2 = .32), and a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P

significant interaction between group and time (F [1, 96] = 10.97, MSE = 3.282, p = .001, 2 = .10), and a non-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P

significant main effect of group (p > .050) These results are consistent with the results for both the matching and
labeling tasks (see Table 1). Thus, in each of the declarative measure tasks, the gifted students performed better on
the posttest, after adjusting for pretest scores.

  Table 1:Means and standard deviations for the pretest and posttest learning measures by group.
  U

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Gifted                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Grade-Level
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (n = 49)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (n = 49)
                                                                                                                                                                                      Pretest                                                                                                                                             Posttest                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pretest                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Posttest

                                                                                                                                                                                      M (SD)                                                                                                                                              M (SD)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M (SD)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M (SD)
    Matching Task                                                                                                                                                                     36.268                                                                                                                                              79.748                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 35.967                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    48.461
                                                                                                                                                                                      (19.922)                                                                                                                                            (22.683)                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (29.334)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (29.688)
    Labeling Task                                                                                                                                                                      3.060                                                                                                                                              40.088                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5.974                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     22.636
                                                                                                                                                                                      (12.449)                                                                                                                                            (23.771)                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (12.143)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (23.120)
        Flow Diagram                                                                                                                                                                   0.820                                                                                                                                              34.300                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14.300                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    23.330
                                                                                                                                                                                      (13.800)                                                                                                                                            (30.890)                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (18.480)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (25.280)

    Hypothesis                                                                                                                          3:                              Gifted          students                                                                                                                                    will  utilize                                                                                                                                           key  SRL                                                                            strategies                                                                                                                    and     processes                                                                                                                                                        more
                                                                                                                                                                               U

    frequently than grade-level students, after controlling for variations in the total number of
    SRL strategies and processes used by each student.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U

              In this section we present the results of a series of chi-square analyses that were performed to determine
whether there were significant differences in the distribution of gifted and grade-level students' use of SRL variables

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   214                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ICLS 2006
  (for a complete description of the coding and analysis plan, see Azevedo & Cromley, 2004, p. 528). We examined
  how participants regulated their learning of the circulatory system by calculating how often they used each of the
  variables related to the four main SRL categories of strategy use, planning, monitoring, and handling task difficult
and demands.

                    For 5 of the 16 strategies, chi-square analyses revealed significant differences in the number of participants
who used those strategies above the median proportion across the two groups. A larger number of gifted students
used summarizing, selecting new informational sources, and coordinating of information sources to learn about the
circulatory system. In contrast, a larger number of grade-level students learned by taking notes and finding location
in environment (see Table 2). However, chi-square analyses revealed no significant differences in the distribution of
    planning, monitoring, task difficulty or interest processes used above and below the median by gifted and grade-
    level students. Thus, gifted and grade-level students only differed in their use of strategies. However, we posit that
    these strategies are a key reason as to why gifted students outperformed grade-level students on the mental model
    and declarative knowledge measures.

    Table 2: Number of coded verbalizations and proportion of gifted and grade-level students using self-
    U

  regulated learning variables above the median proportion.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              UP

                                                             Gifted                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Grade-Level
  Variable                                                   (n = 49)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (n   = 47)                                                                                                                2                                                                                                            P                p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P

              Strategy Use
                Summarization                               35 (71%)a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12 (26%)                                                                                                               20.222                                                                                                                        <.001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P

                Selecting New Informational Source         31 (63%) a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17 (36%)                                                                                                                7.045                                                                                                                        .008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P

                Coordinating Informational Sources         21 (43%) a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11 (23%)                                                                                                                4.085                                                                                                                        .043
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P

                Find Location in Environment                 5 (10%)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19 (40%)b                                                                                                              11.686                                                                                                                        .001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P

                Taking Notes                                17 (37%)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               31 (66%) b                                                                                                               9.379                                                                                                                        .002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P

      Note: Degrees of freedom = 1 and n = 96 for all analyses.
      Note. The bold type indicates the variable was used above the median frequency by more than 50% of learners.
  a Gifted students made the greatest contribution to chi-square for this variable.
  P       P

b Grade-Level students made the greatest contribution to chi-square for this variable.
P           P

1This table represents the 5 SRL processes from the strategy category that had significant chi-square analyses. Chi-squares
P           P

analyses for the remaining 27 SRL processes from the categories of planning, strategy, monitoring, handling task difficulties and
demands, and motivation were non-significant.

  Conclusions
                    These results highlight key differences between gifted and grade-level students. Not only do these students
perform more successfully on both declarative knowledge measures and measures of their mental model, but they
also differentially utilize key SRL processes. Specifically, gifted students use more sophisticated strategies such as
coordinating informational sources and summarizing, a strategy that requires encoding of information. In contrast,
grade-level students spend more time orienting themselves to the environment and taking notes verbatim from the
environment. This suggests that gifted students spend less time orienting themselves to the environment and more
time engaging in the learning. This allows the gifted student more cognitive energy to focus on higher level SRL
strategies, perhaps explaining the differential performance. Thus, this study adds to the literature on gifted students
by demonstrating that they actually use higher-level strategies more often than grade-level students. This differential
use of high-level strategies by gifted students, coupled with their more successful learning performance, suggests
possible            interventions    for grade-level students.  These                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                results                                                     suggest that                                                                                                grade-level   students                                                                                                              may benefit  from
being explicitly taught declarative, procedural, and conditional knowledge regarding the utilization of high-level
SRL              strategies  such  as    the coordination of   information                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sources                                                       and summarization.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Future       research should
systematically              test the influence  of targeted  interventions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               aimed                                                      toward                                                                                                   fostering   this kind                                                                                                              of high-level SRL
strategy use amongst grade-level students when engaging in complex learning. If differential use of SRL strategies
accounted for a significant amount of the variance between these two groups, then interventions may truly make a
profound difference in student performance.

References

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     215                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ICLS 2006
Alexander,   J.  M., Carr,   M, &   Schwanenflugel,    P. J. (1995).   Development   of  metacognition   in  gifted children:
          Directions for future research. Developmental Review, 15(1), 1-37.
Azevedo,     R.  (2005).  Computer     environments    as   metacognitive   tools   for enhancing    learning.  Educational
          Psychologist, 40, 193-197.
Azevedo,   R.,  & Cromley,    J.G.   (2004). Does   training on  self-regulated learning  facilitate students' learning with
          hypermedia? Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3), 523-535.
Azevedo, R., Cromley, J.G., & Seibert, D. (2004). Does adaptive scaffolding facilitate students' ability to regulate
          their learning with hypermedia? Contemporary Educational Psychology, 29, 344-370.
Azevedo,   R.,   Guthrie, J.  T.,  &  Seibert, D.   (2004).  The  role  of self-regulated  learning  in  fostering  Students'
          conceptual understanding of complex systems with hypermedia. Educational Computing Research, 30 (1-
          2), 87-111.
Azevedo,   R.,   Cromley,    J.G., Winters,  F.I., Moos,  D.C.,   &   Greene, J.A.   (2005).   Adaptive  human   scaffolding
          facilitates adolescents' self-regulated learning with hypermedia.     Instructional Science, 33, 367-379.
Boekaerts,M., & Corno, L. (2005). Self-regulation in the classroom: A perspective on assessment and intervention.
          Applied Psychology: An International Review, 54, 199-231.
Carr, M.,  Alexander,     J. M.,   &  Schwanenflugel,  P.    J. (1996). Where   gifted  children do   and   do not  excel on
          metacognitive tasks. Roeper Review, 16, 198-204.
Chi,  M.T.H.    (2005). Commonsense       conceptions  of   emergent   processes: Why    some   misconceptions   are   robust.
          Journal of Learning Sciences, 14(2), 161-199.
Chi, M.T.H. (2000). Self-explaining: The dual processes of generating inference and repairing          mental models. In R.
          Glaser (Ed.), Advances in instructional psychology: Educational design and cognitive science (Vo. 5, pp.
          161  238). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pintrich, P. (2000).  The    role  of goal orientation in   self-regulated learning. In  M.   Boekaerts, P.  Pintrich, &  M.
          Zeidner (Eds) Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 452-502). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Renzulli, J. S. (2002). Emerging conceptions of giftedness: Building a bridge to the new century. Exceptionality,
          10(2), 67-75.
Winne, P. (1995). Inherent details in self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 30, 173-188.
Winne, P.H. (2001). Self-regulated learning viewed from models of information processing. In B. Zimmerman & D.
          Schunk. (Eds.), Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 153-189).
          Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Winne,  P.   H., &   Hadwin,    A. F.  (1998). Studying   self-regulated   learning. In D.  J. Hacker,   J. Dunlosky,  &  A.
          Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and practice (pp. 277  304). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
          Zimmerman, B., & Schunk D. (2001). Self-regulated learning and academic achievement. Mahwah, NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Zimmerman, B. J., & Martinez-Ponz, M. (1990). Student difference in self-regulated learning: Relating
          Grade, sex, and giftedness to self-efficacy and strategy use. Journal of Educational Psychology,
          82, 51-59.
Zimmerman, B. J. (2001). Theories of self-regulated learning and academic achievement: An overview and analysis.
          In B.  J.  Zimmerman      &  D.  H.  Schunk  (2nd     Ed.) Self-regulated  learning  and   academic  achievement:
          Theoretical perspectives (pp.1-37). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Zimmerman, B. J. (2000). Attaining self-regulation: A social cognitive perspective. In M. Boekaerts, P. Pintrich, &
          M. Zeidner (Eds) Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 13-39). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

                                                              216                                                   ICLS 2006
