  How Can We Use Concept Maps for Prior Knowledge Activation ≠
   Different Mapping-Tasks Lead to Different Cognitive Processes

    Johannes Gurlitt, University of Freiburg, 79098 Freiburg, Germany, gurlitt@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
    Alexander Renkl, University of Freiburg, 79098 Freiburg, Germany, renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
       Michael A. Motes, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA, motes@psychology.rutgers.edu
     Sabine Hauser, University of Freiburg, 79098 Freiburg, Germany, hauser@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

       Abstract: A think-aloud-study was conducted to examine how characteristic affordances of con-
       cept maps  could be  used for prior knowledge activation.  Characteristic affordances of concept
       maps  are connection lines representing the relationships  between concepts  and the  labeling     of
       these lines specifying the type of the semantic relationships. To investigate the effects of generat-
       ing semantic relationships versus labeling existing semantic relationships during prior knowledge
       activation, 20 psychology students were given two concept-mapping tasks: 1) They had to draw
       and label the connections between the concepts of a map, and 2) they were given a map of con-
       cepts with connection lines and had to label the connections. Thinking-aloud protocols indicated
       more elaboration processes in the labeling-the-lines task than in the finding-and-labeling-the-lines
       task. On the other hand, the protocols indicated more overview and organization-processes in the
       finding-and-labeling-the-lines task. Thus, particular concept-mapping tasks elicit qualitative dif-
       ferences in prior knowledge activation processes, which has important practical implications.

Introduction
       The importance of prior knowledge influencing learning has long been acknowledged (e.g. Ausubel, 1986).
Prior knowledge influences learning through cognitive processes of selection, organization, integration and recall
(Renkl, 1996; Mayer, 1997; Weinert & Helmke, 1998). For selection, prior knowledge focuses the learner's attention
on problem-relevant information and away from meaningless or distracting information, thus conserving informa-
tion-processing resources. For organization, prior knowledge facilitates the combining of information into meaning-
ful "chunks" that can be processed as a whole, thus also conserving information-processing resources. For integra-
tion, prior knowledge provides a framework or scheme through which new information is actively assimilated (inte-
gration in existing schemes) or accommodated (modification of existing schemes that conflict with the new informa-
tion). For recall, the above described influences of prior knowledge on the selection, organization, and integration of
new information reduce the amount of information to be recalled and provide association cues for recalling the new
information from short-term and long-term memory.

       Ausubel (1968) emphasized the importance of prior knowledge and developed the idea of the advance or-
ganizer in a general way, but did not provide educators with simple functional tools to assess and activate prior
knowledge (Novak & Gowin, 1984, p. 40). Based on Ausubel's work, Novak and Gowin (1984) described hierarchi-
cal concept maps as tools for getting students to examine their prior knowledge before studying new materials. Con-
cept maps provide an external network-like representation of knowledge structures. Concept maps consist of spa-
tially grouped nodes with key-words representing concepts, connection lines representing the semantic connection
of concepts, labels on the connection lines to specify the kind of the semantic connection, and arrows on the connec-
tion lines to specify the directions of the relationships or to guide the reader through the map (Ruiz-Primo, Shavel-
son, Li, und Schulz, 2001; Duit, H‰uﬂler & Prenzel, 2001). Concept maps have been shown to facilitate learning in a
variety of contexts (for review, see O'Donnell, Dansereau, & Hall, 2002). Many studies have examined the benefits
of studying concept maps compared to traditional text (or some other representation like an outline) or the benefits
of using concept maps to study text compared to using a traditional study technique (e.g., outlining).

                                                        217                                                  ICLS 2006
        In this study, we examined the use of concept maps as tools for activating prior knowledge. Following
Larkin and Simon's (1987) distinction between sentential representations, where data was indexed by a position in a
list versus diagrammatic representation in which information is indexed by location, concept maps would be classi-
fied as diagrammatic representations. This simple distinction has implications why a diagram can be superior to a
verbal description for solving problems. Spatial grouping might reduce search processes and facilitates perceptual
inferences, which are extremely easy for humans (Larkin & Simon, 1987, p. 98). As many other external representa-
tions (e.g. outlines, tables, graphs) share these affordances, two characteristic affordances of concept maps are con-
nection lines visualizing the semantic relationship and the labeling of the lines to specify the semantic relationship
between the concepts. We share the hypothesis that different mapping tasks evoke different cognitive and metacog-
nitive processes (Ruiz-Primo et al., 2001). When using concept maps for activating and examining prior knowledge,
generating and labeling connection lines in a concept map versus just labeling connection lines in a concept map
should lead learners to focus on different aspects of their prior knowledge. In particular, the process of finding and
labeling connection lines should require learners to evaluate the organizational aspects of their prior knowledge,
whereas the process of just labeling connection lines should not, or at least not as strongly, elicit the evaluation of
organizational aspects of prior knowledge. Labeling connection lines, however, might lead learners to focus on justi-
fying or elaborating on the reasons for the drawn connections.

Research Questions
        In particular we were interested how cognitive processes and acceptance for prior knowledge activation dif-
fer for two characteristic affordances of concept maps.
1.      Are elicited cognitive processes different for labeling-the-lines and finding-and-labeling-the-lines?
2.      Is the acceptance of these techniques for prior knowledge activation different for labeling-the-lines and
finding-and-labeling-the-lines?

Method
Participants and Design
        Twenty German psychology students (age M = 26.5 years, 17 female, 3 male) participated in the study.
Concept maps were new to 18 subjects, two subjects knew about concept maps and had frequently used them. Prior
experience with the use of concept maps was not a threat to the validity of the study, because we were comparing
two  mapping-tasks, finding-and-labeling-the-lines and     labeling-the-lines, not concept mapping to some      other
method.

        Four types of maps were created. Learners completed either a label-the-lines economics mapping task (see
Figure 1) and then a finding-and-labeling-the-lines meteorology mapping task or vice versa. The task order was
counterbalanced across participants. We used this design to control for sequence-effects of topic and mapping-task.
Participants were randomly assigned to the conditions.

Procedure
        In the beginning participants received the written instructions that explained concept mapping. The instruc-
tions included an example from biology, and explained how to label the lines (plus for a positive relationship or a
minus for negative relationships). Using the same example, participants also completed a label-the-lines task and a
fill-in-and-label-the-lines task on the computer to familiarize themselves with the software used in the research por-
tion of the study. The mapping-software (Easy Mapping Tool, for more information see www.cognitivetools.com)
was specifically adapted to the research so that concepts could not be changed, rearranged or added. The only possi-
ble actions for subjects were drawing and labeling lines.

        After this introduction subjects read written instructions for their first mapping-task. To introduce a mean-
ingful setting, we asked subjects to imagine being in a meteorology or economics-class (depending on the mapping
topic) and to imagine that before the lesson started they think about what they know and do not know about the
topic. We stressed that we were interested in the process of prior knowledge evaluation and that it was not the learn-
ing-product that mattered and stressed the importance of using the concept maps as a tool for this self-assessment. If
subjects did not talk aloud for more than five seconds, the experimenter prompted them to continue talking.

        After each mapping-task, participants completed a questionnaire addressing the usefulness of the technique
for activating prior knowledge. After both mapping-tasks were completed subjects rated which of the two mapping-

                                                          218                                                 ICLS 2006
tasks they found more useful for examining their prior knowledge. As a reward for participation subjects could
choose between 7 EUR or the concept map program Easy-Mapping-Tool. The whole experiment lasted about 50
minutes while each of the two mapping-tasks took 10 minutes.

     Figure 1. Example of the map on economic-relationships used for the labeling-the-lines task.

Results
       Talk aloud protocols were transcribed and separated into verbal units (Ruiz-Primo et al., 2001). One verbal
unit was defined as one coherent semantic block, that is, thinking about a single concept or a concept-pair (Ruiz-
Primo et al., 2001). Verbal units then were rated for elaboration, organization, definitions, overview, and negative
monitoring (see Table 1).

Table 1: Categories that were used to rate think aloud protocols

Category                                Description                        Examples from our think-aloudprotocols
Elaboration           Elaborations    are  processes,   to  connect   "Rising oilprice, has a negative influence
                      new knowledge with existing knowledge           on export of most companies. Or, yes, let
                      structures.  Indications  of  elaborations are  me think, if you need more money for the
                      the   generation  of examples,   the imagina-   production of some plastic then the prod-
                      tion of a picture, or other cognitive proc-     uct will be more expensive and it will be
                      esses   that enhance  the   given information   more difficult to sell it on the international
                      (Weinstein & Mayer, 1986).                      markets, yes this has a negative influ-
                                                                      ence."
Organization          These strategies are used to organize and       "The higher the temperature the higher the
                      reduce   the   new   knowledge    on  the  key  evaporation."
                      features  and    to  relate  new   knowledge
                      pieces to each other (Weinstein & Mayer,
                      1986).   As   the task did   not  include  the
                      rearrangement or reduction of the learning
                      content,  we   concentrated   on  the  second
                      aspect,  thinking    processes dealing    with
                      relations between two concepts.
Definitions           The    learner clarifies  the  meaning    of a  "NYSE, what is NYSE, New York Stock
                      word.                                           Exchange."

                                                         219                                                ICLS 2006
Overview                Do  learners  draw   a conclusion,   do   they  "It seems that many paths lead to the cash
                        relate more than two concepts and get an        flow. The cash-flow seems to be related
                        understanding of the "larger picture"?          with almost all other concepts. So this is
                                                                        the view of the business-owner..."
Negative Monitoring     Negative   monitoring  concerns   processes,    "For    example,    I'm  not   sure about    the
                        where    the learner   "looks himself     over  concepts     interest rate and  bond   rate, but
                        her/his   shoulder"  and   finds out,   what    I'm    sure  I did hear them   before. Still,  to
                        she/he did not know, or where she/he is         relate them is very difficult for me."
                        not sure.

       We used a one-factor, repeated measures ANOVA to analyze the data. For all statistical analysis alpha was
set .05. Following Cohen (1988) a small effect is a 2 up to .01, a medium size effect is a 2 until 0.06 and 2 big-
ger than 0.14 are big effect sizes. Table 2 presents an overview about the results. 10 of the 40 protocols were co-
rated by a second rater. Interrater agreement was high (Kappa was between .97 for elaboration and .74 for overview
processes). Thus, only one rater coded the rest of the protocols.

Table 2: Means and Standard Deviations (in Parentheses) of Dependent Variables

                                       Labeling-the-lines     Finding-and-labeling-the-linesF-Value1    2            p

           Elaboration                  7.1 (3.42)              5.2 (3.70)              6.57           .25       .021*

          Organization                  21.9 (5.11)           25.1 (7.15)               6.04           .24       .024*
           Definitions                  1.65 (1.56)           1.65 (1.46)               .00            .00       1.00
           Overview                     2.1 (2.63)              3.6 (4.45)              5.51           .23       .030*
     Negative Monitoring                11.1 (4.49)           12.7 (5.86)               1.20           .06       .287

           Acceptance
(6-point rating-scale from 1 = not      4.7 (0.97)              4.8 (0.72)              .01            .00       .915
  helpful to 6 = very helpful)
 Favorite mapping-task for prior
knowledge activation (number of                   10               10
            subjects).
Note. 1df=1,19; all tests were two-sided, n = 20; * statistically significant.

       ANOVA revealed that the label-the-lines task elicited significantly more elaborations in the think aloud
protocols than the find-and-label-the-lines  task, F(1,  19)  = 6.57,  p <     .021, 2  =  .25  (strong effect). However,
ANOVA also revealed that the find-and-label-the-lines task elicited significantly more organizational and overview
processes than the label-the-lines task, F(1, 19) = 6.04, p < .024, 2 = .24 (strong effect) and F(1,19) = 5.51, p < .03,
2 = .23 (strong effect), respectively. The conditions did not significantly differ in the number of definition or the
number of negative monitoring statements. Thus, for the find-and-label-the-lines tasks, participants focused on the
organization of their prior knowledge, determining what they knew or did not know about the relationships between
the concepts, whereas for the label-the-lines tasks, participants focused more on their ability to justify or elaborate
on the depicted relationships.

       There was no difference in the acceptance of the two tasks for knowledge activation, the mean value of ac-
ceptance was 4.7 for labeling-the-lines and 4.8 for finding-and-labeling-the-lines (6-point rating scale, 1 = not at all
helpful, 6 = very helpful). This is consistent with the preference for one or the other mapping-task for knowledge

                                                          220                                                    ICLS 2006
activation where   10  subjects  preferred the labelling-the-lines task and  10 subjects  preferred  the finding-and-
labelling-the-lines task. A general indicator for the acceptance of both mapping tasks was that 17 of the 20 subjects
chose the Easy-Mapping-Tool as a reward for participation.

Discussion
         The main goal of our study was to examine how cognitive processes and acceptance for prior knowledge
activation differs for two characteristic  affordances  of concept  maps. The   results showed  that the finding-and-
labeling-the-lines task elicited more overview and organizational processes compared to the labeling-the-lines, but
the labeling-the-lines task elicited more elaboration processes than the finding-and-labeling-the-lines task. The dif-
ferent mapping-tasks did not elicit differences in negative monitoring processes and also did not differ in their high
level of acceptance for prior knowledge activation.

         These results indicate, that the "more restricted task" of only labeling the lines realized the potential to
evoke more elaborative processes because learners had to complete no search processes for semantic connections
between   concepts. This may    reduce cognitive load  (Sweller, Merrienboer, &  Paas,   1998) and  uncertainty  about
which concepts might be connected. On the other hand constraining the task in this way also has a trade-off. It led to
less organizational and overview processes. One central implication of these findings is that we should differentiate
concept mapping based on the specific affordances and tasks that have to be completed. But generalization of these
results should be interpreted carefully with respect to the realized topics, mapping-technique and subject-pool.

         From a practical point of view, the data shows that instructors need to consider the relationship between the
affordances of the concept mapping task and the focus of the lesson. If the results could be generalized to other
topics and subject pools we could give teachers the following recommendation for activating and examining prior
knowledge with the realized mapping-tasks: Generating and labeling connection lines leads learners to focus on
organizational aspects of their prior knowledge, whereas the process of labeling connection lines on existing rela-
tionships leads to an elaboration of connected concepts.

References
Ausubel, D. P. (1968). Educational Psychology: A Cognitive View. New York: Holt, Rinehardt and Winston.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. New York: Erlbaum.
Duit, R.,  H‰uﬂler, P.  &  Prenzel, M.  (2001).  Schulleistungen   im Bereich   der naturwissenschaftlichen   Bildung
       [Achievement in the domain of science learning]. In Weinert, F.E. (Hrsg.), Leistungsmessung in Schulen (S.
       169-186). Weinheim: Beltz.
Larkin, J.H. & Simon H.A. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science, 11,
       65-100.
Mayer, R.E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking the right questions? Educational Psychology, 32, 1-19.
Novak, J. D. & Gowin, D. B. (1984). Learning how to learn. New York: Cambridge University Press.
O'Donnell, A. M., Dansereau, D. F. & Hall, R. H. (2002). Knowledge Maps as Scaffolds for Cognitive Processing.
       Educational Psychology Review, 14, (71-86).
Renkl, A. (1996). Vorwissen und Schulleistung [Prior knowledge and school achievement]. In J. Mˆller & O. Kˆller
       (Hrsg.), Emotionen, Kognitionen und Schulleistung (S. 175-190). Weinheim: Beltz.
Ruiz-Primo, M.A., Shavelson, R.J., Li, M. & Schultz, S.E. (2001). On the validity of Cognitive-Interpretations of
       Scores From Alternative Concept-Mapping Techniques. Educational Assessment 7, 99-141.
Sweller,  J., Merrienboer, J. J. G. van    & Paas,  F. G.  (1998). Cognitive  architectures and instructional design.
       Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Weinert, F. E., & Helmke, A. (1998). The neglected role of individual differences in theoretical models of cognitive
       development. Learning and instruction, 8, 309-323.
Weinstein, C. E., & Mayer, R. E. (1986). The teaching of learning strategies. In C. M. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of
       Research in Teaching (pp. 315≠327). New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant of the Virtual Ph.D. Program Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange
with New Media of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG (German Research Foundation).

                                                          221                                                ICLS 2006
