    Designing instructional support for individual and collaborative
                 demands on net-based problem-solving in dyads

                                                 Miriam Hansen & Hans Spada
                         Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg, 79085 Freiburg, Germany
                       Email: hansen@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de, spada@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

        Abstract: Instructional measures were designed to foster collaboration in a net-based problem-
        solving  task. They   include  support for communication      and  for the individual and   collaborative
        problem-solving process. A "worked-out example" of collaboration realized as an on-screen video
        was combined with elements of cooperation scripts. In a 2x3 factorial design, the type of support
        and the type of communication were varied. Audio recordings and performance measures were
        taken. As first steps of the data analysis, the performance measures of 24 dyads were analyzed and
        two in -depth case studies were conducted in order to compare the collaboration with and without
        the support of the developed measures. The collaborators with instructional support made fewer
        communication errors, managed to better structure the collaborative problem-solving process, and
        solved the task faster ­ they appear to have learned to collaborate. Further quantitative analyses of
        the whole sample of 48 dyads are work in progress.

Introduction
        Collaboration isn't easy! This simple phrase summarizes findings from work carried out in the field of
collaborative learning and collaborative work. Collaboration poses several challenges. Different kinds of skills are
required: the demands of collaboration are added to individual cognitive demands inherent to a specific task. In
order to learn or to solve a problem, individual actions and individual cognitive processes have to take place (see
Dillenbourg, 1999), and due to the need to interact, additional activities and cognitive processes are required. These
additional demands    offer opportunities because   of the   benefit  they might   have  on learning or problem-solving.
However,   collaboration also brings   with it certain challenges,   including  coordinating  the  collaboration  (Barron,
2000) or pooling unshared knowledge (Stasser & Titus, 1985). An important part of the additional demands on the
collaborators  arises through the  need  to communicate.     Communication      requires the  establishment  of  common
ground in  order to   achieve mutual   understanding   (e.g. Clark,   1996).  Through   the use  of new technologies,   it
becomes possible to learn collaboratively (e.g. distant learning) or to jointly solve problems (e.g. remote teams in
organizations) while the collaborators are located in different places. A variety of collaborative learning settings and
collaborative tasks have been implemented, but a common challenge of most remote collaborative settings is that of
communicating without a physically shared environment (for an overview see Kraut, Fussell, Brennan, & Siegel,
2002), on top of all the usual challenges of face-to-face collaboration. It is therefore necessary to support remote
collaboration.

        By instructing collaborating partners on how to solve a remote collaborative task and improving the skills
required (the collaborators learn to collaborate), a sustainable enhancement of the collaborative process and results
can be achieved    (Rummel    & Spada,  2005).   However,    in  order to  design  instructional  measures,  we   need to
understand  in detail  what skills are needed   to solve a   specific  task. Studies of  collaboration  mostly   use quite
complex  settings. As   we  aimed   to examine   the   role  and functioning   of  communication,    we  used   a remote
collaborative problem-solving task that is more restricted and enables a more detailed analysis. The task is similar to
the Referential Communication Task (Krauss & Weinheimer, 1966), which has been used a great deal to study
communication, but holds more individual cognitive demands. The task we used therefore contained both individual
cognitive demands and demands due to interaction. In this paper, we introduce instructional measures designed to
support individual cognitive as well as collaborative demands. These measures were designed based on results of a
first study that revealed the task demands (Bertholet & Spada, 2005). We will present a validation study conducted
to examine the developed support measures, and will report first quantitative results as well as two case studies
conducted  to  examine   the  problems   that  occur   during   collaboration.  Our  aim  was   to  identify whether   the
collaborators learn to collaborate, and more precisely, how they learn to communicate under conditions of additional
cognitive load posed by individual cognitive demands.

                                                            229                                                  ICLS 2006
The collaborative task
          Two persons have to jointly solve a picture-sorting task while located in two different rooms. One of the
participants assumes the role of speaker and the other takes on the role of addressee. The task is presented on two
displays (see Figure 1), and oral communication between speaker and addressee is possible via an audio link. On the
speaker's  display, sixteen   pictures are presented that differ only in   terms   of minor   details. The speaker     has to
describe nine of the pictures and their order of presentation to the addressee. The addressee sees the single sixteen
pictures in a random order and has to arrange nine of them according to the speaker's description. The addressee can
rearrange the pictures on the target area by using his mouse (drag and drop). Because the differences between the
pictures are very small, the participants have to first detect these differences and then the speaker has to design
appropriate utterances that will enable the addressee to choose the correct pictures by considering the relevant
features. This  component     of  feature  detection constitutes  the     main difference     from the   classic    re ferential
communication task, in which the task demands consist only in the verbal description of clearly different objects.
This individual  cognitive    demand   makes  the  task more   comparable    to  realistic collaborative   tasks    in which
communication often has t o take place under additional cognitive load.

                      speaker                                                       addressee

                                                              target area

                                                                                           pictures in random order

          Figure 1. The pictures on the speaker's display (left) and the addressee's display (right)

          Four different tasks   were  used. These   four sets of pictures     can be  categorized   as  more "concrete",
containing familiar or known objects (e.g. the pictures in Figure 1), or more "abstract", depicting unknown objects
such as geometrical figures or patterns.

The demands of the task
          The basic demands of the task can be grouped into "individual cognitive demands" and "demands due to
interaction". The first group of demands includes feature search and identification. The collaborators have to detect
the relevant features that differ between the pictures (e.g. the position of the cat, the cat's line of sight, the direction
of the cat's whiskers). These demands have to be dealt with individually; they would also exist if the sorting of the
pictures had to be carried out by an individual instead of being part of a collaborative task. (The original children's
game "Differix" by Ravensburger©, from which we took some of the pictures, consists in arranging nine pictures on
a template individually, competing against one to five other players.) The second kind of demands contains the
additional challenges of collaboration due to the need to communicate. The speaker has to describe the relevant
feature values  (e.g. "the  cat's whiskers   are pointing upwards")   of   one  picture  in   an appropriate way      and  the
addressee has to understand the speaker's description and to match the description to the features in the picture.

          In a previous study (Bertholet & Spada, 2005), it could be shown that the difficulties arising from the two
demands are different for the two groups of pictures: The concrete sets hold more challenges with regard to the
individual cognitive demands, and the abstract sets are more difficult in terms of the demands due to interaction. As
the concrete sets contain familiar objects, the detection of the relevant features is more error-prone because the
details can be overlooked quite easily. This result is in line with theories of object recognition (e.g., Biedermann,
2000). On the other hand, it is more difficult to describe the unfamiliar objects and their features in the abstract tasks
because   the speaker needs   to  invent terms and   customize them   for   interaction. Speaker   and  addressee    have  to

                                                           230                                                       ICLS 2006
develop a common language in order to establish referential identity (Clark & Brennan, 1991). If they use different
frames of  reference, this results    in specific             errors    in   some   concrete ta sks (e.g. Taylor    &    Tversky,   1996).  For
example, the cat's line of sight can be described from the speaker's or from the cat's perspective. To enable a correct
identification of the pictures, speaker and addressee must have a mutual frame of reference.

Designing instructional support measures

How is the support realized?
        Several approaches attempt to foster collaboration by structuring the problem-solving and communication
process. Scripted cooperation (O'Donnell & Dansereau, 1992) is a prominent technique. It aims at optimizing the
interaction process by sequencing it into different phases, defining roles, and assigning them to the collaborative
learners. As cooperation scripts have shown themselves to be a very effective means to foster collaboration, they
have  also been  transferred to computer                    settings   (e.g. Baker   &  Lund,  1997;   Kollar,   Fischer     &   Slotta, 2005).
Typically, they are embedded into computer-based learning environments and guide the collaborators in a step-by-
step fashion through  different activ ities.                Computer-based       cooperation  scripts may    be  used    not only   to   support
learners to acquire knowledge in a specific domain but also to support them to learn how to collaborate (Rummel &
Spada, 2005). In order to promote the skills needed for collaboratio n, instructional measures may be used that are
presented to the collaborators prior to the collaboration itself. A "worked-out example" of the collaborative task is
such an instructional approach (Rummel & Spada, 2005): While observing a speaker or addressee solving the task,
people should reflect upon the solution steps and engage in meta-cognitive activities that promote learning (e.g.
Renkl, 1997; VanLehn, 1996).

        In our instructional measures,     the              instructions   prior to the collaboration  were   realized    as on-screen videos
(one for each role). Furthermore, during the collaboration, scripts were used. Figure 2 provides an overview of the
support measures. The on-screen videos consisted of visual and auditory information. This is in line with Mayer's
(2001) modality effect, which claims that students learn more deeply from information presented in a mixed mode
(e.g. animation and spoken text) compared to information presented in a single mode (e.g. animation and written
text). The on-screen videos showed, for example, the screen of a speaker or an addressee solving a task. Each video
was accompanied by auditory information containing hints for feature search and picture description, instructions
concerning the structuring of the task as well as the roles and technical directions. The cooperation scripts were used
to structure the collaboration  process    (i.e.             what    has do   be  done  at   what point   in time?).    As   the task  contains
individual cognitive demands besides those due to interaction, it can be divided into an individual and a common
part. The collaborators first have to search for the feature differences on their own before engaging in the description
and positioning of the pictures. By making this division explicit, a script may help to overcome the collaborators'
tendency to solely engage in joint activities and forget about individual work phases (Hermann, Rummel & Spada,
2001). Furthermore,   we   used the      role -defining              function    of scripts  (who   does  what?).   In    order  to foster  the
communication process, the script prescribes, for example, that the speaker has to label the features and to propose
the naming to the addressee. In contrast to the classic cooperation scripts (O'Donnell & Dansereau, 1992), the roles
of speaker and addressee are not interchangeable but fixed.

                                                                                      Training elements
                                                                     ·   Hints for feature search (level 1) and naming of
                                                                         pictures (level 2)
                 Prior collaboration                                 ·   Structuring of the task, division into subtasks,
                                                                         definition of roles
                                                                     ·   Technical directions

                                                                     (1) Search for features (picture editor) - level 1
                                                                     (2) Naming of features (text editor) ­ level 2
               During collaboration                                      only speaker
                                                                     (3) Grounding of features and names
                                                                     (4) Description and positioning of pictures

             Figure 2. Procedure of the training with elements prior to and during collaboration.

                                                                             231                                                      ICLS 2006
                                         On-screenCooperation
                                                     videoscript
What is supported?
         Taking into account the results of the previous study, both demands ­ the individual cognitive demands and
those due to interaction ­ should be supported. We developed two levels of support, each corresponding to one of
the two demands. Both levels contained hints and, furthermore, individual editors as part of a subtask.

Level 1 ­ support of the individual cognitive demands
         In the previous study, many errors occurred particularly in concrete tasks because the collaborators failed to
identify all relevant features. Therefore, the hints of level 1 stressed the importance of a careful search for the
differences, especially for the concrete sets of pictures, which appear at a first glance to be less difficult to deal with.
Additionally, a subtask was introduced: The collaborators were asked to search the features that differed between the
pictures and to mark them in the picture editor containing one of the 16 pictures of a task.

Level 2 ­ support of the demands due to interaction
         The  second    pitfall of  the task lies in  the establishment  of referential identity.  The  hints   of level 2
emphasized that referential identity for the feature's name and position as well as for the spatial frame of reference is
crucial for successful  communication      and should be  established as early  on  as possible.  The subtask   of level 2
consisted in the naming of the feature differences. The speaker was asked to enter the features' names into an
individual text editor.

Validation of the resulting training
         The  instructional     support  measures   that  we  designed   result  altogether   in a  training  that  fosters
collaboration. The effects of the training were examined in an experimental validation study. In this paper, we
present  two case  studies  in   ord er to illuminate the  communication    and  problem-solving    process  of one    dyad
collaborating with the support of our training and one dyad collaborating without such support. As the collaboration
of the two dyads was part of the validation study, we will begin by briefly describing the design of the study before
reporting the results of the case studies.

Design of the study and procedure
         A 2x3-factor design was used. As one between-subject factor, the amount of support was varied. Either
there was no training at all, or only the individual cognitive demands were supported (only level 1), or the dyad
received the complete training (levels 1 and 2). As a second between-subject factor, the mode of communication was
varied, being either synchronous or asynchronous. A synchronous mode of communication means that speaker and
addressee communicated through an audio link at the same point in time. The results section will include two in-
depth case studies of dyads performing within the synchronous communication condition as well as a quantitative
analysis of  the performance     of all 24 dyads  in  the synchronous   condition.  As  within -subject factor, the set  of
pictures was varied so that each dyad had to solve all four tasks. Two tasks contained concrete pictures and two
contained abstract pictures. 96 students (48 dyads) of the University of Freiburg, Germany participated in the study.
Figure 2 shows the procedure of the complete training. To keep the procedure and time-on-task comparable, the
dyads without training were also shown an on-screen video prior to the collaboration, but just containing technical
instructions. During collaboration, only the dyads with training were supported by a cooperation script; the dyads
without  training collaborated    without  support.  All  dyads had the possibility to  first look individually at  the  16
pictures of a task before starting the description and positioning phase. The dyads with training received instructions
to use this time to search individually for the differences between the pictures .

Measures
         Two  sets of   dependent    measures   were  collected to  examine  the collaboration   process  as  well  as  the
outcome: audio recordings of the verbal communication and performance measures. We developed a coding scheme
for the verbal communication data that emphasized the time structure and different kinds of errors committed during
collaboration. Corresponding with the subtasks introduced in the on-screen video as well as the cooperation script
(see Figure 2), the ideal time structure of the collaboration contains (1) an initial individual period to search for the
features and to name them (= "individual time"), (2) a common period used for grounding (= "grounding time"), and
(3) a common period for the description and positioning of the nine pictures (= "description/ positioning time"). The
collaboration process was divided into these three periods. The third period can further be divided into the time
needed for the description and positioning of each of the nine pictures. The errors committed during collaboration
are: (1) number of not identified features in a task (error of speaker and addressee), (2) number of times the speaker

                                                            232                                                  ICLS 2006
failed to mention a relevant feature in the description of a picture, (3) number of times the speaker gave ambiguous
descriptions with regard to the referential identity, and (4) number of irrelevant features mentioned by the speaker.
The errors refer to one of the two demands on the collaborators, (1) and (2) to the individual cognitive demands and
(3) and (4) to the demands due to interaction.

                 The performance measures included the number of pictures placed in the correct position at the end of one
task, the time used to look at the pictures individually before starting the description/ positioning (separately for
speaker and addressee), and the time needed to complete the task. These measures of the time spent are not equal to
the time          structure of  the collaboration   process   described above,     because   they only   consist                                 in  computer-based
measurement and do not reveal what the collaborators exactly did during collaboration.

Results of the two case studies
                 One dyad had the support of the complete training ("with training") while the other was not supported at all
("without          training"). Both dyads   solved  all  four tasks in the same    order  (tasks  1 and  3 concrete,                                  tasks  2 and 4
abstract). We will now take a closer look at the collaboration process. The time structure differed considerably with
regard to the existence or duration of the periods: The dyad with training took between 140 and 200 seconds of
individual time, between 50 and 120 seconds of grounding time, and between 290 and 370 seconds of description/
positioning time per task. The dyad without training, by contrast, took practically no individual time at all (between
7 and 24 seconds), and their collaboration did not include grounding time in tasks 1 to 3. Only in the last task were
there 320 seconds of grounding time. Instead, the dyad without training took between 860 and 1200 seconds of
description/ positioning time. Figure 3 depicts the time needed for the description and positioning of each single
picture          separately for the two  dyads.    The  dyad  with  training took   a little more   time  for                                  the first picture, but
altogether the time did not differ a great deal for the different pictures. For the dyad without training, the especially
large amount of time for the first picture is striking, and is followed by a smaller peak around the fourth and fifth
pictures. The large amount of time for the first picture is due to the search for the feature differences and the
grounding process. Both were carried out only while the speaker was trying to describe the first picture. As the
search and grounding were often not done properly (especially in tasks 1, 2 and 4), problems occurred after the
description and positioning of some pictures: The peak around the fourth or fifth picture is due to repair mechanisms
as a restart of feature search, repeated grounding or a too detailed description of the picture containing a lot of
irrelevant features.

                               Dyad with training                                      DDyayDdadywawidthitwhoouituthttrttarraainiinniniinnggg
                 600                                                   600
                 500                                                   500                                                                                     task 1
                 400                                                   400                                                                                     task 2
                 300                                                   300                                                                                     task 3
                 200100                                                200                                                                                     task 4100
                   0                                                     0
                       1    2    3   4    5    6     7   8    9    n° of picture1   2   3    4    5    6   7                                     8   9    n° of picture

                 Figure 3. Time needed for description and positioning of each single picture for both dyads.

                 Regarding   the errors committed      during collaboration , the   differences   are even more                                    striking. Table  1
shows the four types of errors for the dyad with and the dyad without training. The dyad without training showed a
great number of errors of all four types, whereas only one error could be detected in the collaboration process of the
dyad with training.

Table 1. Number of errors committed during collaboration.

                                    N not identified        N speaker did not         N speaker did not                                        N irrelevant features
                                       features             mention a feature          establish ref. id.
    With training                           0                        1                         0                                                          0
  Without training                          2                       31                         12                                                        68

                                                                    233                                                                                     ICLS 2006
     time in sec
        The performance measures showing the result of the collaboratio n indicate a clear advantage for the dyad
with training: In all four tasks, the dyad without training took longer to complete the task (mean with training = 640
sec and mean without training = 1210 sec) and, for the concrete tasks, arranged fewer pictures (only 6 of 9) in the
correct position. For the abstract tasks, both dyads placed all pictures in the correct position.

Quantitative results of the performance measures ­ synchronous condition (24 dyads)
        A multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) with repeated measures (for the within-subject factor) was
conducted in order to test the influence of the type of support and the type of task on the performance measures.
There were significant effects for both factors: The dyads with the complete training implemented the instructions,
as they used more   time  to look  at the pictures individually  (speaker:  F[2] = 19;  p<.000;   addressee: F[2]  = 16.5;
p<.000). Furthermore, the complete training led to better results. The number of correctly placed pictures did not
differ between the support conditions, but with complete training less time was needed to complete the task. In line
with the results of the first study, more pictures were placed in the correct position in abstract tasks (F[1] = 9.5;
p<.000). The collaborators took more time to look at the pictures individually in abstract tasks (speaker: F[1] = 13.2;
p =.001; addressee: F[1] = 15.6; p<.000) and needed less time to complete them (F[1] = 5.9; p =.024). Furthermore,
we can assume from the results that problems with different frames of reference occurred if collaborating without
the complete training.

Discussion
        The aim of the case studies was to examine the problems that can occur during the collaboration process
and to scrutinize whether, through the developed training, the collaborators could learn to overcome these problems
and, in particular, communicate      adequately.  The   dyad without   support   faced various   problems:   Speaker   and
addressee did not structure the process or balance individual and common work phases, were confused about how to
deal with  the  different demands    at the same  time, and  thereby  committed   many   errors.  The  uncertainty  of  the
speaker as to how to solve the task appropriately may, for example, be seen in the number of irrelevant features he
included in his descriptions. By contrast, the dyad with training seemed to have learned how to collaborate: The
collaboration process was better organized, clearly structured and contained nearly no communication errors. This
led to results that were greatly superior to those of the dyad without training. In contrast to some evidence from
scripted collaboration, we were not able to detect motivational problems in the dyad that collaborated with scripts.

        The    combination   of   an  on-screen  video  containing  a  "wo rked -out example"     of collaboration  and  a
cooperation script to help structure the collaboration process therefore seems, so far, to be a promising approach to
foster collaboration. The results of the quantitative analysis of the performance measures for the 24 dyads in the
synchronous condition also indicate that the training measures help to improve the collaboration, as the dyads with
training took less time to complete the tasks. Furthermore, the results suggest the need for both training levels.
Especially with concrete tasks, the support of both demands is crucial and should contain instructions to assure a
mutual frame of reference.

        Further  quantitative  analyses   of the whole  sample  of 48  dyads (including  the synchronous    as well  as the
asynchronous condition) are in progress. It is also planned to analyze the collaboration process of all 48 dyads in the
same way as in the case studies. In a further step, the training could be transferred to other collaborative settings in
order to support the various demands on the collaborators and to improve the results of the collaboration. In the
future, the introductory statement could then perhaps be changed to: Collaboration may not be easy ­ but it is not too
difficult with the right support!

References
Baker,  M., &   Lund,  K. (1997).  Promoting   reflective interactions in a CSCL   environment.      Journal of Computer
        Assisted Learning, 13(3), 175-193.
Barron, B.  (2000). Achieving     coordination in collaborative  problem-solving  groups.  The   Journal of  the Learning
        Sciences, 9, 403-436.
Bertholet,  M., &   Spada,   H.   (2005).   Cognitive  analysis of a   remote  collaborative  problem-solving    task   and
        experimental validation of the resulting demand model. In K. Opwis & I.-K. Penner (Eds.), Proceedings of
        the German Cognitive Science Conference 2005 (pp. 15-20) Basel: Schwabe.
Biederman,  I.  (2000).   Recognition-by-components:    A theory   of human  image   understanding.   In S.  Yantis  (Ed.),
        Visual perception: Essential readings (pp. 320-340). Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.

                                                           234                                                   ICLS 2006
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D. Teasley
          (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: American Psychological
          Association.
Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by `collaborative learning'? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.),               Collaborative
          learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 1-19). Oxford: Elsevier.
Hermann,     F., Rummel,     N., &   Spada,    H.  (2001).  Solving the   case   together:   The  challenge  of  net -based
          interdisciplinary  collaboration. In P. Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings,  &   K. Hakkarainen   (Eds.), Proceedings of
          the First European Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 293-300). Maastricht:
          McLuhan Institute.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2005). Internal and external collaboration scripts in webbased science learning
          at schools. In  T.  Koschmann,    D.  Suthers,  & T.  -W. Chan   (Eds.),   Computer    Supported   Collaborative
          Learning 2005: The Next 10 Years (pp. 331-340). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Krauss, R. M., & Weinheimer, S. (1966). Concurrent feedback, confirmation, and the encoding of referents in verbal
          communication. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 14, 343-346.
Kraut, R. E., Fussell, S. R., Brennan, S. E., & Siegel, J. (2002). Understanding effects of proximity on collaboration:
          Implications   for technologies   to support remote   collaborative    work. In P. Hinds   & S.  Kiesler (Eds.),
          Distributed work (pp. 137-162). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge: University Press.
O'Donnell, A. M., & Dansereau, D. F. (1992). Scripted cooperation in student dyads: A method for analyzing and
          enhancing   academic   learning and  performance.  In R. Hertz - Lazarowitz  &  N.  Miller (Eds.), Interaction in
          cooperative  groups:   The theoretical   anatomy  of  group  learning   (pp.  120-141). New   York:  Cambridge
          University Press.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A study on individual differences. Cognitive Science, 21, 1-
          29.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
          problem-solving in a desktop-videoconferencing setting. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-
          241.
Stass er, G., &   Titus, W.  (1985). Pooling    unshared   information in group   decision   making:  Biased  information
          sampling during group discussion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 1467 -1478.
Taylor,   H. A., &  Tversky,  B. (1996).  Perspective  in  spatial descriptions. Journal  of Memory   & Language,   35(3),
          371-391.
VanLehn, K. (1996). Cognitive skill acquisition. Annual Review of Psychology, 47, 513-539.

Acknowledgments
This work is part of the Virtual PhD Program (VGK) "Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with New
Media", which is supported by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG).

                                                            235                                                  ICLS 2006
