 Didn't I Tell You That?                     Challenges and Tensions in Developing and
                        Sustaining School-University Partnerships

                      Michael Barnett, Thomas Higginbotham, Janice Anderson, Boston College
                                 barnetge@bc.edu, higgintb@bc.edu, anderaab@bc.edu

        Abstract: Chamberlain High School is small inner-city school within a school in a large urban
        district. Over   its five years   of  existence, Chamberlain    administrators   have  enlisted the   aid of
        outside   partners   to help  them   realize the vision   of an interdisciplinary   environmental   science
        theme   based   school.  Partners  include   many    university-based groups, as  well   as groups such   as
        National    Public  Radio's  Living   on Earth,  the  Urban  Ecology   Institute (a non-profit  university-
        based organization), and a local environmental literacy program. This study was undertaken to
        understand some of the dynamics behind those partnerships. Using activity theory as an analytical
        lens we found a set of tensions that drove many of the changes that have occurred between the
        school and its partners. In this paper we document these tensions so others who are working in
        similar   situations will be  able   to leverage our   experience  and  findings to support   urban school
        change.

Introduction and Need
        This year's theme for ICLS is on making a difference. With that same goal in mind, many educators have
argued that collaboration between university faculty, classroom teachers, and community organizations are central to
supporting  school  reform    and  making     a  difference   in  K-12  education (Ball,  2000).    To  date, however,     our
understanding  of how    such   relationships   unfold and   are sustained over time  is rather  limited.  Most   research on
educational partnerships has been focused on understanding the logistical and administrative strategies used by the
partners to maintain working relationships (Borthwick, Stirling, Nauman, & Cook, 2003; Zetlin & MacLeod, 1995)
rather than the processes that create or inhibit enduring collaborations. The purpose of the work described here it is
to document the development of a school-community-university partnership by capturing the tensions that pervaded
the partnership   and   the  perceptions  of  teachers,  university  partners,  and school   administrators   regarding    the
partnerships.

Background
        Research suggests that from the perspective of school personnel, educational researchers and other such
partners are often viewed as outsiders who lack the perception of what it means to be on the "inside" of schools
(Lewison & Holliday, 1997). As Gerald W. Bracey (1990 p. 65) states, "most people in [K-12] school buildings
perceive the work of universities as irrelevant."    Coupled with this perception of irrelevance, educational researchers
have developed    a reputation   for  short  term  interventions,  conducting   their research   and  then  abandon   school
personnel  once   their funding   expires or    when   their work  with school  personnel   becomes    too difficult or time
consuming   (Lewison    &   Holliday, 1997).    Even   worse,  teachers (particularly urban   teachers) have   often viewed
educational researchers as "users and abusers" of their time and their students (Lewison & Holliday, 1997). This
distrust was due to several factors, but research suggests that such distrust has arisen, at least in part, from the social
hierarchical structure that has emerged between university and school faculty (Peel, Peel, & Baker, 2002). Namely,
university personnel    have  been   privileged  in  relation  to schools  because    university personnel    are considered
knowledge producers whereas school practitioners are considered (and expected to be) users of university generated
knowledge (Laine, Schultz, & Smith, 1994). These relations have led to long-standing asymmetries in status, power,
and resources which made it difficult for educational researchers and school personnel to trust one another (Lewison
& Holliday, 1997). Cultivating better relations are critical for university researchers so the knowledge base about the
dynamics of teaching and learning in the settings in which they occur can be improved (Peel et al., 2002). Likewise,
establishing better relations for school personnel, allows them to gain new insights and frameworks from which to
view their own beliefs and practices which can inform about how to work more effectively with students (Peel et al.,
2002). Yet, the question remains: "How do we as an educational community improve relations between schools and
university personnel?"

                                                               23                                                   ICLS 2006
History and Study Context
          Chamberlain High School is small inner-city school within a school in a large urban district. Over its five
years of  existence,  Chamberlain    administrators  have  adopted  the   strategy of  enlisting outside partners  (most  of
whom are university based) to help realize the vision of an interdisciplinary environmental science theme based
school. However, while those five years have seen many areas of growth and adaptation, informal conversations
among many partners and teachers revealed frustrations with the ways in which those partnerships have manifested
themselves,   and the incomplete   whole-school   integration   of partners and    the environmental   science  theme.   This
study was undertaken to try to help understand some of the dynamics behind those partnerships. We also sought to
disentangle   other factors that may  contribute  to less  than ideal  partnerships.   Specifically, we  were  interested in
answering the following questions:

          1.  How    do  teachers, partners,  and administrators    at CHS     perceive  the  role and   nature of
              partnerships?
          2.  What changes to partnerships do teachers, partners, and administrators believe can be made to
              better facilitate a whole-school adoption of an environmental science theme?

Methods

Methodological Framework
          Following the framework described by Abell (2000) in her study of collaboration and identity formation
between herself and an elementary teacher, our research was guided by the perspective of phenomenology coupled
with the principles of activity theory. We called upon the principles of activity theory because complex systems,
such as school-university partnerships, are often characterized by their internal contradictions (Engeström, 1993).
These contradictions are best understood as tensions among the components of the activity system. Tensions are
critical to  understanding  what motivates   particular actions and   in  understanding   the evolution  of a  system   more
generally. These tensions can be thought of as system dualities, and it is through understanding the interplay within
and among these dualities that one can best understand and support the continued innovation of the system. Wenger
(1998) argued that it is the interplay within the dualities that drive the system, with the design goal being to leverage
the dynamics of system dualities and not to treat them as polar opposites or to eliminate one side or the other. As
tensions enter the system they become the moving force behind disturbances and innovations and eventually drive
the system    to change  and develop.   We   found   that that  these two  frameworks     seemed   particularly appropriate
because   the participants  and  our research team   were  jointly living  out our  stories of   collaboration and  working
together to improve teaching and student learning while attempting to navigate the inherent tensions that permeate
educational partnerships (Clandinin & Connelly, 1991; Zetlin & MacLeod, 1995).

Data Collection
          This is a primarily naturalistic study grounded in the principles of ethnographic research. Two researchers,
who   were   also partners  at  Chamberlain   High   interviewed    7  teachers (out   of 20   in  the school),  7  partners
(representing 4 different organizations, 2 were university professors, 1 was university based professional, 1 was
university-based non-profit, and 1 was community organization) and 2 administrators (principal and vice-principal).
In addition to the semi-structured interviews (which lasted approximately 30 to 45 minutes) the researchers attended
professional  development    sessions   at Chamberlain,   attending   all partner  meetings   with   school administration,
conducted    informal interviews,  and  wrote  reflective journals,   attended classes  when   partners  were   present, and
developed curriculum materials in collaboration with teachers and the other partners.          In addition, we collected e-
mail exchanges between teachers and partners and between the partners themselves.

Data Analysis
          The data analysis occurred in an on-going manner during the course of the two years of our partnership
with Chamberlain. We began by examining the data documents in light of our personal experience while being
partners at the high school. In particular, data were examined through an activity theory perspective with a focus on
identifying  the  tensions that characterized the relationships    between  school  personnel    and the partners. We    then
developed formative theories and tested these theories against the empirical evidence that we were collecting (i.e.
teacher interviews, retrospective reflection) from the partners and school faculty. We were in an ideal position to
identify  emerging    tensions  as   we were   participants or   were    informed   about   nearly   every  interaction  that
Chamberlain    had  with a  partner. As  such we  could   quickly  follow-up   with the  partners  regarding   our emerging

                                                             24                                                    ICLS 2006
thoughts.  As    we  developed  our  interpretations of   how  the partnership  building   process unfolded,   we began  to
formalize the tensions that appeared to characterize how the partnership structures and tensions unfolded over time.
Following the formalization of the tensions we discussed the tensions with the assistant principal of Chamberlain
High School and one partner to determine if the tensions we had identified did characterize their perception of how
the partnerships.

Results

Tension 1:       Participation versus Non-Participation
           Teachers  fell among      four points  along    two spectra:  partnered   or  unpartnered     and  supportive or
unsupportive (see table 1). Partnered teachers were those who are or have been main contacts or classroom hosts of
outside partners. Unpartnered were those that had not. Supportive teachers were those that, regardless of partnered
status, seemed generally supportive and optimistic about the utility of having the various partners work with the
school, while unsupportive generally did not.

Table 1. Matrix of support and level of participation in partnerships of teachers interviewed

                                                          Partnered             Unpartnered
                                   Supportive                  PS                 US
                                   Unsupportive                PU                 UU

           In general, partnered supportive (PS) teachers were satisfied with the ways in which their partners helped
them  to   incorporate  what   they  perceived as  valuable  curricula into their classrooms,   and  in  general they were
perceived positively by the partners. One teacher fell into the partnered, unsupportive (PU) category, and we were
not   able to interview   her.  However,   both  partners  paired   up with  PU   teachers  and   administrators  expressed
frustration at the PU teacher's apparently superficial agreement to work with the partners on classroom projects, but
to put forth such little effort towards those projects that they were essentially unsuccessful utilizations of resources.
It is unfortunate    we did  not get  to  interview  this teacher  (though  fortunate there   was  only  one). Unpartnered
supportive (US) teachers provided the most valuable insights from teachers' perspective, and will be described in
more detail below. Unpartnered unsupportive (UU) teachers were not interviewed due to the voluntary basis of these
interviews and on the three occasions when an interview was discussed the teachers decided not to be interviewed.
However, some evidence of their ideas was proffered in discussions with US teachers who relayed UU teachers'
perceptions of the partnerships. According to the US teachers, UU teachers neglected to participate in partnerships
for two main reasons. First, they felt it was difficult to incorporate these environmental science-focused partnerships
into their course content. For example, a French teacher found the integration of Environmental Science into his
classroom quite unrealistic and not aligned with his overall classroom mission. Second, UU teachers perceived that
there were administratively `chosen' teachers that got to partner and that they (the UU teachers) were not chosen.
This latter finding speaks to the issue that not all of the teachers in the school trusted the administration.

           US teachers provided some revealing insights, a voice that has yet gone unheard at Chamberlain, and that is
potentially valuable in expanding the interdisciplinary vision and partnerships at the school. US teachers saw the
value in the resources the partners brought to bear. In general, US teachers felt outside the loop, and not `chosen' by
administration to participate in what the partners had to offer. It was clear that some unpartnered teachers did not
feel welcomed, nor did they know how to adapt partners' resources into their classrooms. One US teacher was
particularly interested in partnerships, saying "You've (partners) got valuable stuff," and that she would love to
integrate environmental issues such as nuclear power into her math class, but that she had no idea whom to contact
or where   to begin.  She   believed that  she and   other US  teachers needed,   "just... to talk in  a real  way, because
now...we're being talked at." This teacher recognized the content expertise of partners, and clearly recognized the
potential value in cultivating such a relationship, yet did not know how to forge such a relationship.

           This  contrasted with    some  partners'  beliefs that  teachers who   do  not  participate  in partnerships  are
unwilling to do so, and don't participate solely by choice. These partners generally believed that they were clearly
conveying    to  the teachers  the  opportunities  each   partner  afforded the teachers,  and  that  if a teacher  did  not
participate,  it was  due   to their own   choice.  However,   one  partner  lamented   that  each  year   the partners  ask

                                                              25                                                   ICLS 2006
administration for a day in which partners and teachers sit down and genuinely talk about who they are and what
they have to offer, but that day never occurs.

Tension #2:     Curriculum Developer vs. Resource Provider
         As the partnerships progressed there was initially a great deal of discussion primarily between the partners
and school administration regarding the role of the partners. The partners tended to believe that their role was one of
providing resources rather than one of developing curriculum materials and providing classroom support for those
materials. This idea is illustrated by the following excerpt from an e-mail exchange between one of the partner
groups:

         ...I don't feel that it is our place to develop curriculum specifically for the school, but rather to
         determine ways in which we can support the teachers in integrating our existing resources and
         helping them to see the connections to the other disciplines...

         The  teachers  on the other hand   tended   to  believe  that the  partners' role was   to provide more   than  just
resources but to provide materials and classroom support to implement the materials. This was also the view of the
administration  but  to  a more    limited degree,    in that  the   administration   highly valued    in-class professional
development where a partner was working alongside a teacher. They believed that this model was a good way to
establish trust between the partner and their teachers and that it helped the teacher become a better teacher.           This
idea regarding the need for classroom support was articulated by one of Chamberlain's teachers:

         I appreciate everything that they are trying to do but you know without real classroom support it is
         really impossible to do some of this.   Though, I know that most folks try to make an effort to be
         here as much as they can.  The more the better.

         While articulated in this interview by a teacher, this sentiment was also repeatedly expressed in monthly
meetings between the administration and partners, as the administration expressed the voice of their staff. There
were numerous occasions during those meetings when administration stressed that teachers want partners to, "give
us something we can use."

         Throughout the two years of our work at Chamberlain there have been several discussions regarding the
role of the   partners, how they   should  interact,  and what    services  they  should provide    to the teachers. At  the
conclusion of these discussions, uncertainty surrounding the role of the partners persisted, at least from the partners'
perspectives. However, when the administrators were asked regarding the role of the partners they tended to see the
partners as developers of materials alongside the teachers:

         I see the partnerships as helping us develop curriculum, implement that material in the classroom
         and work with teachers in the classroom.        What I like best is when the partner is in the room,
         getting their hands dirty, and really working alongside with the teachers and interacting with the
         students.

         It appears that this uncertainty of roles and a common vision has inhibited partners fully realizing their
visions and   teachers  being able  to  fully utilize partners    in some   cases.  Given  these  different viewpoints    we
recommend     (and have   learned) that when   entering   into  a  partnership it  is critically important  to  identify and
document the precise roles of the partners and develop a shared sense of common purpose early in the partnership
process or else this tension and the frustrations that embody this tension will have the potential to de-rail even the
most well intentioned partnership.

Tension #3:     Perception vs. Knowledge Interaction
         From the very beginning of the partnership there has been a sense of mistrust between some teachers and
the  partners and  the  administration. Some   teachers   have  seen   the partners as strictly  looking our for  their  own
interests (particularly their monetary interests) while at the same time perceiving the administration as looking out
for their own interests and promotion rather than concerning themselves with improving student learning. Through
our interviews and participation as research partners at Chamberlain we found that the requisite trust for successful
partnerships was not present between many partners and teachers, primarily because initial actual contacts between
unpartnered teachers and partners had not occurred, and that administration and most partners believed that such

                                                             26                                                    ICLS 2006
contact had indeed occurred. The importance of developing trust was revealed by one US teacher who, when asked
whether there was trust between partners and teachers responded:

       Teacher:         I don't trust them (partners).
       Interviewer:     Why?
       Teacher:         Because, why should I? They haven't done anything trustworthy. As far as I can see you
                        guys are getting a whole lot of money to do something and you don't really know what
                        you're doing but you still get the money.

       It is important to note that this teacher is one who sees the value in partnerships, and would like partners
help her to integrate environmental science issues into her classroom. However, short of the interview in which she
was engaged, she had had little contact with partners. Thus, she had no basis on which to trust the partners, who, to
her, represented an outside group making money off of the schools, while offering nothing definitive in return. This
teacher particularly well represented an inner-conflict common among US teachers: they see the potential benefits of
having outside partners but have yet to reap those benefits personally, and have developed a sense of mistrust.      This
was evident during another teacher interview:

       I just try to stay out the fire. I am told I need to do this and work with the partners. I admit I just
       tend to try to ignore it all, but when told to do something I will, but I often just close the door and
       teach as best as I can.

       A feeling of being exploited (which also contributed to initial mistrust) by universities was evident through
many of our initial interactions with our partner teachers. This feeling of exploitation was evident in the following
excerpt taken from an e-mail exchange with one of the teachers in the early stages of our work:

       We get suitors all the time. They come in get their grant money and leave. It is because working
       with urban schools are sexy and that it is easy to get grants and to say look at how good we are in
       helping those kids. Then the grant runs out and they leave, or their students graduate and they
       leave, or they just leave. Even though I have only been teaching for a few years I feel rather used
       by the universities around here.

       Chamberlain's teachers were optimistic and hopeful that the partner materials and programs would benefit
their students, but at the same time they were extremely concerned that we were just another university project that
would leave after a few months and that we would not provide the support that they felt they would need. Ironically,
similar conflicting beliefs appeared in several of the partners we interviewed. These partners assumed that teachers
not involved with projects were uninvolved by choice, yet these partners also generally hoped for a wider net of
teacher inclusion within partner relationships. Partners had no reason to trust the unpartnered teachers, since they
believed they had sufficiently invited the entire teaching staff to participate in partnerships.

       In seeking an understanding to why the teachers tended to not trust the partners one of the school's teachers
expressed the  belief that previously    university-driven initiatives lacked longevity during      a   presentation at a
conference about the collaborative projects.

       I  feel like Charlie Brown   in    that old peanuts  skit. University faculty have came       to me and
       promised to do this and that. I admit I am always excited to do new things and try new things, but
       every time I feel that the football is pulled away from me just as I get comfortable with something
       new. I have been burned many times so I'm not sure whether I want to try anything new anymore
       particularly if it comes from a university. However, they really came through for us and it worked
       great!...

Tension #4:    Politics vs. Collaboration
       Our intensive collaboration within the school has revealed that there is a general mistrust between many
teachers and administration. While this is not true for all teachers, it is true of many unpartnered teachers. This
becomes an important consideration for partners reaching out to those unpartnered teachers, who found it necessary
to tread carefully ­ partners need the support of administration, but if they appear `too close' to administration,

                                                           27                                                   ICLS 2006
teachers  would  associate   them   with  the administration     which   lead  to mistrust. One   partner expressed    this in  a
reflection he wrote:

          our chief   problem (is that) the faculty associates us, at least initially, with the administration.
          They did  not ask   for  the  partners  to  be in the  school.    They  did not ask  for our help   in their
          classrooms. They did not ask for an environmental science theme. As such, I feel that many of
          them (especially those that have been at the school a while and only interact with us peripherally)
          view us as just another bureaucratically imposed interruption to their closed classroom. I feel like
          there are faculty who patiently endure us, and I indeed see why they would. Its essence is that we
          are associated with the bureaucracy of BPS and the administration, two entities that do little (from
          teachers' perspectives) other than make it more difficult what it is that most of them love to do:
          teach kids.

          This quote   reflects a  partner interested  in   bringing  new    teachers aboard  the partnership  programs.    This
sentiment was also evident in partners' consideration of their existing teacher-partner relationships. These partners
noted that it was critically important that when working with teachers, to not appear too close to the administration
or else some of the teachers would choose to only marginally participate and tend to explore ways to ensure that the
partnership would be a failure to show the administration that the partnership model was untenable. Thus, most
partners  recognized   that an  important    tension and   something    that they  had to quickly  learn  to navigate   was    the
political landscape   within the   school  and    to understand     the relationship  between  the administration   and    all of
Chamberlain's teachers.

                                          Discussion and Implications
          The research base and historical evidence reveals that many school/university educational partnerships that
have existed   `fizzle and   fail  (Peel  et al., 2002).    As  noted   by   Peel and  colleagues  (2002)    many  educational
partnerships  have  been    formed  to  provide   only   temporary   band-aid  solutions  to  very complex     and multifacted
problems, failed to develop equity and trust between the participants, and as a result were short in duration. Yet,
some educational partnerships have continued to shine and formed viable coalitions (e.g. see Borthwick et al., 2003).
There are many facets to building a successful school-university partnership including professional development,
sufficient time,  open   communication,       and    strong leadership.     However,   we   have  found   that   developing    an
understanding  of   how trust   is developed   between     university   and  school personnel  is critically important  if  such
partnerships are to be successful and sustainable (Bracey, 1990; Bryk & Schneider, 2003).

          Identification of the tensions that act as barriers to the development of that trust can be an important step in
cultivating healthy, productive relationships. Noting those tensions and sharing them among stakeholders can allow
everyone to go in with `eyes wide open'. In closing, this study highlights the merit in consciously studying the
dynamics   of  school-university   partnerships   as  they  unfold   because   through  the  constant of  reflection upon      the
partnership it will allow one to better understand the pitfalls that one may encounter and the exact nature of the
tensions that are inherent in any partnership. If stakeholders do not understand the tensions that emerge during the
partnership building process many new partnerships will be less productive and functional than they could be. This
point is particularly salient now since funding agencies have recently mandated that schools and universities form
partnerships   with the goals   of  impacting     student   outcomes    and  supporting   school  reforms,   yet there  is  little
empirically  grounded   research   that   examines   the tensions   that will naturally arise when  working      across the two
different cultural landscapes that are K-12 schools and universities.

          The research base and historical evidence reveals that many school/university educational partnerships that
          have existed  usually    fizzle and fail   (Peel  et al., 2002).  As noted   by Peel and  colleagues   (2002)    many
          educational partnerships have been formed to provide only temporary band-aid solutions to very complex
          and multifacted problems, failed to develop equity and trust between the participants, and as a result were
          short in duration. Yet, some educational partnerships have continued to shine and formed viable coalitions
          (e.g. see Borthwick et al., 2003). We found that developing an understanding of how trust is developed
          between university and school personnel is critically important if such partnerships are to be successful and
          sustainable (Bracey, 1990; Bryk & Schneider, 2003; Harris & Harris, 1994).

          At a basic level, we as educational researchers are "outsiders" to the communities that we hope to serve and
improve; namely, the school systems (Lewison & Holliday, 1997). Yet, a first step when attempting to implement

                                                                28                                                    ICLS 2006
curricular interventions or conducting research is often necessary to develop relationships with schools and teachers.
This process of building relationships is particularly important for those of us who are outsiders to the communities
if we expect   to  conduct valid  research   or create successful  interventions (Miller, 2004). In fact,  we argue  that
building trust  is an  essential, critical, and an often   overlooked component    of the  school-university  partnership
literature. If trust does not exist  between    university faculty and teachers,  interpersonal  access is unlikely, and
participants may be inclined to offer "frontstage" responses when asked to provide their thoughts and reflections
(Primavera, 2004). In essence, teachers may opt to respond according to what they perceive to be the researchers'
expectations or simply provide what they consider to be politically expedient answers (Miller, 2004). However, to
achieve trusting and mutually beneficial relationships it is necessary that school-university partners invest the time
and energy to develop the sort of trusting relationships that will facilitate interpersonal access, trust, which in turn
fosters the sharing of "backstage" information.

References
Abell, S. (2000). From professor to colleague: Creating a professional identity as collaborator in elementary science.
         Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 37(6), 548-562.
Ball, D. (2000). Working on the inside. In A. Kelly & R. Lesh (Eds.), Handbook of research design in mathematics
         and science education (pp. 365-402). Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Borthwick, A. C., Stirling, T., Nauman, A. D., & Cook, D. L. (2003). Achieving successful school-university
         collaboration. Urban Education, 38(3), 330-371.
Bracey, G. W. (1990). Rethinking school and university roles. Educational Leadership, 49(8), 65-66.
Bryk, A. S., & Schneider, B. (2003). Trust in schools: A core resource for school reform. Educational
         Leadership(March), 40-44.
Clandinin, D. J., & Connelly, F. M. (1991). Narrative and story in practice and research. In D. A. Schon (Ed.), (pp.
         258-281). New York: Teachers College Press.
Engeström, Y. (1993). Developmental studies of work as a testbench of activity theory: The case of primary care
         medical practice. In S. Chaiklin & J. Lave (Eds.), Understanding practice: Perspectives on activity and
         context (pp. 64­103). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Harris, R. C., & Harris, M. F. (1994). University/school partnerships: Exploring tangible and intangible consts and
         benefits. In M. J. O'Hair & S. J. Odell (Eds.), Partnerships in education: Teacher education yearbook ii
         (pp. 45-68). Fort Worth, TX: Association of Teacher Educators.
Laine, C. H., Schultz, L. M., & Smith, M. L. (1994). Interactions among school and college teacher: Toward
         recognizing and remaking old patterns. In K. A. Borman & N. P. Greenman (Eds.), Changing american
         education, recapturing the past or inventing the future (pp. 381-397). Albany, NY: State University of New
         York Press.
Lewison, M., & Holliday, S. (1997). Control, trust, and rethinking traditional roles: Critical elements in creating a
         mutually beneficial university-school partnership. Teacher Education Quarterly, Winter, 105-126.
Miller, K. E. (2004). Beyond the frontstage: Trust, access, and the relational context in research with refugee
         communities. American Journal of Community Psychology, 33(3&4), 217-227.
Peel, H. A., Peel, B. B., & Baker, M. E. (2002). School/university partnerships: A viable model. The International
         Journal of Educational Management, 16(7), 319-325.
Primavera, J. (2004). You can't get there from here: Identifying process routes to replications. American Journal of
         Community Psychology, 33(3&4), 181-191.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge,MA: Cambridge
         University Press.
Zetlin, A. G., & MacLeod, E. (1995). A school-university partnership working toward the restructure of an urban
         school and community. Education and Urban Society, 27(4), 411-420.

                                                             29                                                ICLS 2006
