            A Resources Interpretation of Teachers' Epistemologies of Science

    Sandra Honda, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute, 701 E. Pratt Street, Baltimore, MD 21202
                                             Email: honda@umbi.umd.edu
            David B. May, University System of Maryland, 3300 Metzrott Road, College Park, MD 20873
                                                Email: dmay@usmd.edu

         Abstract:    Teachers' epistemologies of science are explored as they emerge during the course of
         an authentic laboratory research experience.     Using a resources framework as an interpretive lens,
         we find that teachers develop epistemological resources for the nature of science while conducting
         authentic research and participating in conversations in which epistemic discourse about the nature
         of science is facilitated. However, stability of these epistemological resources and the contexts in
         which they are activated vary across individuals.        Here we   describe a  sample   of the resources
         along with some contexts in which they are and are not activated.

         Teachers'  understandings    of the nature   of  science  and inquiry   are critical to reform.  However,   many
teachers hold relatively naïve conceptions of the nature of science (Abd-El-Khalick & Lederman, 2000). Recent
studies  have  shown   that providing teachers  with  authentic   research experiences   is not  sufficient for developing
sophisticated conceptions of the nature of science (Windschitl, 2002; Schwartz, Lederman, & Crawford, 2004; Kang
& Wallace, 2005).   However, these same studies show that when combined with explicit instruction in the nature of
science  along    with guided   journaling,  these    research    experiences can    provide  a  context    for developing
epistemologies   of science.  Maintaining   perspective   at  the periphery   of the authentic   research context  may be
important in the development of these understandings (Schwartz, Lederman, & Crawford, 2004). Sustaining these
improvements may be difficult. A recent study indicates that five months after a one semester methods course where
explicit reflective instruction in  the  nature of  science   was  used,  not all teachers   sustained  improvement   seen
immediately after the course's completion (Akerson, Morrison, & McDuffie, 2006).              Beliefs about the nature of
science influence teachers' practices (Brickhouse, 1990; Gallagher, 1991; Gess-Newsome & Lederman, 1994; Lakin
& Wellington, 1994; Tobin & McRobbie, 1996). The extent of undergraduate or career research experience appears
to be directly related to the likelihood of teachers adopting inquiry teaching practices (Windschitl, 2002).        Recent
case study interpretations also suggest that teachers' epistemologies may be filtered through their goals for teaching,
which in turn get translated into actions that form their modes of implementation in the classroom (Kang & Wallace,
2005).

         This study applies a resources framework to teachers' talk about their research and its connections to the
nature of science, their students' school science experience and their teaching practices as they emerge during and
shortly  after an  authentic research   experience.   Facilitated  discussions   were  carried  out to  explicitly develop
epistemological resources for the nature of science and multiple contexts for activating them.

Research Context
         During   the  summer   of 2005, 10  high   school   science teachers participated  in  4-week  full-time  research
internships with faculty at an academic bioscience research institution. Teachers were recruited from a single school
system using a unified curriculum for ninth grade biology. All had taught at least 3 years. Teachers were matched to
one of   11 mentors   based  on teacher  preference   for research topic.  Although  the types   of research were   diverse
(examples include molecular biology, developmental biology, aquaculture, and marine microbiology), teachers were
situated in a single department within the same facility.

         While actively involved in research, teachers also participated in hour-long facilitated discussions twice per
week. These discussions were designed to connect their laboratory experiences with the nature of science and their
teaching practices, while guiding teachers in their epistemic discourse on the nature and practice of science in their
situated context. In half of the sessions, readings related to the discussion topic were distributed to encourage deeper
reflection. The facilitator for these discussions was the first author, a Ph.D.-level molecular biologist with expertise
in science education and inquiry teaching practices. On the last day of their internships, teachers presented their
research  work  to  mentors,  peers and  other  staff in  the departments.  Facilitated discussions  are  continuing  on a
monthly basis during the school year with 7 of the 10 teachers.

                                                             264                                                  ICLS 2006
Data Collection
          Discussions were initiated in a number of ways:    through conversations about progress in research projects,
casual reporting on social adjustments to individual labs, or a question (posed by the facilitator) grounded in the
nature of science relating to a previous session's discussion. In every discussion session, teachers did greater than
90% of the talking. The facilitator's role was to simply tie the discussion to the nature of science through questions,
when possible, to reorient it in that direction, or to offer expertise that would give teachers a footing in the evidence
base. These discussions had a high engagement value to teachers.          Although scheduled to last one hour, they often
lasted 90 minutes or longer. Although it is difficult to place a label on discussion session topics, examples of topics
discussed  are:  how   does authentic scientific inquiry   differ from   school  science;  what  is the value   of inquiry  to
science,  to teaching  and  to students;  what is science;  how      do scientists grapple with  uncertainty;   and what   do
scientists do  with evidence.    All  but one  of the    facilitated discussions   were  videotaped  or audiorecorded     and
transcribed for the analysis described here.  Fieldnotes from discussions and informal conversations with teachers, as
well as teachers' unguided journals were also collected for this study.

Findings
          In this study, we use the authentic research experience as context and vehicle for talking with teachers
about the nature of science.   These conversations proved to be rich sources of data relating to how teachers reveal
their epistemologies for the nature of science and in what those epistemologies are.       The conversations also allowed
us to reframe the experience of "doing real science" in the teacher's context of "what we do with students," meaning
the student    science experience, curriculum    and instruction.    Indeed, this  study finds  that teachers   were  able  to
generate   ideas about  the nature of science  directly   from   their  research   experiences, and  connect  them    to what
students experience as science in the classroom.

          In these facilitated discussions, we were able not only to discern elements of teachers' epistemologies of
science,   but also to  some   extent guide   their  development.     Although     "no consensus    presently exists  among
philosophers of science, historians of science, scientists, and science educators on a specific definition for NOS
[nature of science]" (Abd-Ed-Khalick & Lederman, 2000), this study is guided by the AAAS Project 2061's Science
for All Americans (AAAS, 1990) and the National Science Education Standards (National Research Council, 1996).
Included in them are the scientific world view, scientific inquiry and the scientific enterprise (AAAS, 1990), science
as a human endeavor, nature of scientific knowledge, and historical perspectives (NRC, 1996).            Therefore, we use
these two descriptions and the elaborations of Inquiry and the National Science Education Standards (NRC, 2000)
as contexts for describing the teacher epistemologies in this study

          Our data clearly indicate that most, if not all, teachers in this program developed epistemological resources
for notions of the empirical and social construction of science, the tentativeness of science, scientific inquiry and
science as a human endeavor.    Over the course of the summer, they expressed a further appreciation for the value of
skepticism in science and the nature of uncertainty in science. The manner by which authentic scientific inquiry is
conducted    was contrasted  to the  misguided   linear  "scientific    method"  of most   school   science. In an  extended
conversation on the vital importance of careful observation and the unspoken honesty and integrity in recording data
and evaluating evidence, they also talked about "making mistakes."         When one teacher opened with, "I'm afraid of
looking stupid...so many chances to screw it up," another noted "...the mistakes thing is a huge part of becoming a
scientist  and you  need to  worry  about every   little thing. But  I  mean  eventually  you   need to get   over it to be a
scientist" (original emphases). The teacher who made the latter statement was able to immediately translate this to
the classroom by making a distinction between two types of mistakes in students' science work: careless mistakes
made because students do not care about the quality of their classroom work and mistakes as human or experimental
error in design and/or execution of an experiment.

          Teachers also observed the utility of disagreement and, hence, argument as a regular mode of operation for
scientists. During their short stay, the disagreements they most often witnessed or participated in were in the context
of troubleshooting technical details of experimental protocols.       In two instances, however, disagreements centered
on interpretation of results from data as evidence. They were also acutely aware that scientific findings do not rise
from the data on a daily basis. Rather one teacher summed it up this way, "The guy I work for...constantly says that
90% of what we [scientists] do is perfecting technique and 10% is gathering data from it."

                                                             265                                                    ICLS 2006
          Teachers talked about the contrast between how science is represented to students as a big picture, and how
large lab groups were merely generating all of the "small pieces" that make up that big picture.

          In terms of science as a human endeavor and the importance of communicating results to peers and the
public, teachers commented on how busy their scientist mentors were as they witnessed them juggling many duties
from writing and reviewing grant proposals and manuscripts, attending meetings, mentoring several students and
supervising staff. They also expressed the pressure that scientists were under and how it affected their productivity.
In preparing their final research presentations, all teachers were surprised at how invested their mentors were in
seeing professional quality presentations, careful attention to detail in the explanation of experimental design and
accuracy in the communication of results to others.

The Resources Perspective
          We have   examined    these conversations  through    the interpretive lens   of the resources  framework   for
epistemologies   (for  a full   description,  see Louca,    Elby,   Hammer,  &    Kagey,    2004).  In  this framework,
epistemologies are viewed as being composed of resources, which are fine-grained cognitive elements that can vary
in their stability and mode and context of activation. By contrast, the grain size of resources is much smaller than
beliefs. Activation of resources may be passive, i.e. not requiring metacognition, and may or may not be reliably
activated in a given   context. The attractiveness  of  the resources framework    lies in its ability to account for the
context-sensitivity of beliefs, including differences between professed beliefs and their enactments. We examine
these properties of epistemological resources in more detail in the context of the examples below.        With them, we
suggest that the teacher epistemologies that developed in this program have a form consistent with epistemological
resources in that  they  vary in grain size,  stability and  context dependence    for  activation among   the individual
teachers.

Understanding Self as Novice Learner
          We use portions of our first discussion with teachers as an example of how they serve as a vehicle for
examining a teacher's personal epistemology and for guiding its formation. This discussion began with teachers
talking about the difficulties in adjusting to being the new kid on the block and acculturating to laboratory life. Part
of this "new kid" phenomenon was their induction into the role of novice learner, a stark contrast to that of expert
science teacher. Here we recall a portion of the discussion and the context-broadening opportunity it afforded.

          One of the teachers, who was engaged in research involving cloning of DNA, talked about something he
called "the gaps."  He described these gaps as little missing pieces of the puzzle.     For him, the gap was "why we
need to clone something [at this point] here [in time]" rather than proceed directly to a different, subsequent step in
the investigation. While he understood what cloning was and how it was done, he could not immediately see the
utility of cloning as a vital tool in the molecular toolkit for making available a pure copy of a DNA sequence away
from the noise of its genome. He talked about the difficulty in getting other scientists in the lab to explain what he
was missing in a way that was meaningful to him. In another but somewhat similar incident, a different teacher
sought foundational knowledge in microbiology, the discipline in which her project was situated.           In a very well
intentioned  response, her postdoctoral   lab mentor    gave her  a graduate level textbook    in microbiology.   As she
attempted to read this book, she found herself looking up words in the book's glossary so frequently that it distracted
from comprehending content.      Because we talked about these incidents as a group, not only were we afforded the
opportunity to discuss the affective part of these experiences, but also their grounding in our current understanding
about expert versus novice knowledge.     Teachers were also able to compare themselves as beginning researchers in
their experiences with their research mentors to themselves as teachers relating science to their students.        In the
instance of the teacher who was overwhelmed by vocabulary, we immediately related her experience to what it
might be like for English language learners to comprehend a biology textbook. This discussion was supported by the
group's reading of the chapter in How People Learn (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000) that compares expert
with novice knowledge.    We view this conversation as contributing to the development of epistemological resources
on learning.

Talking about the Scientific Method
          Here we  examine  the  contrast between   two  teachers'  views of  the  scientific  method.    Throughout the
summer, Amanda was constantly surprised at how different "real science" is from school science. Amanda moved to
teaching middle school from her former high school position after the summer intervention.         In the first meeting of

                                                            266                                                 ICLS 2006
the school year following her research experience (her first semester teaching middle school), she told the group that
she was aghast that the other science teachers at her new school did not teach the scientific method. By "scientific
method," she indicated the canonical linear process. She was adamant that if anything should be taught at all, it
should be the scientific method.       Less than an hour before Amanda's comment, the group had discussed how real
science was significantly different than school science. In that earlier segment, another teacher, Terry, explained
how non-linear the process of real science is and that this was not at all what we teach students. Because of this
inconsistency between Amanda's immediate comments and Terry's earlier ones, the facilitator asked the group how
Amanda's frustration related to the way they experienced the scientific method during the summer. Amanda was
silent and seemed confused.   Terry responded by reiterating that the scientific method of real science is not linear by
any means and that teaching students the scientific method as a linear, canonical process is not an accurate portrayal.
Using the resources framework, we can interpret Amanda's confusion as demonstrating that her epistemological
resources for the scientific process are not stable and activation of resources related to constructing the non-linear
scientific method is highly dependent on the context of her research experience.       That is to say, outside the frame of
her  research experience  or  her     discourse about authentic   scientific research, Amanda   does   not activate  these
resources. We would, therefore, say that Amanda's epistemology remains naïve. By contrast, Terry demonstrates a
more   sophisticated   epistemology.      He shows    passive activation  of  his resources   for scientific inquiry   and
appropriately activates them in two contexts: "real science" and teaching science. Although we have not actually
observed Amanda or Terry in practice, Amanda's statements lead us to believe that she would teach her students the
linear scientific method. Classroom observations would help us examine the connections between what is professed
and what is enacted.

Describing What Science Is and What It Is Not
        In   this next example,      we examine  the context  dependence   of teachers' definitions of science and    what
cognitive processes they might be invoking to activate resources. In discussing their research, teachers universally
lamented the tedious repetition involved in day-to-day science, such as "getting experiments to work," "screening
tons of plates," and keeping the enormous aquaculture tanks operational.         When asked whether they thought this
type of activity was science, at least three teachers agreed that it was not science; the others did not state an opinion.
In a subsequent discussion session, the facilitator started off the session asking for clarification of what they meant
when they said that these types of tasks were not science.

Jim:         PCR(1) is a tool of science. So I guess you can say it falls under that. I think of science as seeking
             questions, answering ...that sort of thing. And that's a tool used to get there.
Facilitator: OK.
Jim:         But if someone comes in and does the protocol [PCR] without any thought involved along with it, I
             don't think so.
Facilitator: OK. So you consider, you consider, science as the more higher-order thinking parts.
Jim:         Otherwise you could say making a peanut butter and jelly sandwich is science. If I give you instructions
             on how to do it, you sit down and do it. The only difference is PCR is something that scientist do. The
             average person doesn't do it in their normal life, so they think, `Oh, wow.    He's doing science when it's
             really just a procedure or tool used by scientists."
Facilitator: OK. So that's how you picture that in your head.
Jim:         Just now, right.
Facilitator: [begins laughing] Just now `cause I asked.
Jim:         Yeah. I probably wouldn'ta thought about it. [laughter from the group] You forced me to be
             metacognitive.   [Everyone laughs loudly.]   Thinking about my thinking.
Fred:        I was thinking that uh these repetitive, tedious tasks are part of science when they're um...part
             of..um..trying to answer a scientific question...or...when it's part of an experiment. [pause] To me, it's,
             that's mean um..that's part .   It takes a lot of time. There's a difference between making a peanut butter
             and jelly sandwich versus um like if you're trying to make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich to answer
             some question. How much nutrition is there.um. you know.         If you have to study. To study. That's part
             of it. It's part of it.
Facilitator: If it's grounded, the task is grounded in a scientific question, it's science. If the question is not
             grounded in a scientific question, then it's not science. That's, that a good description. How about you,
             Terry?
Terry:       Uh...As far as the ...routine work aspect of science, when I said `not science,' I'm referring more to the
             questioning. You know. The research aspect of it. It's more than one thing, the day-to-day data analysis

                                                              267                                                  ICLS 2006
             type stuff. I mean...'cause you're not...What I'm doing ...I'm just following protocols........doing
             these ...just kind of...amazing things that will help ultimately, but I'm not searching for any answer.
             My purpose isn't to look for any [unintelligible]
Jim:         I guess the point I was trying to make was in it's, by itself it isn't science.
Facilitator: I see.
Jim:         Doing PCR is not science. Like he was trying to say. I agree with what he said.          We just kind of said it
             two different ways... I think.

         All  three teachers   associate  science  with  asking   and  answering   questions.   We    will focus  on  Jim.  Jim
identifies scientific  techniques,  such  as PCR,   as  tools of  science but   not as   science  itself.  Jim's responses are
particularly telling.  Jim's   fluent responses  close  as he  jokes   good heartedly    about    being   drawn  into using   his
metacognitive    resources     to compose    them.     Jim  recognizes   that   he  is  using   resources   for   understanding
epistemological    activities, such   as checking,  accumulation,     formation  (Hammer      &   Elby,   2003),  to  check   his
knowledge about the nature of science. If we go back to an earlier episode in this study, it was Jim who supplied his
mentor's   perspective  by  saying,   "The   guy I work    for...constantly says   that  90%  of  what    we [scientists]  do is
perfecting technique and 10% is gathering data from it."       Jim made this observation when talking about the kinds of
communication that occur in research group meetings of a mentor with students and staff. Therefore, Jim has this
knowledge but does not bring it up in the context of distinguishing scientific tools and tasks from science as a whole.
Jim seems to have many fine-grained resources for describing the work that goes on in a laboratory some of which
are knowledge as propagated stuff, i.e. passed down from the authority figure of his mentor, and knowledge as
fabricated stuff, i.e. knowledge that he figured out on his own (for a detailed description, see Hammer & Elby,
2003). Jim's resources relating to the source of his knowledge may be unstable or stable. Activation is deliberate
and context dependent. As a side note, it is interesting that Jim has preferentially activated knowledge as fabricated
stuff but not knowledge passed down from an authority figure.

Relating the Nature of Science to Scientific Literacy
         Our final example describes teachers' understandings of the relationship between the nature of science and
scientific literacy. Over the course of the summer, teachers freely contributed their goals for their students in broad
mission statements. Among them, scientific literacy was a high priority for almost all.         Because we had been talking
extensively about some of the aspects of the nature of science that related to current controversies over the teaching
of evolution, the facilitator commented on the importance of understanding the nature of science to this debate.
Several teachers denied the connection, while others had no comment.            At a later date, several attempts were again
made by the facilitator to tie the importance of the nature of science to scientifically literacy.      Teachers responded by
describing their ideas about scientific literacy. Topics such as blindly accepting whatever appears in the popular
media, creating  wise   consumers,    making   informed    health decisions and    other decisions    as  consumers,   nurturing
problem    solving  and  common       sense were  discussed.   Despite    many   attempts    by   the facilitator to  guide   the
conversation about the nature of science to scientific literacy, teachers did not make the connection.          In the minds of
these teachers, the "ways of doing and knowing science" as an important component of science remained divorced
from scientific  literacy. We     interpret this separation as   either not having     adequate   resources  to  activate  or an
inability to activate resources for the nature of science in the context of scientific literacy.

         In conclusion, we can say that these teachers present no single unified epistemology of science across the
cohort. Rather we find that individual teachers have epistemological resources for knowledge about the nature of
science that vary in stability and context sensitivity. Our data suggest that teachers who are conducting authentic
research supported by discussions facilitating epistemic discourse that explicitly aims to develop these resources do
indeed develop them.    What the cues are for activating them reliably is still an open question. Teachers have at least
two  immediate     contexts    through   which   these resources   are  viewed:    their experience     as teachers   and  their
experiences   in research    laboratories.  The  manner    in which     current and    historical resources   interact remains
unexplored.

Future Directions and Implications for Teacher Education
         This study has implications for teacher education.         First, we have shown that professional development
programs grounded in authentic research experiences can be effective in challenging existing thinking and nurturing
the development     of more    sophisticated ideas of  the nature  of  science  when    they are  accompanied     by  facilitated
discussions that elicit them.     We cannot say from our study that research experiences by themselves can or cannot

                                                              268                                                     ICLS 2006
serve that purpose.    What    evolves from this  study is the question  of how   these  epistemological  resources       get
activated and operationalized in the classroom.    That is, what are the contexts in which they become activated and
are these contexts productive for supporting their students' development of, and understandings of, the nature of
science? During the current academic year, we have the opportunity to observe these teachers in their practices and
use our school year discussions to root out the epistemological resources they use to enact their interpretations of the
nature of science.

Endnotes
(1) PCR is an acronym for polymerase chain reaction, a laboratory protocol for amplifying specific sequences of DNA.

References
Abd-El-Khalick,    F., & Lederman    N.G.  (2000). Improving   science teachers' conceptions of    nature of   science:    A
         critical review of the literature. International Journal of Science Education, 22(7), 665-701.
Akerson, V.L., Morrison, J.A., & McDuffie, A. Roth.        (2006).   One course is not enough:     preservice teachers'
         retention of improved views of nature of science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43(2), 194-213.
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1990). Science for all Americans. Oxford, England: Oxford
         University Press.
Bransford, J.D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R.R. (Eds.).      (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience and
         school (Expanded edition) (pp. 31-50). Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Brickhouse, N.W. (1990). Teachers' beliefs about the nature of science and their relationship to classroom practice.
         Journal of Teacher Education, 41(3), 53-62.
Gallagher, J.J. (1991). Prospective and practicing secondary school science teachers' knowledge and beliefs about
         the philosophy of science. Science Education, 75, 121-134.
Gess-Newsome,     J.,  & Lederman,   N.  (1994).  Biology  teachers' perceptions  of subject matter   structure       and  its
         relationship to classroom practice. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 32, 301-325.
Hammer,   D., &    Elby, A. (2003).    Tapping epistemological   resources  for learning physics.   The Journal        of the
         Learning Sciences, 12(1), 53-91.
Kang,  N-H.,    &  Wallace,    C.S. (2005). Secondary    science  teachers'  use  of laboratory    activities:       Linking
         epistemological beliefs, goals, and practices. Science Education, 89,140-165.
Lakin, S., & Wellington, J. (1994). Who will teach the `nature of science'? : Teachers' views of science and their
         implications for science education. Science Education, 16, 175-190.
Louca, L., Elby, A., Hammer, D., & Kagey, T.      (2004). Epistemological resources:  Applying a new epistemological
         framework to science instruction.  Educational Psychology, 39(1), 57-68.
National Research Council. (1996). National Science Education Standards.        Washington, DC: National Academies
         Press.
National Research     Council. (2000). Inquiry and  the  National  Science  Education   Standards.   Washington,          DC:
         National Academies Press.
Schwartz, R.S., Lederman, N.G., & Crawford, B.A. 2004. Developing views of nature of science in an authentic
         context: an explicit approach to bridging the gap between nature of science and scientific inquiry. Science
         Education, 88 (4), 610-645.
Tobin, K.,  &   McRobbie,   C.  (1996).  Cultural  myths as  constraints to the  enacted science   curriculum.        Science
         Education, 80, 223-241.
Windschitl, M.  (2002).   Inquiry projects in  science teacher education:  What  can investigative   experiences       reveal
         about teacher thinking and eventual classroom practices? Science Education, 87, 112-143.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by NSF Math and Science Partnership 0227325.            We are especially grateful to Drs. Janet
Coffey and David Hammer (University of College Park, MD) for their guidance and wisdom throughout the course
of this work. The authors are also indebted to the dedicated teachers and scientists who contributed their time and
intellect to this program.  Special thanks to the science leadership of our school partner for their support of our
efforts. SH wishes to thank Dr. Marian Jackson and Gary Coleman (University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute)
for supporting her solo efforts to conduct educational research at our science research institute.

                                                           269                                                       ICLS 2006
