          Students' Perception of Knowledge Activation on a Guided
                          Collaborative Problem Solving Organizer

                   Wei-Chen Hung, James Lockard, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL60115
                                  Email 1: whung@niu.edu, Email 2: jlockard@niu.edu

          Abstract: While problem solving may seem like an intuitive process as demonstrated by experts,
          there are steps in the process that are clearly identifiable and can be systematically applied.            To
          understand   a  problem   and  to develop   effective   problem-solving    skills, students  must    learn to
          identify learning issues and locate, evaluate, and apply resources relevant to those issues.             The
          purpose  of  this study   was  to investigate   the design  and   impact   of an   innovative learning   and
          performance-support    system    to  facilitate students' development     of  metacognition   and  problem
          solving skills.   Detailed descriptions of the theoretical and design frameworks are provided and
          discussed.   A field test including survey and group interviews was conducted to initially study the
          impact  of this innovative  design    approach.    Findings related   to the  design and  how    the  system
          supports problem solving activities are discussed, and future research suggestions are offered.

Introduction
          Traditionally, PBL activities take place in face-to-face instructional settings with paper-based resources. In
recent years,  computer     technology     has  assumed    the   media-support   role   in PBL   (Koschmann      et  al.,   1996;
Rosenbaum, 2001).       Computer    systems    have been   designed   to support   a  variety of PBL    processes.      The most
common support features include non-linear digital video for presenting problems and search and retrieval tools for
accessing electronic documents and other resources (Bottge & Watson, 2002; Pedersen, 2003).                 Additional support
features, such as  one   that  facilitates peer interaction   and  tutoring processes,   also  have been    documented     in the
literature (Friedman & Deek, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2000).           These support features serve two functions: to
provide   students easy   access  to  resources    needed    for solving  the   assigned   problems   and   to  facilitate  group
communications.      While    these features   can  enhance    learning, they   do  not  take  advantage    of  more    advanced
capabilities of computer technology.       In addition, communication features in PBL (i.e., email, threaded discussion
and chat room) for facilitating peer interactions and tutoring processes are often ineffective or inefficient as these
tools primarily were developed for either business communication or casual discussion. Studies have shown that
these features do not provide tools for tracking student discussions and reasoning processes; for evaluating what or
how much each student knows; or for determining how students identify issues, generate ideas, and develop action
plans for solving a given problem (Edelson et al., 1999; Cruickshank & Olander, 2002).              The designs of such off-
the-shelf systems are simply inadequate to support PBL.          Difficulties in facilitating peer interactions and assessing
individual learning performance have been attributed to the lack of tools in such systems for guiding students when
they engage   in  brainstorming,    ideas  exchange  and   other   activities.  Also,  these  systems   do  not offer   tools for
enabling sharing across teams.      Finally, the lack of a tracking function hinders objective assessment of individual
contributions on team projects.

          In this  paper,   we have  documented     a     PBL  support   system,   ActionOrganizer,    that was    designed   for
individual and collaborative problem-solving activities. The paper begins with the theoretical and design framework
of ActionOrganizer, discussing how the researchers created a database driven problem solving support tool to foster
critical thinking and problem solving skills. Following that, a formative evaluation was conducted to elicit students'
perceptions of and attitudes toward the use and effectiveness of ActionOrganizer in supporting their problem solving
process in PBL activities. The goal is to provide an environment for students to emulate the thought processes of an
expert when solving problems, such as the approaches they take to find clues associated with a problem; the systems
they employ    in  gathering,  filtering   and organizing    information;   the reasoning    processes  they   use   in selecting
solutions; and   their overall strategies   for tackling   a  complex  problem.    ActionOrganizer    addresses    this  goal by
offering a set of tools and a problem-solving framework that guide students through the process of (1) articulating,
debating and documenting ideas and hypotheses, (2) gathering, organizing and synthesizing facts, (3) tracking and
resolving learning issues, and (4) identifying, comparing and selecting solutions and action plans.

                                                               270                                                      ICLS 2006
Theoretical Foundations
          A primary goal of PBL is to help learners capture and understand the process of learning through problem-
solving, self-directed learning, and collaborative learning skills (Barrows, 1986). It does not pre-define the level of
skills required to accomplish a task.    Learners bring their own understanding and interpretation to the problem.          The
task of PBL, at the beginning, is not to solve the problem, but to analyze it and to generate as many hypotheses as
possible.     According     to  Roschelle    (1992), through    analyzing    and generating    hypotheses,  learners  have  the
opportunity  to  build   their  own  understanding    of  related   topics.   Furthermore,   without  being  given    any  prior
instruction  or  guidelines,   learners  have opportunities    to test their  own    ideas and  experiences  on  the  problem.
Although learners might find a problem too complex, under the guidance of a facilitator the learner will find initial
confusion    and puzzlement     gradually giving     way  to   coherence,  understanding,   and  resolution. In  this instance,
providing a scaffold to support learners' learning process in the PBL activity becomes an essential instructional
strategy to foster the development of problem solving skill.

          To design    such  a  scaffold to  support  learners'   learning   process in PBL,   we first used  Barrows'     PBL
format; group formation ­ problem analysis ­ problem follow up ­ performance presentation (Barrows, 1986) as the
problem solving phases to help us plan the structure of the scaffold. We then designed a set of problem solving steps
in each phase as the performance indicators, as shown in Figure 1.           Learners will need to complete these indicators
in order  to  become    competent    learners   and  problem    solvers.  Next,  based  on  the  indicators, we   incorporated
metacognitive    prompts    and cues  in the  scaffold   to  stimulate and   foster  learners' thinking and  problem   solving
strategies toward problems. The following is a discussion of the theoretical foundations for the system.

                                         Figure 1. Problem solving phases and steps

Identifiable steps in the problem solving process
          In the  PBL   environment,     learners are  encouraged    to   engage  in  free  inquiry and   construct  their own
understanding through group collaboration and problem reflection.            When a learning issue or problem is presented,
it is generally  ill-defined.   Learners    are  required to   approach   it with minimal    information   presented  to  them.
Learners develop problem-solving strategies to identify learning issues, then locate, evaluate, and apply resources
relevant to those issues.    The instructor or facilitator assumes a major role in modeling the metacognitive thinking
and group interaction associated with the problem-solving process.           This method allows learners to solve problems
in much the same way as they would in the real world, not merely memorize information from textbooks.                 The issue
of designing   such  an  environment     centers on  how    to help learners  understand   the  problem-solving   processes  of
experts,  such   as their   methods  of  finding  clues   associated   with  problems,   their  cognitive  processes,  and  the
reasoning processes they use in selecting solutions. Our instructional strategy, therefore, is focused on the learning
process ­ to teach learners to become responsible for their own learning and to replicate authentic practices through
problem-solving activity and social interaction in a way similar to the real-world event. In this case, the instructional
design strategies used in PBL are to help learners recognize the issues involved, understand the context, see how
their knowledge     is dependent  on    that context, and    know   why   they are   choosing  a particular  way  to  solve the
problem. In other words, it is a kind of cognitive apprenticeship with scaffolding designed to support the learner in
developing metacognitive skills (Brown, Collins & Dugid, 1989).

Coordination of meta-knowing skills and problem solving process
          The term metacognition, i.e., knowing about knowing, was originated by Flavell and Wellman (1977) who
described metacognition as the "explicit consciousness of ourselves as problem solvers."                Flavell identified two
types of metacognitive activities: a) knowledge about cognition and b) regulation of cognition.               Knowing about
cognition is  the   ability of  learners to  recognize   their own  learning   styles and   understand  how   they  learn  best.
Knowing how to regulate cognition is the ability to control one's own learning through such activities as planning,
monitoring, testing, revising, and evaluating.      Other researchers have further extended the concept of metacognition
to include learning processes that involve connecting new information to former knowledge, deliberately selecting
thinking  strategies,  and  planning,   monitoring,   and   evaluating thinking   processes    (Borkowski,  Carr, &   Pressley,
1987; Dirkes, 1985; Kuhn, 1999).

                                                               271                                                    ICLS 2006
         Metacognitive   processing provides    for self-monitoring   of comprehension    and  self-explanations that can
dramatically improve    both text  comprehension    and problem   solving.  Several    studies have shown  that  students
required to monitor their metacognitive processing acquire greater understanding than those who do not monitor
their cognitive   processes  (Hartman,  2001;   Schraw   &   Moshman,     1995).    In addition,  multiple studies    have
demonstrated that requiring individuals to engage in metacognitive processing increases both their comprehension of
text materials and their ability to solve problems effectively (Berardi-Colleta et al., 1995; Chi et al., 1994).    In one
study,   subjects demonstrated  significantly  improved   problem   solving  capabilities when   they   were required  to
verbally self-reflect each time that they made a "move" while attempting to solve a problem.          In a second study,
students  who    were required to  respond  to  metacognitive   prompts   during  a learning   session, learned  to solve
problems more efficiently than students who responded to problem-oriented prompts.             During the portion of the
experiments when students were no longer required to verbalize, those who had received metacognitive prompts
during the learning sessions, required fewer moves to solve the most difficult problems as compared to students who
had received either problem-oriented prompts or the instruction to just "talk-aloud" during the learning sessions.
More recent studies have shown that metacognitive processing in one subject area not only improves performance
within the class of practiced problems but also improves performance on problems from a class unrelated to the
training problems (Buyer et al., 1997).

         The greatest metacognitive processing effect results from the provision of information at exactly the time
that  an individual becomes   aware  of the need    for the information.  Technology    (e.g., databases) provide   a tool
through   which   metacognitive   prompts  can  be  provided    immediately  to  help  learners  clarify  problem   goals,
understand meanings and concepts, draw inferences, apply existing knowledge to reach goals, look for relationships,
reformulate information in one's own terms, and monitor progress toward a solution. By integrating metacognitive
prompts into a database-driven problem solving support system, we create an opportunity to increase learners' self-
directed learning, which, as shown by Gourgey (1998), will promote gains in learners' problem solving and critical
thinking skills.

The Design Framework of ActionOrganizer
         Real-world problems are typically complex and ill defined with minimal information available about them.
While problem solving may seem like an intuitive process as demonstrated by experts, there are steps in the process
that are clearly identifiable and that can be applied systematically. To understand a problem and to develop
effective problem-solving skills, students must learn to identify learning issues (knowledge gaps) and then locate,
evaluate, and apply resources relevant to those issues.  The instructor assumes the critical roles of modeling the
meta-cognitive process employed by experts in the discipline and facilitating group interaction in collaborative
problem solving.   It is through this cognitive apprenticeship and scaffolding process of free inquiry, group
collaboration, and problem reflection (all of which are characteristics of PBL) that students learn to develop meta-
cognitive skills and to "think like an expert" in problem solving (Brown, Collins & Dugid, 1989).

         To support this inquiry process in problem-solving activities, ActionOrganizer provides an environment for
learners to emulate the thought processes of an expert when solving problems, such as the approaches they take to
find clues associated with a problem; the systems they employ in gathering, filtering and organizing information; the
reasoning processes they use in selecting solutions; and their overall strategies for tackling a complex problem.
ActionOrganizer offers a set of tools and a problem-solving framework that guide learners through the process of (1)
articulating, debating and documenting ideas and hypotheses, (2) gathering, organizing and synthesizing facts, (3)
tracking and resolving learning issues, and (4) identifying, comparing and selecting solutions and action plans.    The
overall design strategy aims to understand and facilitate learners' critical thinking and metacognitive skills
development, based on the assumption that appropriate actions are derived from domain knowledge mastery and
effective/correct problem framing in context through an iterative cycle of perception, articulation, and reflection.

How ActionOrganizer works.
         ActionOrganizer offers a framework that leads users through four problem solving phases in eleven steps,
as shown in Figure 1. Among the 11 steps, seven steps are essential to our design of scaffolding (exploring problem
­ stating problem    ­ abstracting problem    ­ analyzing   problem   ­  choosing solution  ­   implementing  solution  ­
evaluating solution). The seven steps are grouped under three of the four problem solving phases: problem analysis
(Assimilate), problem follow-up (Analyze), and performance presentation (Action Plan).          In the Assimilate phase,
learners focus on a complex problem given by the instructor and try to identify and understand various dimensions

                                                            272                                                 ICLS 2006
of the problem.   In the Analyze phase, learners continue their problem-framing task and they further refine their
understanding of the problem through reading, brainstorming, and systematically documenting and organizing facts,
ideas, issues, and hypotheses generated from discussions. When the learners are ready to move from studying the
problem to identifying possible solutions, they can use a 2x2 Action Planning Matrix to document the problem they
are trying to solve, the knowledge that they have gained in the process, the problem context and constraints, and
finally the appropriate action.

         Since ActionOrganizer is built upon a relational database with a graphical user interface, learners can query
and cross-reference  information   entered  at   various   problem-solving  phases,   and  request a  customized   report
containing  any  information they  have recorded,    such  as  one that prints out a list of learning issues that require
further research.  Other features  in the  system,   including  data exchange    and  communication,   are available  for
learners to support their collaborative efforts. To better illustrate how ActionOrganizer supports problem solving,
screen captures of the system are presented below with explanations.

         Upon logging into ActionOrganizer for the first time, students are prompted to enter their group members'
and facilitator's names and email addresses. This is a one-time task.    At the bottom of this screen, students have the
option of viewing an online guide (PBL tour) describing the overall problem-solving process and strategies.           By
clicking on  the Yes button, the  students will  see   the PBL  tour online help.  After  taking the PBL tour, or  if the
students choose to skip it and view the guide at another time, a simple navigation instructions page is displayed to
quickly guide students in how to navigate through the system.

         In the main work area, the seven problem solving steps are divided into the three task phases -- assimilate,
analysis, and action plan -- as represented by the three tabs on the left margin.   The tabbed work area supports easy
navigation among the problem solving phases, and this interface encourages non-linear, iterative problem solving by
allowing easy access to previously captured and generated information. Of the seven problem solving steps, the first
three (exploring, stating, and abstracting the problem) are grouped under the Assimilate phase (Figure 2).          As a
reminder of the problem solving process, all seven problem-solving steps are available in the right-hand panel.       To
explore  the problem  (Step  1), students  can   click on  the PROBLEM      button to read   or watch a multimedia    file
describing the problem posed by the instructor.   Also available are assignment requirements, resources links, and the
evaluation rubric. Having gained an initial understanding of the problem, students proceed to Step 2 where they
articulate what they understand to be the problem and negotiate any differences of opinion within the group.

         In the Analysis phase (Figure 3), students document problem facts and ideas, identify learning issues, and
begin developing hypotheses. Guided by ActionOrganizer, students learn to use a systematic approach to seek and
analyze information, and to identify knowledge gaps.     From problem framing to hypothesis building, students
proceed in a manner that closely mimics that of an expert.     In addition to the notes organization function, multimedia
and communication functions in ActionOrganizer allow audio recording of notes (controls shown in Figure 3) and
also information sharing and discussions across groups through email.

                Figure 2. Assimilate phase                           Figure 3. Problem analysis and follow up

                                                            273                                                 ICLS 2006
          When students have completed or partially completed the problem analysis (as in Step 4), they can move
on to the last phase, Action Plan, to brainstorm and document possible solutions for the problem.   The final phase
includes three steps: choosing, implementing, and evaluating the solution. In Step 5, Choosing the Solution (Figure
4), students review information gathered and created in phases 1 and 2 (e.g., problem abstract, facts, and
hypotheses), and propose a solution and action plan. In order to identify an appropriate solution, students must learn
to balance domain knowledge mastery and problem framing in the proper context (i.e., situation specific
requirements and constraints), through an iterative cycle of perception, articulation, and reflection. The 2x2 Action
Planning Matrix provides students a visual framework to guide them in the action planning process.    Through the
hint button, a step-by-step tutorial is provided to guide students in how to use and interact with the 2x2 matrix.

         In Step 6 (Figure 5), the data field in the left column will be the action plan replicated from the 2x2 matrix.
The learners then conduct a final review of their action plan using the action criteria checklist on the right side of the
screen and make adjustments to their action plan as necessary.   Then in Step 7, the students provide a title for their
action plan and enter all the references and resources used for their PBL activity. They then compile a final action
report and submit it for review by sending it as an email attachment, exporting it to html format, or simply printing
it.

           Figure 4: Action Planning Matrix                     Figure 5: Reflect and evaluate the action plan

         Throughout the system, the students can use the toolbar to perform a variety of system functions such as
printing a screen, taking notes, generating reports, sending emails (linked with the database query functions), taking
a PBL tour, and managing the PBL records. In addition, while problem evaluation is the final PBL step, throughout
the PBL process, the students can submit their work in progress to the instructor for comments and feedbacks (via
the e-mail and reports functions).

Formative evaluation of ActionOrganizer: The initial impact
         The system formative evaluation utilized both qualitative and quantitative approaches to explore how the
various parts of the system and students' attitudes work together. The goal was to study users' perceptions toward
system acceptance and its impacts. After the system was developed, it was distributed to students in a graduate level
introductory instructional technology course. Ten graduate students majoring in instructional technology used the
system for four weeks to solve two instructional design problems. After this use of the system, a survey and a group
interview/discussion were conducted to elicit students' opinions and perceptions toward the system. Results were
reported as scores and scores for negative items were reversed during the analysis for scoring scale consistency. The
objective of the group interview session was to gain a deeper understanding of the impact of ActionOrganizer on
students' metacognitive and critical thinking skills and of the ways it facilitates students' PBL process.

Data gathering
         The perception assessment instrument, Students' Perceptions of ActionOrganizer Survey, was developed
and piloted by the senior author. The survey consisted of 60 five-point Likert scale questions related to usefulness
and  student perceptions of ActionOrganizer. The overall      reliability coefficient of this instrument was  .90  using

                                                          274                                                  ICLS 2006
Cronbach's    alpha.  There     were four  constructs  in the survey:   items  1  to 10  focus on   student opinions  of  the
teamwork and communication functions in ActionOrganizer, as compared to traditional email and discussion tools
(Alpha = 0.89); items 11 to 20 focus on student concerns about using ActionOrganizer (Alpha = 0.68); items 21 to
30 aim at understanding student reactions to the system interface and orientation (Alpha = 0.70); and items 31 to 60
focus on student perceptions of the system and its impact on their learning outcomes (Alpha = 0.93).

          The users were invited to participate in a group interview session to discuss impacts of ActionOrganizer on
their  learning. The    assessment    strategies   focused   on  the   users' learning   experience   with  the   support of
ActionOrganizer.     The  group    interview session  was   conducted   in a  loosely  structured format  using   open-ended
questions including (1) the effectiveness of ActionOrganizer in promoting PBL, (2) students' perceptions of PBL
and their ability to solve problems using a systematic approach, (3) the usefulness of ActionOrganizer from the
students' perspectives,   and   (4)  difficulties and limitations   of ActionOrganizer   in   supporting PBL.   Six   guiding
questions were asked in the interview to elicit users' experiences with ActionOrganizer in prompting and scaffolding
their problem solving approaches.

Findings & Discussion
          The quantitative data generated in the survey were based on a five point Likert scale that indicates how
much respondents agreed with the variables presented. Results were reported as scores and negative items' scores
were reversed during the analysis for scoring consistency. Higher scores indicate a higher degree of agreement and
satisfaction among   respondents.    The   survey,  composed     of 60 questions  in   four constructs, revealed   an overall
positive  attitude toward   the    usage  of the   system.   First, when   asked  to   compare    the system   to  traditional
communication tools (i.e., email and threaded discussion) for group collaboration support, the participants felt the
ActionOrganizer was more effective in helping them to reflect on group members' comments and ideas and made it
easier to manage     information   entered into   the system  (mean=    3.78,  SD=0.72).    Second, when    asked  about  any
concerns they had while using the system, the participants felt comfortable interacting with the system (mean= 3.29,
SD=0.55). Third, when asked about the ease of use of the system's navigation and orientation, the participants felt
the layout was easy to follow and the amount of instruction was just enough (mean= 3.74, SD=0.51).              Lastly, when
asked about the system's ability to support problem analysis and action plan development, the participants perceived
the system to be helpful and useful to support their problem solving activities (mean= 3.91, SD=0.51). Although the
significance of the survey findings is not substantial due to the small group size, its value lies in the knowledge
gained from specific items in the instruments and issues that must be addressed for the researchers in the revision
and   implementation  of   ActionOrganizer.   The   goal  is to  seek  optimality rather then  validity  in the instructional
design and development process (Reigeluth, 1989).

          Subjects who completed the survey also participated in a group interview session. Due to the number of
subjects, they were divided into two groups (4 and 6 respectively). As a result, two group interview sessions were
conducted. A doctoral student who specialized in focus group process was hired to act as the session facilitator to
monitor the process and facilitate the discussion of the interview questions. The interview used a semi-structured
technique  to gather  information    about the    impact of  the system  and  the subjects' perception  of  the system.   An
interview guide    with a  list of questions was    prepared  by  the  researcher to   ensure consistency   in the questions.
During the interview, the facilitator was also free to explore the topic more broadly and to establish a dialog with the
subjects.

          Overall, subjects commented that the ActionOrganizer provided an effective framework for guiding them
through their problem-solving process. One of the most helpful aspects of the tool, according to the subjects, was
that the framework assisted the project group members to develop a shared understanding of the project process and
nomenclature, which made both the project task and communication easier. Another useful aspect of the tool was
that it provided a comfortable starting point for students to begin solving the problem, much like a scaffold where
students can step through the problem solving process without feeling lost or overwhelmed by the complexity of
problem.  Major emerging themes were derived from the group interviews including: opportunities for tracing and
reflecting upon one's learning when engaged in problem-based learning activities; opportunities of incorporating
technology   to  scaffold, regulate,  monitor     and  thus  enhance   one's  critical thinking   and  metacognitive   skills;
opportunities of structured and scaffolded peer interaction and collaboration; and opportunities of illustrating critical
thinking and metacognition traits. Detailed descriptions of the group interview session findings will be reported in a
future full-length paper.

                                                              275                                                   ICLS 2006
Conclusions
         The ActionOrganizer design approach offers an alternate means to systematically and effectively facilitate
and evaluate students' cognitive and meta-cognitive skills during the problem solving process. With the integration
of an expert problem-solving model, database technology and a graphical user interface, the system has the potential
to support problem-based learning in both large classrooms and online learning environments. Wide adoption of the
system could have the potential to transform the traditional lecture-based classroom into an active, inquiry-based
learning environment. As a logical next step, larger scale field tests should be conducted to identify whether there
are discernable differences in students' problem solving and collaborative learning processes across disciplines, to
determine the system's effectiveness in assessing users' comprehension of knowledge domains associated with the
problem, and to explore how learning and performance theories (e.g., metacognition, scaffolding, and problem based
learning) can be better illustrated, promoted, and extended with the support of technology.

References
Barrows, H. S. (1986). A taxonomy of problem-based learning methods. Medical Education. 20, pp.481-486.
Berardi-Colleta, B., Buyer, L.S., Dominowski, R.L., & Rellinger, E.R. (1995). Metacognition and problem transfer:
         A process-oriented approach. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21,
         205-223.
Borkowski, J.G., Carr, M., & Pressley, M. (1987). "Spontaneous" strategy use: Perspectives from metacognitive
         theory.   Intelligence, 11, 61-67.
Bottge, B. A. & Watson, E. A. (2002). Using video-based math problems to connect the skills and understandings of
         incarcerated adults with disabilities. Journal of Special Education Technology, 17(2), 25-38.
Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational Research.
         18, 32-42.
Buyer, L.S., Walsh, S., & Russell, T.A. (1997).     Metacognitive training procedures transfer across problem types.
         Poster presented at the 1997 American Psychology Society Convention, Washington, D.C.
Chi, M.T.H.,    deLeeuw,    N.,  Chiu, M.H.,    and   LaVancher,    C.   (1994).  Eliciting self-explanations improves
         understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Cruickshank, B. J. & Olander, J. (2002). Can problem-based instruction stimulate higher order thinking? Converting
         an instrument analysis lab. Journal of College Science Teaching, 31(6), 374-77.
Dirks, M.A. (1985). Metacognition: Students in charge of their thinking. Roeper Review, 8(2), 96-100,
Edelson,  D.   C., Gordin, D. N.,  & Pea,   R. (1999).  Addressing   the challenges of inquiry-based   learning through
         technology and curriculum design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3-4), 391-450.
Flavell, J.H., &   Wellman,  H. M.  (1977).  Metamemory.    In R.V.    Karl &  J.W. Hagen    (Eds.). Perspectives  on the
         development of memory and cognition. New York: Erlbaum.
Friedman, R. S. & Deek, F. P. (2002). Problem-based learning and problem-solving tools: Synthesis and direction
         for distributed education environments. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 13(3), 239-57.
Gourgey, A.F. (1998). Metacognition in basic skills instruction. Instructional Science, 26, 81-96.
Hartman, J.H.(2001). Developing students' metacognitive knowledge and skills. In H. J. Hartman .(Ed.).
         Metacognition in learning and instruction: Theory, research and practice. London: Kluwer Academic.
Koschmann,     T.D., Kelson,  A.C.,  Feltovich, P.J., &  Barrows,    H.S. (1996).  Computer-supported     problem-based
         learning: A principles approach to the use of computers in collaborative learning. In T. Koschmann (Ed).
         CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kuhn, D. (1999). A developmental model of critical thinking. Educational Researcher, 28, 16 ­ 25.
Pedersen,  S.  (2003). Motivational  orientation  in  a problem-based    learning environment.   Journal  of  Interactive
         Learning Research, 14(1), 51-77.
Reigeluth, C. M. (1989). Educational technology at the crossroads: New mindsets and new directions. Educational
         Technology Research & Development, 37(1), 67-80.
Roschelle  J.  (1992). Collaborative inquiry:   Reflections on  Dewey     and  technology   for situated learning. Paper
         presented at the American Educational Research Association Meeting, San Francisco.
Rosenbaum,     H.  (2001). Educating   information    professionals  with   problem based    learning and  collaborative
         technology. Proceedings of the ASIST Annual Meeting, 38, 199-208.
Scardamalia,   M.  &  Bereiter, C. (2000).   Commentary   on   part I: Process and  product  in problem-based   learning
         (PBL) research. In D. H. Evensen & C. E. Hmelo (Eds.). Problem-based learning: A research perspective
         on learning interactions. Mahwah, NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schraw, G. & Moshman, D. (1995). Metacognitive theories. Educational Psychological Review, 7, 351-371

                                                           276                                                  ICLS 2006
