CHARACTERIZING THE NATURE OF DISCOURSE IN MATHEMATICS
                                              CLASSROOMS

          Radha R. Kalathil, University of Illinois, Chicago,1007 W. Harrison Street, Chicago, IL 60607
                                                    kalathil@uic.edu

        Abstract: A key idea in mathematics education reform today is the need to support discourse in
        classrooms. Despite the importance of this goal however, research has shown that realizing this
        vision of discourse can be hard to achieve.    To address this issue, I introduce a framework that can
        be   used  to study and   implement   discourse   in mathematics   classrooms.  Data  come     from  two
        second-grade classrooms in which instruction was based on a reform-based curriculum. The study
        examines the character of the discourse that occurred in these two classrooms. I first identify six
        distinct discourse structures that were used as building blocks for talking about students' solutions
        to mathematical problems. I also identify three broad patterns in the ways these structures were
        used to define interactions in the classrooms. These patterns vary in the level of complexity from
        getting   discourse started  to  increasingly  complex    patterns where  students   were   engaging   in
        mathematically complex discussions.

Introduction
        One of the key ideas in mathematics education reform today is the need to support discourse in classrooms
(NCTM 1991, 2000). This emphasis is motivated by a desire to change the way in which mathematics teaching and
learning is envisioned and implemented in classrooms. Work in the area of situated cognition argues that learning is
an interactive process where students learn by interacting and participating in practices with others in social and
cultural contexts (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Cobb & Yackel, 1996; Cobb, Wood, Yackel, & McNeal, 1992;
Greeno, 1991; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Vygotsky, 1978). This is in contrast with the traditional teacher-dominated
view of instruction. In traditional classrooms the teacher is seen as the authority and he or she evaluates students to
see how well they have acquired knowledge (Sinclair & Courthard, 1975). In this model of classroom instruction
and learning, students passively receive knowledge from the teacher and answer directives from the teacher.

        As researchers and educators begin to use sociocultural perspectives to consider teaching and learning, an
emphasis is instead placed on establishing classroom environments in which students are engaged in meaningful
mathematical activities.  In particular students are expected to have opportunities to talk about mathematics and to
share their ideas with their teachers as well as with others in the community    (Ball, 1993; Davis, Mahir & Noddings,
1990; Dorfler, 2000; Greeno, 1991; Hufferd-Ackles, Fuson & Sherin, 2004; Lampert, 1990; NCTM, 2000).                In this
context, students explain and clarify their thinking and respond to others' questions about their ideas.     Students and
the teacher talk about the mathematics as well as about executing the procedures and algorithms.

        Despite the importance of this goal, research has shown that realizing this vision of discourse in classrooms
can be hard   to achieve  (Bauersfeld,  1995; Gallimore   &  Tharp,  1990;  Sherin, 2002).   First, it can  be hard  to   get
discourse started  in the classroom.   For  many   teachers  this involves  a significant rethinking    of  their goals   for
instruction.  And  even  in cases where   teachers  begin to  make   changes  in their instruction  to include    aspects of
mathematics reform (for example focusing on understanding versus executing algorithms), they may tend to follow
traditional patterns of discourse (Leinhardt, 1993; Spillane & Zeuli, 1999).  In this way some long-established norms
of school may    dominate   the patterns of discourse, resulting  in an emphasis    on right answers    and a  reliance   on
teachers' knowledge (Ball, 1991, 1993).

        Second, discourse is hard to establish because of what is asked of the students. Students may be unsure of
what is expected and talking about mathematics may not come naturally to them (Cobb, Wood & Yackel, 1994;
NCTM, 2000).      Teachers  have  to model,   guide and help  them   learn how   to do  so. Finally,   even when   reform-
oriented discourse is established, it can be difficult to maintain over time. Furthermore, it can be quite challenging to
move beyond an initial state in which discussion is centered on explaining one's work, to one in which the discourse
is consistently around significant mathematical ideas (Sherin, 2002).

                                                          277                                                     ICLS 2006
          This study contributes to these issues by introducing a framework for exploring how students and teachers
talk about mathematical problems and solutions. I also apply this framework to two second-grade classrooms. The
classrooms were using a new reform-based curriculum that emphasizes the establishment of productive discourse
among the teacher and students. In particular, the curriculum encourages students to make visual representations of
their  individual  solution methods.   The  class then   discusses  these different  methods. This    study examines   the
discourse that occurs as the class discusses these different methods.

          Specifically this study asks the question: What discourse structures are used by elementary students and
teachers to talk about students' solutions to mathematical tasks? By discourse structures I am referring to units or
components that can be used to talk about the mathematics. Further I ask the question: How are these structures used
together to form patterns of classroom discourse?

          Prior research on classroom discourse has examined strategies that teachers can use to facilitate discourse
(Ball, 1993;   Fraivillig, Murphy   &  Fuson,  1999;  Hufferd-Ackles,    2000;  Kazemi,   1999). These   address  specific
instructional techniques that seem to support the development of classroom discourse. For example, revoicing or
restating a student's idea helps other students to follow along (Michaels & O'Connor, 1996). Hufferd-Ackles (2000)
describes specific types of probing questions that are critical to the establishment of productive discourse.

          Other  research  on   classroom discourse  has   examined  discourse  interaction  patterns in classrooms.   For
example, Mehan (1979) found a reproducible pattern of Initiation, Response, and Evaluation in interactions between
teachers and students. The teacher initiates the interaction by asking a question. There is a response, followed by an
evaluation of the response. Other researchers have described a process of funneling as a way in which teachers can
get students to focus in or a few ideas for the class to discuss (Sherin, 2002; Wood, 1997).         This study considers
both of these perspectives and attempts to describe specific discourse strategies as well as discourse patterns that are
comprised of these strategies.

          This study contributes to current research in several ways. First, the framework helps us to characterize the
nature of classroom discourse in mathematics beyond what is currently known. Specifically this research identifies
particular discourse structures that are used as students explain, ask questions, and communicate with one another
about  their solutions to   mathematical   problems   and   situations. Explaining   one's  thinking  and   being able  to
participate in productive discussions of mathematical ideas are important learning goals of mathematics education
reform (Hiebert et al., 1997; Lampert, 1990; NCTM, 2000). By detailing the discourse in two classrooms, this study
enhances    our knowledge    of   what discourse  in mathematics    can   look like. Furthermore    the development    and
classification of discourse structures increases our understanding of the different ways in which students can be
encouraged to talk about mathematical problems and situations.

          Second, the framework is useful because it offers directions for teachers who want to pursue such discourse
in their  own   classrooms.  In other  words, the identified structures  can be  thought  of as particular  strategies that
teachers can attempt to implement in their classrooms. Further, the results of this research provide valuable ideas
that can be used to inform professional development around creating and maintaining discourse in mathematics
classrooms.

Methodology and Setting
Context
          The research reported in this study is based on observations in two mathematics classrooms in an urban
elementary (K-8) school. The research is based on principles of a case-study approach, which allows us to isolate
and   study in  an in-depth  manner   the issues within  a specific context.   This is particularly appropriate given  the
complexity of studying classroom interactions     (Cohen, 1990; Fraivillig, 1995; Spillane, 1998; Yin, 1994).     The two
classrooms were second-grade classrooms where the teachers were in their first year of implementing the Children's
Math World curriculum (herein referred to as CMW). The CMW (Fuson et.al, 2000) classroom is seen as one where
there  is a collaborative  effort towards  learning  and where  learning  occurs through   interactions  with others.  The
curriculum includes many features that support these goals, three of which are particularly relevant for this study.

                                                            278                                                  ICLS 2006
          First, the CMW curriculum places a strong emphasis on students creating visual representations of their
solutions to the problem situations. These in turn help them to make sense of a problem situation, as well as to
facilitate their thinking and explanations. A second aspect of the curriculum that is relevant is the focus on having
students use different methods for solving problems. Finally, another aspect of the curriculum that pertains to this
study is a focus on encouraging discourse among students and the teacher. One of the ways in which a culture of
collaboration and discourse is encouraged is through what is called "math talk". Math talk involves the discussion of
ideas  and    problem-solving   strategies amongst     the  community    after  students     have  drawn   models   to  solve   and
represent  problem    situations. This study   seeks   to unpack    the nature  of   this math talk   as the students   engage   in
discussion specifically of different solution methods. In particular it examines the kinds of discourse structures that
are used  in  these   discussions.  Further,  it examines   the   kinds  of  patterns  of  discourse   that  are  built with these
structures.

Data collection
          During  the    school year  1999-2000    the  mathematics     classes   of the  two  classrooms    were   observed    and
videotaped.    The classes were observed (on average) every week from September through May. In addition, field
notes  were   collected  during   each observation.    Observation   notes   contained    detailed information    concerning    (1)
general lesson procedures, (2) students' engagement and participation in the activities, (3) key events that occurred
and (4) how the teacher and students communicated about mathematics ideas.                 Notes on general lesson procedures,
students'  engagement     and   participation and  events   provided    contextual   information   for   the examination     of the
interactions around students' drawings.

          A   variety of types  of  interactions  around   students'  representations     of their solutions  were   noted,  those
involving   (a) the   teacher and  individual    students as   she moved    through    the classroom,    (b) the  teacher   and all
students, and (c) students and other students.     Particular attention was paid to the discussions at the board because a
significant portion of the lessons comprised this type of interaction. The displays of the students' representations of
their solution methods that appeared on the board were recorded both by video and within the field notes.

Data Analysis
          This study seeks to understand the nature of discourse in a mathematics classroom by looking closely at
interactions  around   students'  displays  of   their solutions.   The  research    reported  is  largely  qualitative  in  nature,
describing aspects of the communication as students and the teacher discussed the different solution methods made
by  students  to represent    and  solve problems.      The  observation    field notes    along  with the   videotapes   of these
observations form the corpus of the data for this study. All of the videotapes were fully transcribed. Data analysis
was   guided  by  a   combination   of fine-grained    analysis   of the video    (Schoenfeld,     Smith   & Arcavi,    1993)   and
discourse analysis techniques (Erikson, 1986). The analysis focused on studying in detail one portion of the daily
lesson ­ the discussions of the different solution methods at the board.          There were three stages of analysis. These
are described below.

Stage 1
          In this initial stage, all of the 45 lessons were examined and the notion of `display events' was defined. A
display event is a lesson segment in which a set of one of more solution methods related to a particular problem is
explored.   I called  these  "display  events"   because   the focus  of discussion    was   the  drawings   and  representations
students displayed on the board. The basis for these drawings or representations could be a known representation
(e.g. the number     line), a representation  introduced   by   the  curriculum,   or  one   invented  by  students. The    display
events in all 45 lessons were identified. Two researchers performed this analysis independently in order to ensure
the reliability of the process and agreement was over 95%.

Stage 2
          The   goal  of this stage was   to  identify  and  characterize   the different    kinds of  talk  that occurred   in the
classroom   within   the display  events.  To  explore   this, five  lessons were    chosen,  spaced   over  the  year,  for closer
examination.     The  display   events that   had been    identified within  these    lessons  were   examined    with   particular
attention to examining what occurred as the teacher and students discussed the different solutions to mathematical
problems.     Here I looked at various factors including (1) who was speaking, (2) what was being said, (3) what was
the purpose of what was said,      (4) how was this related to the initial problem,        (5) what mathematical concept was
being  addressed,    (6) how   many   representations   were   considered,   and   (7) were   there  any   changes   made    to the

                                                               279                                                       ICLS 2006
representations during the discussion. The display events were then divided into chunks of activities, according to
when the nature of the talk changed. From this chunking, patterns and categories emerged. In particular I identified
six different discourse structures. These structures will be discussed in the next section.

Stage 3
        With these discourse structures in mind, I proceeded to the next stage of analysis. Here ten lessons were
selected from each of the two teachers - making a total of twenty lessons chosen for this stage of analysis. The
lessons chosen were spread throughout the year, while ensuring that they covered varied topics as well. All of the
display events in each of the twenty lessons were coded using the six discourse structures identified earlier. Another
trained researcher using the same categories independently examined the lessons to ensure inter-coder reliability.
Agreement was over 95%.

        Having identified and coded these structures I also looked at how these structures were used together. Here
I looked at the sequence of structures in these lessons ­ the order and the frequency of the use of these structures.
Next I explored  what recurrent patterns  of  interactions occurred around      the use of   these discourse structures.
Specifically, snapshots of the twenty lessons were examined with attention to (a) the order in which the discourse
structures were used and (b) the frequency    of re-occurring sequences      of structures. Again  through an  iterative
process three distinct patterns were identified and coded for in the snapshots of the twenty lessons. Another trained
researcher independently coded the lesson snapshots for the three patterns. Agreement was over 98%.

        Once these patterns had been identified in the twenty lessons, the corresponding notes and videotapes were
again examined. This was done in order to better understand the nature of the different interaction patterns and fine-
grained differences within each pattern. In summary, this stage of analysis focused on trying to understand at a
deeper level than the previous stage, the kinds of interaction patterns that were happening as the community talked
about students' solutions to mathematical tasks. The results of this stage (Stage 3) of the analysis form the central
results of the study and are described in the Results section that follows.

Results and Discussion
        The results from this study are organized in two parts. The first part identifies discourse structures that were
used in these classrooms as the students and teachers discussed student solutions to mathematical tasks. The second
part describes recurrent patterns in the ways that these six structures were used to promote discourse and math talk
in the community. In the next few paragraphs I briefly outline the discourse structures and the interaction patterns.
The paper will discuss these in detail including providing examples from the data.

Discourse in the classroom community

Building blocks
        There were six distinct discourse structures that formed the building blocks for interaction in the classroom
around students' representations of their solutions. The structures that emerged were
·   Answer and partial explanation [1a]: Different solution(s) for the problem are produced or displayed on the
    board. Within the representation there is an answer and a partial solution path that is available to the audience.
    The explanation and answer that can be inferred is non-verbal.
·   Explicit explanation [1b]: Explicit explanations are provided, by the maker or others, of the problem solved.
    This explanation is the verbal extension of the previous structure.     The explanation may be about the elements
    in the representation, how the representation was created, or about the strategy or method used to solve the
    problem being represented.
·   Extension [2a]: A discussion of mathematical ideas. There is no longer just an explanation of the representation,
    but rather statements that go beyond the explanation and extend the problem situation or solution. Types of
    extensions include discussing the conceptual meaning of solution procedure, or discussing other mathematical
    ideas.
·   Comparison [2b]: A comparison is made among the different solution methods displayed on the board.            The
    comparison may be about the features of the different representations, about the strategies used in the different
    solutions, or about the answers obtained.

                                                         280                                                   ICLS 2006
·   Conjecture [3a]: A hypothesis that extends the problem situation in a more generalized direction. Generalized
    positions    that deal with   the  underlying  mathematical     concept  are   addressed.    It is sometimes     implicitly
    formulated and needs teacher support to be a conjecture. The purpose is to construct an understanding of a
    general concept.
·   Justification  [3b]:  An    explanation  or justification is given  for the  conjecture  that was  offered.  By   working
    through the conjectures, an understanding of the general concept is constructed.

    Each of the structures represents a discourse activity that was performed using the solutions represented and
displayed in the classroom. The structures vary in the level of mathematical reasoning required from (a) answering
and explaining the problem in the first two structures (Answer and Partial explanation and Explicit explanation); (b)
going   beyond   the  problem    situation in the Extension    and  Comparison     structures; and   (c) generalizing    in the
Conjecture and Justification structures.     Further, structures 1a-b and 3a-b can be thought of as being in parallel. In
structures 1a and 3a, there is a drawing or a statement made without an explanation. Structures 1b and 3b provide
the justification for the drawing (structure 1a) or statement (structure 3a). The structures will be discussed in detail
in the paper.

          To further understand the ways in which these structures were used in these classrooms, the analysis also
looked for patterns of interactions formed around the use of these structures.         As a result three recurrent specific
types of interactions around students' solutions to mathematical tasks were identified. One pattern that was used was
a Getting Started pattern. This basic interaction pattern serves to initiate discourse around a representation. This
pattern begins when a display of a solution is presented to the class.        Discourse then moves to giving an explicit
explanation. This is followed by an extension activity based on the representation. These interaction sequences are
usually brief and often multiple instances of problem sets are explored. Following the Getting Started pattern, the
discourse  may   continue    in one of   the following   two  ways.  In some  cases  the   discourse   continues  as  the class
compares the different solution methods represented on the board. This is called Investigating by Comparing. Here
the comparison structure is used along with the other structures. In other cases, the class engages in what I call
Going Deeper. This involves an extended discussion of mathematically significant ideas. Such interaction sequences
tend to be longer and fewer instances of problem sets are explored as students engage in discussions relating to a
greater   number  of  issues related  to one  set of  solutions.  In the paper   I relate  these patterns   specifically to the
discourse patterns identified earlier. Detailed examples of these patterns from the data will also be discussed.

Implications and future work
          This study provided a description of the different ways in which students in these classrooms talked about
their solutions and representations of mathematics problems.        The study identified six structures of various levels of
complexity that were used to define discourse around these represented solutions. The study also identified three
recurrent  patterns   in the ways   these  structures were    used.  The    identification and   description of  the  different
structures and patterns is useful for a few reasons.

          First, the  definition and  identification  of the  structures and  patterns helps   to   further characterize  what
mathematics reform looks like in practice. In particular, the six discourse structures define individual components of
mathematics talk. Exploring the different patterns is also an important step in moving towards a better understanding
of classroom discourse. We see that the discourse structures are not just isolated units ­ but can be coordinated and
integrated into these patterns. Second, each of the structures addresses a different purpose that teachers and students
have   in mind   while   talking about   the mathematical    problem  situation. The   structures   define  different types  of
discourse, each with it own learning goals. It is important at this time to clarify the kind of learning goals that this
research addresses. One measure of assessing learning by students is through performance measures on standardized
tests.  The research in this study does not address this aspect of testing learning. Rather, this research addresses
current mathematics learning goals by investigating other measures of understanding.             For instance, there is a non-
verbal aspect of understanding where a representation is made to solve a given problem. Another measure consists
of the verbal discussion and explanation of one's own or others' represented solutions. The six discourse structures
are thus verbal and non-verbal indications of mathematical understanding.

          From   this viewpoint   then,  the  identification  and characterization  of the   discourse   in these classrooms
addresses mathematics reform efforts that are tied to engagement in mathematical activity through participation in
discourse. Work in the area of situated cognition argues that learning is an interactive process and students learn by

                                                              281                                                     ICLS 2006
participating in practices with others in social and cultural contexts (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Cobb &
Yackel, 1996). Thus researchers began to emphasize the importance of participating in meaningful mathematical
activities where students do not just learn how to execute the algorithms. Instead researchers emphasize that students
should be able to hypothesize, try things out, execute mathematical procedures, communicate and defend results and
reflect on the methods selected and the results generated (Cobb, & Bauersfeld, 1995; Davis, Maher, Noddings, 1990;
NCTM, 2000). The six discourse structures address these different aspects of engagement in mathematical activity
and learning.

        This work has implications for teacher education in important ways. Establishing and maintaining patterns
of discourse is not easy and places significant demands on teachers.            This work considers the abstract notion of
`mathematical discourse' and breaks it down into concrete discourse structures. These structures are at a grain size
that is useful for teachers. By identifying these structures and then combining them to form patterns of discourse,
this work  is  an important   step   in  moving   teachers   towards a  better understanding   of discourse  in   mathematics
classrooms. The units are a useful step in helping teachers make sense of how to foster discourse in classrooms by
giving them components that are easier to understand. The structures that were identified could allow teachers to
identify different ways in which students might be encouraged to engage in mathematical discourse. Relating the
talk of students in their classrooms to these structures could contribute to teachers' understanding of how to foster
discourse.
Furthermore, this work provides us with a model of classroom discourse by breaking it down into components.
Teachers   can   use  these models    to study    their own   classrooms  and  find ways    of implementing    discourse.   By
exploring the different ways in which the structures can be used to facilitate and form discourse patterns, the work
offers a new approach to the design of mathematical discourse communities.

Discussion of the Framework developed

        In particular, the study contributes to this effort through the development and identification of a framework
that can be used to study and develop discourse. The framework that was developed has important implications for
mathematics research.       First the framework     addresses  both  individual  discourse  strategies as  well as   how they
interact. The first part of the framework identified six distinct discourse structures that could be used to characterize
the  discussions  that students   and    the teacher    had about  students' solutions  to mathematical    tasks. The  list of
structures defined offers a manageable way in which to characterize these discussions. There are enough distinct
structures to capture the different kinds of talk. At the same time, the list is not    too long. In the second part of the
framework,  I    showed how   these   different   structures  could be  used to  form  discourse  patterns for  interacting in
classrooms about students' solutions to problems.

        Second, the framework describes trajectories ­ at two levels. First there is a continuum along which the
structures fall. There are three levels at which these structures fall. At the first level, the two structures (Answer and
partial explanation, and explicit explanation) address answering and explaining the problem. At the next level, we
have the extension and comparison structures that address going beyond the initial problem. Finally at the third level
the conjecture and justification structures address generalizing.       Thus there is a continuum in the levels at which the
structures fall, with each level addressing increasingly complex reasoning. In addition, there is a continuum along
which the discourse patterns fall. The Getting Started pattern is a way of getting classroom discourse started. It can
be seen as a bridge and jumping off point for other interactions. It is a good starting step and is a basic interaction
pattern that is not very difficult to achieve. It has easily reproducible bits or sections and has a flow that is natural.
You  begin with   the  display    of the solution,  explain  what   you did  and then  explore  some   mathematical   concept
embedded in the display. Once this pattern is achieved, by adding the comparison structure the Investigating by
comparing pattern can by built. Further, the Going Deeper pattern uses the same basic structure ­ but encourages a
deeper and longer sequence of interactions.

        Lastly    the framework      offers  a modular   approach   to building  discourse. The   framework    first identified
specific discourse structures that could be used to talk about mathematics solutions. These can then be used to form
patterns of discourse. So the structures provide the building blocks      or components that can be combined in different
ways to form discourse patterns (modules).
In  conclusion,  the  classrooms     engaged   in significant mathematical   discourse. More    importantly, the  classrooms
moved along a continuum as they engaged in discourse around students' solutions to mathematical tasks.                Students
encouraged one another and formed a community where students learned from one another. The discussions and

                                                               282                                                   ICLS 2006
exchanges were mostly amongst students, with the teacher playing the role of facilitator of the discussions. Besides,
the classroom did not just use one kind of structure or pattern of interaction for discourse. The discussions were
diverse and addressed important mathematical issues as well.

       There are a few points worth noting here. Firstly these classrooms were not `special' classrooms, serving a
gifted population. The classrooms were in an urban school district serving low-income students many of who were
speaking English as a second language. Secondly, the students were second-graders and to see the level of discourse
and the kinds of discussions and talk they were having is encouraging and noteworthy.     Furthermore, the teachers in
these classrooms were not veteran teachers. Both were in their fourth year of teaching and in their first year of
implementing a reform based mathematics curriculum. In summary, it is encouraging to see the kind of engagement
and discourse that these students engaged in, where the discourse covered mathematically significant issues. This
study shows that such a result is achievable and thus provides encouragement for our reform efforts.

REFERENCES
Ball, D.L. (1991). What's all this talk about "discourse"? Arithmetic Teacher, 39, 44-48.
Ball, D. L. (1993). With an eye on the mathematical horizon: Dilemmas of teaching elementary school
       mathematics. Elementary School Journal, 93, 373-397.
Bauersfeld, H. (1995). "Language Games" in the Mathematics Classroom: Their Function and Their
       Effects. In P. Cobb, & H. Bauersfeld (Eds.) The Emergence of Mathematical Meaning ­ Interactionn in
       Classroom Cultures (pp. 271-291). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
        Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Cobb, P., Bauersfeld, H. (1995). Introduction: The Coordination of Psychological and Sociological Perspectives in
        mathematics Education.       In P. Cobb, & H. Bauersfeld (Eds.) The Emergence of Mathematical Meaning ­
        Interactionn in Classroom Cultures (pp. 1-16). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cobb, P., Wood, T., Yackel, E., & McNeal, B. (1992). Characteristis of classroom mathematics traditions: An
        interactional analysis. American Educational Research Journal, 29, 573-604.
Cobb, P., Wood, T., & Yackel, E. (1994). Discourse, Mathematical Thinking, and Classroom Practice. In Contexts
        for Learning: Sociocultural Dynamics in Children's Development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cobb, P., & Yackel, E. (1996). Constructivist, emergent and sociocultural Perspectives in the context of
       Developmental research. Educational Psychologist, 31, 175 ­ 190.
Cohen, D. (1990). A Revolution in One Classroom: The Case of Mrs. Oublier. Educational Evaluation and Policy
      Analysis, 12 (3), 327-345.
Davis, R.B., Maher, C.A. & Noddings, N. (1990). Suggestions for the Improvement of Mathematics Education.       In
       R.B. Davis, C.A. Maher, & N.Noddings (Eds.) Constructivism Views on the Teaching and Learning of
       Mathematics (pp.). Reston, VA: NCTM.
Dorfler, W. (2000). Means for Meaning. In P. Cobb, E. Yackel, & K. McClain (Eds.), Symbolizing and
       Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms ­ Perspectives on Discourse, Tools, and Instructional Design
       (pp. 99-132). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Erikson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In C. Wittrock (Ed.), The handbook of research on
       teaching (3rd ed., pp. 119-161). New York: MacMillan.
Fraivillig, J. L. (1995, April). Advancing Children's mathematical thinking: A case study of an expert teacher.
       Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), San
       Fransisco.
Fraivilig, J., Murphy, L.A., & Fuson, K. (1999). Advancing Children's Mathematical Thinking in Everyday
       Mathematics Classrooms. Journal for Research in Mthematics Education, 30 (2), 148-170.
Fuson, K. C., De La Cruz, Y., Lo Cicero, A. M., Smith, S. T., Hudson, K., Ron, P., & Steeby, R. (2000). Blending
       the best of the 20th century to achieve a mathematics equity pedagogy in the 21st century. In M. Burke
       (Ed.), Learning mathematics for a new century, 2000 Yearbook of the NCTM. Reston, VA.
Gallimore, R., & Tharp, R. (1990). Teaching Mind in Society: Teaching, Schooling, and Literate Discourse. In
       L.C.Moll (Ed.) Vygotsky and Education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Greeno, J. (1991). Number sense as situated knowing in a conceptual domain. Journal for Research in Mathematics
       Education, 22, 170-218.
Hiebert, J., Carpenter, T.P., Fennema, E., Fuson, K.C., Wearne, D., Murray, H., Olivier, A., & Human, P. (1997).
       Making Sense ­ Teaching and Learning Mathematics with Understanding. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

                                                           283                                                ICLS 2006
Hufferd-Ackles, K. (2000). Learning by all in a Math-Talk Community. Unpublished dissertation. Evanston, IL:
        Northwestern University.
Hufferd-Ackles, K., Fuson, K., & Sherin, M. G. (2004). Describing levels and components of a math-talk
       community. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 35 (2), 81-116.
Kazemi, E. (1999). Discourse that promotes conceptual understanding. Teaching Children Mathematics, 4)7, 410-
       414.
Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not the question and the solution is not the answer: Mathematical
       knowing and teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27, 29-63.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, England:
       Cambridge University Press.
Leinhardt, G. (1993). In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in instructional psychology, 4, pp. 1-54. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Mehan, H. (1979). Learning Lessons: Social organization in the Classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
       Press.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (1991). Professional Standards for Teaching Mathematics. Reston,
       Va.: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (2000). Principals and Standards for School Mathematics. Reston,
       Va.: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
O'Connor, M.C., & Michaels, S. (1996). Shifting participant frameworks: Orchestrating thinking practices in group
       discussion. In D. Hicks (Ed.) , Discourse, learning, and schooling (pp. 63-103). New York: Cambridge
       University Press.
Schoenfeld, A.H., Smith, J.P. & Arcvi, A. (1993). Learning: The microgenetic analysis of one student's evolving
       understanding of a complex subject matter domain. In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in instructional
       psychology (pp. 55-175). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sherin, M., G. (2002). A Balancing Act: Developing a Discourse Community in a Mathematics Classroom. Journal
       of Mathematics Teacher Education, 5, 205-233
Sinclair, J.McH. & Coulthard, R.M.(1975). Towards and analysis of discourse: The English used by teachers and
       pupils. London: Oxford University Press.
Spillane, J. (1998). Challenging Instruction for "All Students": Policy, Practioners and Practice. Evanston, IL:
       Institute for Policy Research (IPR), Working Paper (also published as NSSE book chapter).
Spillane, J., & Zeuli, J. (1999). Reform and Teaching: Exploring Patterns of Practice in the Context of National and
       State Mathematics Reforms. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 21(1), 1-27.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind and society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA :
       Harvard University Press.
Wood, T. (1997). Alternative patterns of communication in mathematics classes: Funneling or focusing: In H.
       Steinbring, M. Bartolini-Bussi & A. Sierpinska (Eds.), Language and communication in the mathematics
       classroom (pp. 167-178). Reston, VA: NCTM.
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods (2nd ed.), Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

                                                        284                                                ICLS 2006
