                    Interface agents to alleviate online frustration

                            Amy L. Baylor Ph.D., Rinat B. Rosenberg-Kima
   Center for Research of Innovative Technologies for Learning (RITL), Florida State University
                           Innovation Park, 2000 Levy Avenue, Bldg. A, Suite 320
                                        Tallahassee, FL 32310-2735
                              baylor@coe.fsu.edu , rr05@garnet.acns.fsu.edu

         Abstract: Mitigating system-based frustration is important within computer-based learning
         contexts.  In  two  experimental   studies, students  answered  online  survey  items  and  were
         confronted by a frustrating obstacle--an error message pop-up window that blocked them
         from answering the items. In the first study, "Survey Sam," an animated interface agent was
         present throughout the survey, and at the end delivered an affective message (apologetic or
         empathetic)   or remained  silent. Results   revealed that the presence  of   either message  led
         students to attribute the cause of their frustration to the program instead of to themselves.
         Further, participants receiving the empathetic message rated Survey Sam as significantly more
         believable and sincere. The second study investigated the impact of the visual presence of the
         agent by providing identical messages but with voice only. Results reinforced the value of the
         agent's visual preference as more effective than voice only, particularly for the empathetic
         message.

Introduction
         Emotions within learning contexts are not stable. Students may experience many different emotional
states during   the learning process. According      to appraisal  theories of emotion,  emotions    arise from  an
individual's meaning construction and appraisal of continuous interactions with the world (Frijda, 1986; Lazarus,
1991). Especially in learning situations, the process of students' meaning construction and appraisal may acquire
different forms depending on the characteristics of the tasks given to those students. Frustration, where an
obstacle prevents the satisfaction of a desire (Barker, 1938), is one of the negative emotions students deal with
in most learning situations because a learning task usually requires student effort to solve challenging problems.
Therefore, reducing the level of frustration becomes a critical issue in a computer-based learning situation (Bias
& Mayhew, 1994). One method for diffusing frustration involves offering an apology, especially if the one
apologizing is taking responsibility for the obstacle causing the frustration, thus admitting blameworthiness and
regret for an undesirable event (Darby & Schlenker, 1982; Blum-Kulka, House & Kasper, 1989). A second
method   to diffuse  frustration involves delivering    empathetic  concern  for another's emotional   experiences,
especially  if the  one expressing  concern  is not   perceived as  the cause  of  the frustration. Empathy   is an
emotive-cognitive state where the emotional element involves concern with the personal distress of another
person and the cognitive element involves understanding the perspective of the other person (Rogers, 1980),
resulting in a shared, or distributed, emotional experience.

         With regard to previous agent implementations, Mori and colleagues evaluated an affective agent that
was designed to alleviate frustration during a mathematics quiz game by delivering empathetic "happy for" or
"sorry for" responses (Mori, Prendinger, & Ishisuka, 2003); however, results were limited by a small sample

                                                          30                                                   ICLS 2006
size. While Johnson and colleagues have found that agent politeness is valuable in a tutoring environment
(Wang,   Johnson,  Rizzo,   Shaw, &  Mayer,  2005),  they  have  not   focused  on  learner frustration. Baylor and
colleagues investigated the role of interface agent message (presence/absence of motivation) and affective state
(positive versus evasive) on student attitude for mathematically-anxious students (Baylor, Shen, Warren, & Park,
2004). While their results supported the value of cognitively-focused motivational messages (e.g., Bandura,
1997) on student confidence, results were inconclusive regarding the impact of affect as a mediator in the
process.

Experiment 1
   The first experimental study was designed to investigate the impact of interface agent message (apologetic,
empathetic, or none) on student frustration, attribution perception, and attitude. Specifically, we investigated the
following research questions:
   1. Does the presence of an affective message impact participant attitude toward the task, attitude toward the
         agent, or attribution toward the cause of frustration?
   2. Does the type of affective message (apologetic or empathetic) impact participant attitude toward the task,
         attitude toward the agent, or attribution toward the cause of frustration?

Method
Participants
         Participants included thirty undergraduate students (average age = 19.7 years; 93% female) who had
recently completed an introductory course on Educational Technology in a public university in the Southeastern
United   States. Fifty-five participants began   the study, but   only   thirty actually completed   it.  Computer
self-efficacy assessed as part of the pre-survey revealed no differences in efficacy between those who completed
the survey and those who did not, or between treatment groups.

Research Environment and Interface Agent
         The research environment was created so that participants could complete a personality survey (based
on the Big Five Factor theory of personality (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1992) with the presence of "Survey Sam," a
3D animated interface agent. Upon entering the environment, Survey Sam introduced students to the survey,
stating: "Hi, my name is Survey Sam. Here's the survey you take to get your movie tickets. Please do your
best." While   students were  completing   the survey, Survey    Sam    was  always  present  and  displayed  basic
animations,  including  eye-blinking and   head-turning,  figuratively   "watching"  participants as they   worked
through the survey. His presence was maintained throughout the survey to establish his existence as a foundation
for the message that he later delivered to 2/3 of participants. Upon completion of the survey (for the thirty
students, or 52%, who actually finished it), Survey Sam was either silent or provided one of two affective
messages with a human voice: apologetic or empathetic. The script for the apologetic agent was based on the
strategies in the Cross-Cultural Speech Act Realization Project (Blum-Kulka, House, & Kasper, 1989) and the
script for the   empathetic agent paralleled the apologetic script    based on  Roger's  (1980) emotive-cognitive
description of empathy. Table 1 lists the scripts used in this study.

                                                        31                                                      ICLS 2006
Table 1. Scripts for Apologetic and Empathetic Messages
Message       Scripts
Apologetic    "I'm really sorry that this problem happened to you. I know that the problem
              could have been avoided on our part, and it was not your fault. I promise that I
              will report this problem to the system administrator so that it will never happen
              again. Please take a few minutes to describe your experiences from the previous
              screens. Thank you."
Empathetic    "It must have been very frustrating trying to finish the survey with the problem
              you were experiencing. I sympathize with how you feel. I wish that I could have
              helped you to overcome this problem. Please take a few minutes to describe your
              experiences from the previous screens. Thank you."

Post-survey
       The post-survey assessed the dependent variables of agent competency, agent believability, survey
enjoyment, survey frustration level, and attribution of the cause of the frustration. Agent competency and agent
believability measures were adopted from the API (Agent Persona Instrument) developed by Ryu and Baylor
(2005). Three to five items were used to measure each dependent variable and each employed 5-item Likert
scales. Internal consistency reliabilities (Cronbach's alpha) for Agent competency, Agent believability, Survey
enjoyment, and Survey frustration level measure were .90, .74, .98, .88, and .75, respectively.

Procedure
       A total of 289 emails were sent out to invite students to participate in a web-based personality survey
and receive a free movie ticket upon completion. Respondents could complete the survey within the following
four weeks. The 55 participants who began the survey first provided demographic information and information
regarding their computer self-efficacy. Following this, they completed items from the Big Five personality
survey, as presented on five successive screens, with eight items per screen. Beginning on the second screen of
the Big Five survey, a pop-up window appeared and covered up the survey items (see Figure 1). This pop-up
window was designed to stimulate annoyance and frustration in the participants. The participants had to move
the pop-up window out of the way in order to answer the survey questions (the window would not close by
pressing the red "X" button). Because the pop-up window moved back to the original spot after five to nine
seconds, participants had to repeatedly move the pop-up window out of the way to respond to the survey. Indeed,
this was such a frustrating experience that only 30 of the initial 55 participants completed the survey.

     Figure 1. Screen shot with the pop-up window as an obstacle to answer survey questions

                                                   32                                                          ICLS 2006
         After completing the personality survey, the agent was either silent or provided an affective message
(apologetic   or empathetic). Next,  students    completed   a post  survey   to   assess agent  competency,    agent
believability, survey enjoyment, survey frustration level, and attribution of the cause of the frustration.

Data analysis and design
         A planned contrast with alpha level set at .05 was conducted to compare each dependent variable
between those receiving no message (silent agent) and those receiving an affective message (either apologetic or
empathetic). An independent sample t-test with alpha level at .05 was conducted to compare each dependent
measure between the apologetic-message and empathetic-message groups. Students' perception of attribution of
problem cause was analyzed with a one-way ANOVA, across the three agent conditions (silent, apologetic,
empathetic).

Results
Impact of affective message
         The primary research question in this study was concerned with the effect of interface agent message
(or absence). The descriptive statistics for each dependent variable are presented in Table 2.

Table 2. Means and standard deviations of dependent variables across groups.
Message                Agent                Agent            Agent            Survey             Survey
                       Competency           Human-Like       Believability    Enjoyment          Frustration
                       M         SD         M       SD       M        SD      M           SD     M           SD
Apologetic (n=11)      3.18       .68       3.00     .51     3.00     .94     3.25        .96    3.24       .82
Empathetic (n=9)       2.78       .93       2.78     .83     3.89     .60     3.06        .1.09  3.15       .94
Silent (no  message)   3.22       .47       2.85     .39     3.23     .39     3.33        .53    2.23       .93
(n=10)

         For survey frustration, results indicated a statistically significant difference between those receiving an
affective message and those receiving no agent message, t(27) = 2.772, p=.01, d=1.12, a large effect, indicating
that students who received an agent message reported significantly higher frustration from taking the on-line
survey than students who did not receive a message.

         Independent sample t-tests with alpha level at .05 were conducted to compare each dependent variable
between  participants receiving  an  apologetic    versus empathetic   message.    Results  revealed  that  for agent
believability there  was a    statistically significant difference  between   the   apologetic-message   group     and
empathetic-message    group,  t(18)= -2.445,     p<.05, d=1.16,   a large  effect, indicating   that students   in the
empathetic-message group believed the animated agent more (e.g., believed that Survey Sam "meant what he
said," and "was sincere in what he said") than students in the apologetic-message group.

Attribution of cause of problem
         Students also rated their attribution of the cause of the problem. Descriptive statistics for the attribution
of problem cause are presented in Table 3.

                                                          33                                                       ICLS 2006
Table 3. Descriptive statistics for attribution of problem cause
Students attributed the malfunction to...
                               Themselves        Survey Sam           Software             Internet
Message                        M                 M             SD     M             SD     M              SD
                               SD
Apologetic (n=11)              1.82        .75   3.00         1.27    3.82        1.08     3.09        1.14
Empathetic (n=9)               1.56        .73   2.00         1.00    4.22        .83      2.67        1.32
Silent (no message) (n=10)     2.50        .53   2.90         .74     3.60        .70      3.30        .68
(Range of 1-5, where 1=SD and 5=SA)

        A one-way ANOVA setting the alpha level at .05 was conducted to examine whether students attributed
the cause of the problem to themselves, to Survey Sam, to the computer software, or to the Internet. The
ANOVA yielded a significant overall difference, F(2,29) = 5.03,         p  < .05  =  .27. Follow-up   Fisher's least
significant difference (LSD)    tests were   performed   to determine  whether   significant  differences occurred
between the mean scores for each pair of treatments. These tests revealed that those in the silent agent (no
message) group tended to attribute the problem to themselves more than the other two message groups (p < .05).
There  was   no statistically significant  difference  between    the apologetic-message     agent group   and   the
empathetic-message   agent    group.   The   ANOVA     was   also  conducted  to  determine   whether  there   were
differences between groups in attributing the cause of the problem to Survey Sam. As expected, those receiving
an apologetic message tended to attribute the problem to Survey Sam (p<.05). This validated the treatment, as it
indicates that participants believed Survey Sam when he apologized and took responsibility for the problem.

Discussion
        Results  indicate  that  the  presence  of an  affective  message  contributed    to participants reporting
significantly greater frustration. This indicates that they resonated with and believed the agent, as his message
essentially "re-activated" their frustration, validating it and   amplifying it. More   importantly,  students who
received the agent's affective message also tended to attribute the cause of the frustration to the program (rather
than themselves). Given that the problem was indeed out of their control, implementations like this that can
reassure students that they are not at fault are of importance; indeed, this was only a five-sentence intervention,
yet it yielded large effects (over a standard deviation).    Future research should consider the nature of this
self-reported "frustration" and its relative weight in relation to students' attributions of the cause. Results also
indicated that students who received the empathetic message rated the agent as more believable than students in
the apologetic-message   group.  Since   the  empathetic message   conveyed   an  understanding    of the student's
perspective rather than focusing on responsibility, it may have had the effect of making the student feel that
he/she and the agent were figuratively "in the same boat." This might have provided the student with the
perception  of  the interface  agent  as  an  understanding   bystander  instead  of  a   responsible/apologetic or
non-responsive helper. Also, the delay of the apology from the initial occurrence of the problem may have
lessened the credibility of the apologetic message in terms of perceived sincerity. In addition, an apologetic
message that conveys responsibility for the problem may also place the agent in an inferior position, i.e., the
agent may be perceived as someone who has failed in avoiding technical problems. Either way, it is interesting
that such a brief message from a non-human, computer-based, interface agent had such a profound impact, in
line with findings by Reeves and Nass (1996).
        In retrospect, given that 25 of the 55 respondents who began the survey did not finish it (a 45.5%
attrition rate), the survey was likely too frustrating. Another limitation is that the experiment had a low number

                                                         34                                                    ICLS 2006
of participants per condition (9, 10, and 11 respectively). However, in spite of the relatively low statistical power,
the results were statistically significant with large effect sizes (d > 1.0). Another important consideration is that
participants completed the study at their own computer and chosen time/place. While control in implementation
was thus lost, ecological validity was enhanced, as this type of computer-based frustration is more authentically
simulated in a real context. Despite these limitations, the overall impact of these findings is that the presence
and nature of an agent-delivered affective message can impact how a student perceives frustration.      However, a
lingering question from this initial study was: what was the actual impact of the interface agent in leading to
these outcomes?   Thus, a second study was conducted, with two control groups to examine the impact of the
visual presence of "Survey Sam" in delivering the message versus voice-only message delivery.

Experiment 2
Participants
       Participants included undergraduate students (average age = 20.2 years). Sixty participants began the
study, but only twenty-five actually completed it. Computer self-efficacy assessed as part of the pre-survey
revealed no differences in efficacy between those who completed the survey and those who did not, or between
treatment groups.

Procedure
       For this study, "Survey Sam" was not visually present on the screen, but he provided, using voice only,
one of the two messages (empathetic or apologetic) which were identical to the first study. The procedure was
identical to that in the first study in all other ways.

Data Analysis and Design
       Two planned independent sample t-tests with alpha level of .05 were conducted to compare each of the
agent-delivered messages (empathetic and apologetic, from Experiment 1) with the voice-delivered messages
for each of the dependent measures.

Results
       Results    indicated significant differences     between  the agent-delivered   empathetic message  and the
voice-delivered empathetic   message in  two   areas.     First, participants reported that the empathetic "Survey
Sam" was significantly more believable when he was visually present (M=3.89, SD=.20) than absent (M=2.83,
SD=.41, p<.05).   Second, participants were significantly more likely to attribute the frustration/problems they
experienced to the computer software when "Survey Sam" was visually present (M=4.22, SD=.28) than absent
(M=2.83, SD=.44,    p<.01),  with a  large  effect      size (d  > 1.0). With   respect to  the comparison  of the
agent-delivered apologetic   message    versus voice-delivered     apologetic  message,  there  were no significant
differences.

Overall Discussion
       The second study revealed that for the empathetic message in particular, the visual presence of "Survey
Sam" was particularly powerful. Specifically, as compared to the voice-only condition, the visually present
agent led to significantly more positive outcomes with respect to student attribution of source of frustration and
believability of message. While there were no significant differences between agent presence/absence with
respect to the apologetic message, this is supportive of results from the first study, where it was also found less
effective than the empathetic message. Interestingly, the visual presence of the interface agent, "watching" the

                                                            35                                                 ICLS 2006
participant experiencing frustration and then providing an empathetic message, was the most powerful of all the
interventions. This   contributes to increasing evidence   that interface agents can serve   as believable virtual
"peers" to which students respond affectively (Baylor & Plant, 2005; Kim & Baylor, in press). These findings
are important because they suggest that the presence and nature of an affective message can powerfully impact
how  a  student perceives   frustration, and provide  the  catalyst for further  research in the development   of
frustration-mitigating support for computer-based contexts.
        While learner frustration is not always detrimental, and can in fact be a valid part of the learning
process (Kort & Picard, 2001), it is important to continue to investigate alleviating learner frustration that is
extraneous to the learning process (e.g., system-related). Future research should consider the timing of the
message, including messages delivered during each problem occurrence rather than after-the-fact. Future studies
could also track student interactions to determine when participants quit during a frustrating task, as well as
compare participant personality characteristics with their frustration levels, attribution perceptions, and attitudes.

References
Barker, R. (1938). The Effect of Frustration upon the Cognitive Ability. Character and Personality, 7, 145-150.
Baylor, A., Shen, E., Warren, D., 2004. Supporting learners with math anxiety: The impact of pedagogical agent
        emotional and motivational support. ITS
Baylor, A. L., & Plant, E. A. (2005). Pedagogical agents as social models for engineering: The influence of
        appearance on female choice. Paper presented at the Artificial Intelligence in Education: Supporting
        Learning through Intelligent and Socially Informed Technology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Bias, R., & Mayhew, D. (Ed.). (1994). Cost-justfying usability. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Blum-Kulka,    S., J. House  & G.    Kasper (Ed.). (1989). Cross-cultural  pragmatics: Requests   and  apologies.
        Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Compaq, I. (2001). Rage against the machine: A Compaq survey.
Darby, B. W., & Schlenker, B. R. (1982). Children's reactions to apologies. Journal of Personality and Social
        Psychology, 43, 742-753.
Dollard, J., Doob, L. W., Miller, N. E., Mowrer, O. H., & Sears, R. R. (1939). Frustration and Aggression. New
        Haven: Yale University Press.
Frijda, N. (1986). The Emotions. Cambridge University Press.
Kim, Y., & Baylor, A. L. (in press). A social-cognitive framework for pedagogical agents as learning
        companions. Educational Technology Research & Development.
Kort, B., Reilly, R., Picard, R.W. (2001), An Affective Model of Interplay Between Emotions and Learning:
        Reengineering Educational Pedagogy-Building a Learning Companion. In Proceedings of International
        Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT 2001), Madison, Wisconsin, August 2001.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaption. New York: Oxford University Press.
Reeves, B. and Nass, C. (1996). The media equation: How people treat computers, television, and new media
        like real people and places. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Rogers, C. R. (1980). A way of being. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Ryu, J. &  Baylor,    A. L. (2005).  The   Psychometric Structure   of  Pedagogical Agent    Persona. Technology,
        Instruction, Cognition & Learning (TICL) 2(4), 291-315.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation, Grant IIS-0218692.

                                                        36                                                   ICLS 2006
