Insights into the Emergence of Convergence in Group Discussions

                                                   Manu Kapur
       National Institute of Education, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616, manu_kapur@hotmail.com
                                   John Voiklis, Charles K. Kinzer, John Black
              Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W 120th Street, New York, NY 10027
                    jv37@columbia.edu, kinzer@tc.columbia.edu, black@tc.columbia.edu

        Abstract:   Understanding     how   complex    group   discussions     converge  presents     a major
        challenge   for collaborative  problem-solving     research (Fischer    &  Mandl,    2005).   From     a
        complex   systems   perspective,  convergence   in  group   discussions   is an emergent    behavior
        arising  from   the transactional  interactions between     group   members.    Leveraging      on  the
        concepts  of    emergent   simplicity and  emergent    complexity      (Bar-Yam,    2003),  a   set of
        theoretically-sound yet simple rules was hypothesized: Interactions between group members
        were conceptualized as goal-seeking adaptations that either help the group move towards or
        away from its goal, or maintain its status quo. Operationalizing this movement as a Markov
        walk, we present quantitative and qualitative findings from a study of online problem-solving
        groups. Findings suggest high (low) quality contributions have a greater positive (negative)
        impact   on convergence    when   they  come   earlier in a discussion     than later. Significantly,
        convergence analysis was able to predict a group's performance based on what happened in
        the first 30-40% of its discussion.

Introduction
        One of the major challenges facing collaborative problem-solving research is to understand the process
of how groups achieve convergence in their discussions (Fischer & Mandl, 2005). Roschelle (1996) argued that
convergence,  as opposed    to socio-cognitive   conflict, is  more significant   in explaining    why   certain    group
discussions lead to more productive outcomes than others (Barron, 2003). Therefore, understanding the process
of how multiple actors, artifacts, and environments interact and evolve in space and time to converge on an
outcome is critical (Barab, Hay, & Yamagata-Lunch, 2001). Yet, generally speaking, measures and methods for
conceptualizing the evolution of collaborative problem-solving processes as well as the emergence of learning
remain lacking (Barab et al., 2001; Collazos, Guerrero, Pino, & Ochoa, 2002).

        Increasingly, a realization of the inherent complexity in the interactional dynamics of group members
(or agents) is giving way to a more emergent view of how groups function and perform (Arrow, McGrath, &
Berdahl, 2000; Kapur, Voiklis, & Kinzer, 2005; Stahl, 2005). However, the use of complex systems in the
learning sciences is relatively sparse, but gaining momentum (for a fuller review and treatment, see Jacobson &
Wilensky, in press). A major thrust of such research is on the curricula, teaching, and learnability issues related
to complex  systems,  and   how   they influence  learning  and   transfer. However,    complex    systems     also offer
important theoretical conceptions and methodologies that can potentially expand the research tool-kit in the
learning sciences (Jacobson & Wilensky, in press). Our proposal leverages on this potential to better understand
how convergence emerges in group discussions. From a complex systems' perspective, convergence in group
discussions can be seen as an emergent behavior arising from the local interactions between multiple actors, and
mediated by tools and artifacts. But before delving any deeper, we discuss the concept of emergent behavior,
particularly the distinction between emergent simplicity and emergent complexity; a distinction that is central to
our proposal.

Emergent Simplicity versus Emergent Complexity
        Central to the study of complex systems is how the complexity of a whole is related to the complexity
of its parts (Bar-Yam, 2003). The concept of emergent behavior--how macro-level behaviors emerge from
micro-level interactions of individual agents--is of fundamental importance to understanding this relationship.
But, emergent  behavior  can   be  of different types. For  many  complex      systems, their  agents   are themselves
complex, and it is only intuitive to expect complex agents to result in a complex whole. But, is it possible for a
system of complex agents to exhibit simple behavior? Although counter-intuitive, the answer is "yes." For
example,  a neuron  comprises     complex,  autocatalytic,  chemical  systems.    Yet,  its behavior    as  a  whole  in
interacting with other neurons is simple, often conceptualized as simple binary synapse. This type of emergent
behavior, when   complexity    at the micro-level  results  in simplicity   at the macro-level,    is   called emergent
simplicity (Bar-Yam, 2003).

                                                        300                                                          ICLS 2006
         One must also consider the other possibility, in which a system of simple agents (or agents that exhibit
simple behavior) may, as a whole, behave in a complex manner. For example, consider the brain as a system of
neurons  (agents). These    neurons   are complex    themselves,  but exhibit simple    behavior    in  their  synaptic
interactions. Yet,    these simple    interactions between   neurons   collectively give    rise to     complex    brain
"behaviors"--memory, cognition, etc.--that cannot be seen in the behavior of individual neurons. This type of
emergent    behavior, when   simplicity at the micro-level   results in  complexity  at the   macro     level, is called
emergent complexity (Bar-Yam, 2003).

         The   distinction  between   emergent simplicity    and complexity   is  critical, for  it demonstrates    the
possibility that a change   of scale  (micro vs.   macro level)  can  be accompanied    with  a  change   in   the type
(simplicity vs. complexity) of behavior. In this paper, we use notions of emergent simplicity and complexity to
conceptualize a group of individuals (agents) interacting with each other as a complex system. The group, as a
complex system, consists of complex agents, i.e., just like the neurons, the individuals themselves are complex.
Again, it is only intuitive to think that their behavior can be anything but complex and any attempt to model it
via simple rules is futile. However, emergent simplicity suggests that this is not an ontological necessity. Their
behavior may very well be modeled via simple rules. Further, emergent complexity suggests that doing so may
reveal critical insights into the complexity of their behavior as a collective. It is this possibility that we explore
and develop in this paper.

Purpose
         We describe how convergence in group discussions can be examined as an emergent behavior arising
from theoretically-sound yet simple teleological rules to model the collaborative, problem-solving interactions
of its members (agents). We support our view empirically, through findings from a study of in-situ groups
solving problems in an online, synchronous, chat environment.

Methodology
Research Context and Data Collection
         Participants included sixty 11th-grade students (46 male, 14 female; 16-17 years old) from the science
stream of a co-educational, English-medium high school in Ghaziabad, India. They were randomized into 20
triads and instructed to collaborate and solve either well- or ill-structured problem scenarios. Both ill- and well-
structured  groups were     presented with an  authentic car  accident   scenario that  required    the application  of
concepts in Newtonian kinematics. The study was carried out in the school's computer laboratory, where group
members communicated with one another only through synchronous, text-only chat. The 20 automatically-
archived transcripts, one for each group, contained the group discussions as well as their solutions, and formed
the data used in our analyses.

Hypothesizing Simple Rules
         The concept of emergent simplicity was invoked to hypothesize a set of simple rules. In other words,
despite the complexity of the individual agents in the group, the impact of their interactions was conceived to be
governed by a set of simple rules. As such, group members were conceived as transactionally interacting with
one another in a goal-directed manner toward solving a problem (Barab et al., 2001). Viewed a posteriori, these
transactional interactions seemed to perform a telic function, i.e., they operated to reduce the difference between
the current problematic state of the discussion and a goal state. Thus, local interactions between group members
can be viewed as operators performing a means-ends analysis in the problem space (Newell & Simon, 1972).
From this, a set of simple rules follows naturally: Each interaction has an impact that:
i.   moves the group towards a goal state, or
ii.  moves the group away from a goal state, or
iii. maintains the status-quo (conceptualized as a "neutral impact").
Then, convergence in group discussion was conceived as an emergent complexity arising from this simple-rule-
based mechanism governing the impact of individual agent-based interactions.

Operationalizing Convergence
         Concepts from the statistical theory of Markov walks were employed to operationalize the model for
convergence (Ross, 1996). First, quantitative content analysis (QCA; Chi, 1997) was used to segment utterances
into one or more interaction units. The interaction unit of analysis was semantically defined as the impact(s) that
an utterance had on the group discussion vis-à-vis the hypothesized simple rule. Two trained doctoral students
independently coded the interactions with an inter-rater reliability (Krippendorff's alpha) of .85. An impact

                                                         301                                                        ICLS 2006
  Fitness
                                                                            Fitness
value of 1, -1, or 0 was assigned to each interaction unit depending upon whether it moved the group discussion
toward (impact = 1) or away (impact = -1) from the goal of the activity--a solution state of the given problem,
or maintained the status quo (impact = 0). Therefore, each discussion was reduced to a temporal string of 1s, -
1s, and 0s.

               More formally, let   n1 , n-1 , and     n0  denote the number of interaction units assigned the impact values
1, -1, and 0 respectively up to a certain utterance in a discussion. Then, up to that utterance, the convergence
value was,
                                                            C   = n1 -              n-1  .
                                                                  n1 + n-1
For each of the 20 discussions, convergence values were calculated after each utterance in the discussion,
resulting in a notional time series representing the evolution of convergence in group discussion.

Results
               Plotting the convergence value on the vertical axis and time (defined notionally with utterances as ticks
on the evolutionary clock) on the horizontal axis, one gets a representation (also called a fitness curve) of the
problem-solving process as it evolves in time. Figure 1 presents four major types of fitness curves that emerged
from the discussion of the 20 problem-solving groups in our study. These four fitness curves contrast the high-
with the low-performing groups (group performance is operationalized in the next section) across the well- and
ill-structured problem types.

                  Fitness Curves of High Performing Groups                                   Fitness Curves of Low Performing Groups
           1                         Well-structured                                 1
    0.8                                                                             0.8
    0.6                                                                             0.6
    0.4          Ill-structured                                                     0.4
    0.2                                                                             0.2
           0                                                                         0
   -0.2                                                                      -0.2                             Well-structured
   -0.4                                                                      -0.4
   -0.6                                                                      -0.6
   -0.8                                                                      -0.8                                             Ill-structured
          -1                                                                        -1
                                     Notional Time                                                              Notional Time
                    Figure 1. Fitness curves of high and low performing groups across problem types

Interpreting Fitness Curves
               It is easy to see that the convergence value always lies between -1 and 1. The closer the value is to 1,
the higher the convergence, and the closer the group is to reaching a solution. The end-point of the fitness curve
represents the final fitness level or convergence of the entire discussion. From this, the extent to which a group
was successful in solving the problem can be deduced. Furthermore, one might imagine that an ideal fitness
curve is one that has all the moves or steps in the positive direction, i.e., a horizontal straight line with fitness
equaling 1. However, the data suggests that, in reality, some level of divergence of ideas may in fact be a good
thing (Schultz-Hardt et al., 2002), as can be seen in the fitness curves of both the high-performing groups.

               The shape of the fitness curve, therefore, is also informative about the paths respective groups take
toward problem solution. For example, in Figure 1, both the low-performing groups converged at approximately
the same (negative) fitness levels, but their paths leading up to their final levels were quite different. The well-
structured group showed a sharp fall after initially moving in the correct direction (indicated by high fitness
initially). The ill-structured group, on the other hand, tried to recover from an initial drop in fitness but was
unsuccessful,       ending      up at approximately        the same  fitness               level as the well-structured          group.      Further,
comparing the high-performing with the low-performing groups, one can see that the discussions of high-
performing groups had fewer utterances, regardless of problem type. Finally, all fitness curves seemed to settle
into a fitness plateau fairly quickly. What is most interesting is that this descriptive examination of fitness
curves provides a view of paths to a solution that are lost in analysis systems that consider only a given point in
the solution process, thus assuming that similar behaviors or states at a given point are arrived at in similar
ways. As different paths can lead to similar results, unidimensional analyses that consider only single points in
time (often only the solution state) are not consistent with what this study's data suggest about problem-solving
processes.

                                                                    302                                                                         ICLS 2006
         Most important      is a   mathematical           property     of convergence.           Being    a ratio,   convergence     is more
sensitive to initial contributions, both positive and negative, than those made later in the process. This can be
easily seen  because      with each       positive     (or   negative)   contribution,       the   ratio's   numerator        is increased  (or
decreased) by 1. However, the denominator in the ratio always increases, regardless of the contribution being
positive or negative. Therefore, when a positive (negative) contribution comes earlier in the discussion, its
impact on convergence is greater because a unit increment (decrement) in the numerator is accompanied by a
denominator that is smaller earlier than later. Said another way, this conceptualization of convergence allows us
to test the following hypothesis: "good" contributions made earlier in a group discussion, on average, do more
good than if they were made later. Similarly, "bad" ones, on average, do more harm if they come earlier than
later in the discussion. To test this hypothesis, the relationship between convergence and group performance
was explored by running a temporal simulation on the data set.

Exploring the Relationship between Convergence and Group Performance
         The purpose      of the   simulation          was   to determine       if the   level    of convergence       in     group discussion
provided an  indication     of the  eventual        group     performance.       Group      performance       was    operationalized     as the
quality of group solution, independently rated by two doctoral students on a 9-point rating scale with an inter-
rater reliability (Krippendorff's alpha) of .95. The discussions of all 20 groups were each segmented into 10
equal parts. At each tenth, the convergence value up to that point was calculated. This resulted in 10 sets of 20
convergence values; the first set corresponding to convergence in the discussion after 10% of the discussion
was over, the second after 20% of the discussion was over, and so on until the tenth set, which corresponded to
the final convergence value of the discussion, i.e., after 100% of the discussion had occurred. A simulation was
then carried out by regressing group performance on convergence values at each tenth of the discussion (hence,
a temporal   simulation),      controlling         for problem        type (well-        or ill-structured)      each    time.    The   p-value
corresponding to the      statistical     significance       of the   predictive     power     of    convergence      at  each    tenth  of the
discussion on eventual group performance was plotted on the vertical axis (see Figure 2).

                          1                   0.93
                        0.9
                        0.8
                        0.7
                        0.6
                        0.5          0.46
                        0.4
                        0.3
                        0.2                             0.18
                        0.10                                     0.02      0.04     0.02     0.00     0.00      0.00     0.00
                                C1         C2       C3        C4        C5        C6        C7       C8       C9       C10

                                                             Proportion of Discussion

            Figure 2. Simulation of the significance of convergence in predicting group performance

         C1 through C10 denote the 10 equally spaced instances in each discussion at which the convergence
values were calculated. The simulation suggested that, on average, at some point after 30% but before 40% of
the discussion is over (i.e., between C3 and C4 in Figure 2), the convergence value is able to predict eventual
group performance at the .05 level of significance or better. This shows that convergence is a powerful measure
that is able to model the impact that early contributions have on eventual group performance. This insight bears
important implications for scaffolding group discussions to achieve optimal outcomes. For example, if one's
interest is primarily in maximizing group performance, the insight suggests a need for scaffolding early in the
discussion, since the impact of early interactional activity on eventual group performance seems to be greater.
Scaffolding earlier parts of a group discussion may increase its likelihood of settling into higher fitness plateaus;
the higher the fitness plateau, the better the group performance, on average. This insight is in and of itself a
significant finding, but since participation in high-performing groups is consistently (and not surprisingly) a

                                                                      303                                                                   ICLS 2006
                p-value
strong predictor of subsequent individual learning gains (e.g., see Barron, 2003; Cohen et al., 2002), we believe
it makes it all the more significant, for it demonstrates strong connections to group and individual learning.

         To  delve  deeper     into what   makes   convergence   a   powerful  measure,  micro-analytical   interactional
analysis sheds more light. Given the constraints on the page limit, we present a very brief analysis of the
following excerpt containing an exchange between group members S1 and S2.

   S1 > are we going to apply frictional retardation for the reaction time also?                                -1
   S2 > no, because reaction time is the time between watching the boy and applying the brakesso in this time car must be accelerating1, 1
   S1 > but I think we must not forget that the car is moving on the same road on which theincident occurs and the road is providing the retardation-1, -1
   S2 > but maximum speed is at the instant when he applied the brake                                            1
   S1 > but earlier you said that the car will accelerate after perceiving the boy                              -1
   S2 > I said so because his foot must be on accelerator during reaction time                                   1
   S1 > Now I understand... please proceed to write your answer                                                 1, 1

         Recall that the problem involved a car-accident scenario. In this excerpt, S1 and S2 are trying to decide
whether or not reaction time of the driver of the car that was involved in the accident should factor into their
calculations. The excerpt starts with S1 asking a question about applying frictional retardation during reaction
time of the driver. Being a misconception, it was rated as having a negative impact (-1). S2 evaluates S1's
question and says `no,' attempting to correct the misconception. Hence, its positive (+1) impact rating. In the
same utterance, S2 elaborates why frictional retardation should not to be applied, further positively impacting
the group's progress. The argument continues with S1 persisting with the misconception (assigned negative
impacts) until S2 is able to convince S1 otherwise (assigned positive impacts), thereby converging on a correct
understanding of this aspect (dealing with friction during reaction time) of the problem given to them. Note that
had S2 wrongly evaluated and agreed to S1's misconception, the impact ratings would have been negative,
which, without any further correction, would have led the group to diverge from a correct understanding of that
very aspect of the problem.

         This analysis,  albeit    brief, shows  that  impact   ratings are meaningful   only   in relation to preceding
utterances (Bransford & Nitsch, 1978) and take into account the sequence and temporality of collaborative
interactions (Kapur  et  al.,    2005). Other   examples  of  highly  convergent    discussion  episodes  would  include
agreement with and positive evaluation and development of correct understandings of the problem, solution
proposals, and problem solving strategies. As a result, despite the groups solving different types of problems
(well- or ill-structured), their performance depended mainly upon the convergence of their discussions. Because
convergence takes into account both the number as well as the temporal order of the units of analyses, it utilizes
a greater amount of information present in the data. This makes convergence a more powerful measure, both
conceptually  and  statistically,   than  existing   predictors that do  not  fully utilize the  information   present in
interactional data. If this is the case, then the following hypothesis should hold up: convergence is a more
powerful predictor of group performance than existing, commonly-used interactional predictors.

Comparing Convergence with other commonly-used Interactional Predictors
         Many   studies     of collaborative   problem   solving,    including this one,    use QCA    to operationalize
measures for problem-solving processes. These measures typically result in data about the frequency or relative
frequency of positive indicators (e.g., higher-order thinking, questioning, reflecting, etc.), or negative indicators
(e.g., errors, misconceptions, lack of cooperation, non-task, etc.), or a combination that adjusts for both the
positive and  negative   indicators     (e.g., the   difference between   the  frequencies   of  high- and   low-quality
contributions in a discussion). In this study, we operationalized three measures to represent typical measures:
i.   Frequency ( n1 : recall that this is the number of interaction units in a discussion with impact = 1),
ii.  Relative Frequency (           n1        ), and
                              n1 + n0  +  n-1
iii. Position ( n1 - n-1 ).
Convergence   ( n1 - n-1    ) formed the fourth  measure.
                n1 + n-1
         Multiple linear regression was used to simultaneously compare the significance of the four measures in
predicting group performance, controlling for problem type in each case. The overall model was significant (F =

                                                            304                                                       ICLS 2006
6.391, p = .003). Results in Table 1 suggest that, of the four predictors of group performance, convergence was
the only one significant (t = 2.650, p = .019), thereby supporting our hypothesis. In other words, consistent with
our hypothesis, convergence seems to be a more powerful predictor of problem-solving performance when
compared to existing, commonly-used predictors.

             Table 1. Regression Parameter Estimates of the Interactional Variables & Problem Type
                                                   B          SE           Beta            t          p
                (Constant)                      -1.778        1.693             .       -1.051       .311
                Frequency                        .006         .021         .239            .268      .793
                Relative Frequency               1.541        2.792        .116            .552      .590
                Position                         -.012        .024         -.446        -.513        .616
                Convergence                      5.338        2.014        .839         2.650        .019*
                Problem Type                     -.050        .544         -.021        -.092        .928

Implications and Future Directions
          Leveraging on the concepts of emergent simplicity and emergent complexity, this study hypothesized a
set of theoretically-sound yet simple rules to model the micro-level problem-solving interactions between group
members, and then examined the resulting emergent behavior (convergence in their discussion). Insofar as we
are aware, the analysis revealed novel insights into the process of collaboration. The first insight concerned the
differential impact   of contributions  in  a group   discussion--high    (low)    quality   contributions   have  a greater
positive  (negative)  impact  on   the eventual  outcome     when    they come    earlier  than  later  in a   discussion. A
corollary of this finding was that eventual group performance could be predicted based on what happens in the
first 30-40% of a discussion because group discussions tended to settle into fitness plateaus fairly quickly.
Finally, convergence was shown to be a more powerful predictor of group performance than some existing,
commonly-used       measures. These    insights  are significant,  especially   since   participation  in  high-performing
groups is a strong predictor of subsequent individual learning gains (e.g., see Barron, 2003; Cohen et al., 2002).
In other words, this conceptualization and analyses of convergence demonstrates strong connections to group
performance and individual learning.

          At a  more    conceptual   level, the  idea   that  one  can  derive    meaningful    insights   into a   complex
interactional process via a simple rule-based mechanism, while compelling, may also be unsettling and counter-
intuitive. Hence, a fair amount of intuitive resistance to the idea is to be expected. For instance, it is reasonable
to argue   that the  extreme   complexity    of  group  interaction--an    interweaving      of syntactic,   semantic,  and
pragmatic    structures  and  meanings   operating   at multiple   levels--make      it a  different   form  of  emergence
altogether and, therefore, insights into complex interactional processes cannot be gained by using simple-rule-
governed   methods.     However,   a careful  consideration   of   this argument     reveals  an  underlying    ontological
assumption that complex behavior cannot possibly be explained by simple mechanisms. Saying it another way,
some may argue that only complex mechanisms (e.g., linguistic mechanisms) can explain complex behavior
(e.g., convergence    in group  discussion).    Of  course,  this is indeed   a possibility.    But, notions    of emergent
simplicity and emergent complexity suggest that this is not the "only" possibility (Bar-Yam, 2003), especially
given our knowledge of the laws of self-organization and complexity (Kauffman, 1995).

          It is noteworthy that emergent complexity is also integral to the theory of dynamical minimalism
(Nowak, 2004) used to explain complex psychological and social phenomena. Dynamical minimalist theory
attempts to reconcile the scientific principle of parsimony--that simple explanations are preferable to complex
ones   in explaining  a  phenomenon--with       the  arguable loss   in depth   of understanding     of   that phenomenon
because of parsimony. Using the principle of parsimony, the theory seeks the simplest mechanisms and the
fewest    variables for  explaining  a  complex     phenomenon.    It   argues  that  this   need not   sacrifice  depth   in
understanding because simple rules and mechanisms repetitively and dynamically interacting with each other
can produce complex behavior: the very definition of emergent complexity. Thus, parsimony and complexity
are not irreconcilable, leading one to question the assumption that complex phenomena necessarily require
complex explanations.

          Therefore, the conceptual and methodological implication from this study is not that complex group
behavior ought to be studied using simple-rule-based mechanisms. It is more that exploring the possibility of
modeling    complex   group   behavior   using   simple-rule-based      mechanisms      is a  promising    and  meaningful
endeavor.    Leveraging   on  this  possibility, this   study demonstrated      one   way    in which     simple-rule-based
mechanisms can be used to model convergence in group discussion, in turn revealing novel insights into the

                                                          305                                                           ICLS 2006
collaborative process. The proposed measures of convergence and fitness curves have been intentionally and
conceptually designed to be generic and can, therefore, easily be applied to other problem-solving situations.
Hence, they also provide a platform for the development of more sophisticated measures and techniques in the
future.

References
Arrow, H., McGrath, J. E., & Berdahl, J. L. (2000). Small groups as complex systems: Formation, coordination,
         development, and adaptation. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Barab, S. A., Hay, K. E., & Yamagata-Lynch, L. C. (2001). Constructing networks of action-relevant episodes:
         An in-situ research methodology. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 63-112.
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Bar-Yam, Y. (2003). Dynamics of complex systems. New York: Perseus Publishing
Bransford, J.D., & Nitsch, K. E. (1978). Coming to understand things we could not previously understand. In J.
         F. Kavanaugh   and    W. Strange   (Eds.), Speech   and language in  the laboratory, school, and  clinic.
         Harvard, MA: MIT Press.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 6(3), 271-315.
Cohen, E. G., Lotan, R. A., Abram, P. L., Scarloss, B. A., & Schultz, S. E. (2002). Can groups learn? Teachers
         College Record, 104(6), 1045-1068.
Collazos, C.,  Guerrero,   L., Pino, J.,   &   Ochoa, S.  (September,  2002). Evaluating   collaborative learning
         processes. Proceedings   of the   8th International Workshop  on Groupware    (CRIWG'2002),     Springer
         Verlag LNCS, 2440, Heidelberg, Germany.
Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Knowledge convergence in computer-supported collaborative learning: The
         role of external representation tools. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 405-441.
Jacobson,   M. J., &   Wilensky,  U.   (in press).  Complex   systems  in education: Scientific and   educational
         importance and implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Kapur,  M.,  Voiklis,  J., &   Kinzer, C.   (2005).   Problem  solving as  a  complex, evolutionary   activity: A
         methodological    framework    for    analyzing  problem-solving  processes   in  a  computer-supported
         collaborative  environment.     Proceedings     of  the  Computer-Supported   Collaborative     Learning
         conference, Taipei, Taiwan.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for the laws of self-organization and complexity.
         New York: Oxford University Press.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Nowak, A. (2004). Dynamical minimalism: Why less is more in psychology. Personality and Social Psychology
         Review, 8(2), 183-192.
Roschelle, J. (1996). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL:
         Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm (pp. 209-248). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ross, S. M. (1996). Stochastic processes. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Schultz-Hardt, S., Jochims, M., & Frey, D. (2002). Productive conflict in group decision making: Genuine and
         contrived dissent as strategies to counteract biased information seeking. Organizational Behavior &
         Human Decision Processes, 88, 563-586.
Stahl, G. (2005). Group cognition in computer-assisted collaborative learning. Journal of Computer Assisted
         Learning, 21, 79-90.

                                                         306                                                 ICLS 2006
