     Using Drawings and Interviews to Diagram Entering Preservice
     Teachers' Preconceived Beliefs about Technology Integration

                                      Elizabeth Keren-Kolb & Barry Fishman
                          University of Michigan, 610 E. University, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                    elikeren@umich.edu, fishman@umich.edu

         Abstract:  There is concern that colleges of education are not adequately preparing teachers to use
         technology in their classrooms. Programs find it hard to properly train preservice teachers for a
         variety of reasons, both structural and pedagogical.   One reason is that students bring their prior
         beliefs about teaching with them into their preservice programs.    In the past we lacked sufficient
         tools to uncover these entering beliefs. This study employs drawings and interviews to uncover
         preservice secondary   teachers'  prior  beliefs and  knowledge  about  the  use of  technology  in
         teaching.  These methods offer a counterpoint to quantitative approaches often used to study
         preservice teacher beliefs regarding technology.   Our analysis of the data from preservice teacher
         interviews resulted in a diagram that illuminates incoming teachers' orientation toward their future
         technology-infused teaching.   This study provides methodological guidance for examining and
         improving teachers' learning about technology integration.

         Although there are numerous studies that focus on preservice teachers' beliefs concerning technology
integration in the classroom (Becker, 2000; Wang, 2002; Albion 2001), there are few studies that focus on the prior
beliefs that preservice teachers hold as they enter their teacher training programs.   If we want to develop more
effective methods for training teachers to use and integrate technology in their future classrooms, then we need to
address this gap in our knowledge. Utilizing methods that Thomas & Pedersen (2003) and Haney, Russell & Bebell
(2004) used in developing and collecting drawings, we asked preservice teachers to create an artifact (a classroom
drawing) and participate in an interview (based on their drawing) in order to uncover their beliefs about technology
integration and determine where their beliefs originate.  We were then able to transform this data into an analytical
diagram that allows for rapid identification of beliefs across groups of preservice teachers. In this paper, we focus
on how the diagramming of each preservice teachers' prior beliefs helps to highlight his or her current position in
relation to technology integration in their future classroom. In doing so, we will demonstrate how the combination
of image and interview can be used to interpret a preservice teacher's preconceived beliefs concerning technology.
Ultimately we hope this research will contribute to practices used to investigate preservice teachers' preconceived
experiences and beliefs about technology integration in the classroom.

Theoretical Framework
         A large gap exists between today's technology and teachers' ability to integrate technology into their
everyday classrooms (Becker, 2000; Cuban, Kirkpatrick, & Peck 2001; Albion, 2001).           There is concern among
researchers that preservice   education is not preparing   educators to  integrate technology  into their classrooms
(Doering, Hughes, & Huffman, 2003; Albion, 2001). Albion (2001) asserts that less than 25% of graduating teachers
think they are adequately prepared to integrate computers into their classroom instruction. Why aren't teacher
preparation programs able to sufficiently prepare teachers to integrate technology?    Although there are numerous
reasons why teachers are unprepared, one reason, which is often overlooked, is that teachers bring their prior beliefs
about teaching with them into their teacher training programs.      Because  teacher  candidates enter  their teaching
programs with years of schooling experience, often these prior experiences cloud what they are learning in their
teacher training. It is well documented prior beliefs play a large role not only in how teachers teach in the classroom,
but also in how    they learn from their   preservice courses  (Pajares, 1992; Richardson,    1994; Britzman,   1991;
Knowles, 1992; Holt-Reynolds, 1992). Even so, Richardson (1994) concludes that the experiences they have in the
program and the way the teachers reflect on those experiences may alter their prior beliefs.  In order to modify prior
beliefs, it is helpful to know what they are and where they originate.   There is consensus that preservice teachers'
beliefs stem from a variety of personal experiences, often related to their own schooling (Bruner, 1996; Clandinin &
Connelly, 1991; Holt-Reynolds, 1992; Kennedy, 1997; Raths, 2001).         If personal experiences   are where  beliefs
originate, than what exactly are these experiences and why do they play such a strong role in shaping what kind of
teacher a person becomes?  We take a qualitative approach to uncovering preservice teachers' prior experiences.

                                                          328                                                 ICLS 2006
         Thomas and Pedersen (2003) found, "unexplored entering beliefs may be responsible for the perpetuation
of antiquated and ineffectual teaching practices" (p. 328).   Some (Thomas & Pederson, 2003; Richardson, 1994)
argue that teachers pick and choose what they will learn according to their beliefs. Goodman (1988) claimed that
higher education classes might be more likely to reinforce teachers' prior beliefs and experiences. Hence, if we do
not know entering preservice teachers' prior experience with technology, their teacher education courses may not
effectively address their entering beliefs. This, in turn, could affect how they respond to different ideas in their
preservice technology education.

         It was important   to  select a  methodological   approach that  would  allow  teachers' prior beliefs     and
experiences to emerge.   Vygotsky (1978) pointed out that drawings can be a vital way for children to create stories
and demonstrate a particular way of knowing.      According to Kendrick & McKay (2002), drawings are more than
simply pictures on a page; they can denote the beliefs and experiences of a person's culture and possibly their future
actions. Haney et al. (2004) explain that drawings in educational research have largely been overlooked as a data
tool, as they can provide rich qualitative data when collected and analyzed. There have been only a limited number
of educational studies that have analyzed drawings by their participants to uncover beliefs and experiences about a
particular issue, and for the small number of studies that have used drawings, few have examined preservice
teachers' beliefs (Thomas &Peterson 2003, Piscitelli & Andreson 2001, Kendrick & McKay 2002).

         In this study, entering preservice teachers were asked to draw their ideal future classroom (including any
technology they might utilize).  These drawings reflect entering teachers' prior beliefs and experiences in regard to
integrating technology   tools into their future  classroom.   Individual interviews conducted about  the drawings
highlighted the teachers' own thoughts regarding classroom instruction and the role that technology might play.    The
interviews result in a diagram, which depicts each preservice teacher's entering orientation in relation to technology.

Methods
Setting
         The data for this study was collected in summer 2004 from 45 beginning preservice secondary teachers
enrolled in a graduate level technology education course at a mid-western research university.      These preservice
teachers were part of a 2004-2005 secondary post-baccalaureate certification program.    Like many such programs,
the students received their undergraduate degrees in areas other than education.       The 45 preservice teachers'
specializations included social studies, mathematics, science, English, physical education, and foreign languages.

The Data Collection and Analyses
         We began the study on the first day of the preservice teachers' technology education class.  The objective
of the data collection was to allow preservice teachers to reflect upon their past experiences with technology.     We
asked all 45 of the preservice teachers to complete a qualitative instrument with three parts, resulting in three
separate artifacts. At the beginning of the instrument each student was asked, "what term best describes your level
of experience with technology?"     They were given choices of "none," "very little," "some," or "a great deal".        In
the first part of the instrument, the students developed a list of technology that they would like to have in their ideal
classroom.  The second part of the instrument asked them to draw a picture of their ideal classroom, including all of
the items from their technology list.  Finally, each student wrote a vignette describing his or her past technology
experiences.

         For the initial data analysis, we grouped the participants along two dimensions.  The first was by subject
area, and the second was by their stated level of technology experience.     We used inductive content analysis to
analyze the qualitative instruments along both dimensions.    From the findings and subject grouping, we selected a
purposive sample (Weiss, 1994) of 11 preservice teachers to participate in extended interviews probing prior
technology experiences and how they relate to the artifacts developed (focusing mostly on their drawings).         The
selected sample     was designed  to   highlight variation by: subject content  area, self-identified comfort      with
technology, and age.    The selected sample ranged in age from 22 years to 47 years.   There were 6 females and 5
males. The preservice teachers' content areas included: 3 social studies, 2 science, 2 mathematics, and 4 English.
Of the 11 preservice teachers, 4 of them claimed to have "a great deal" of comfort and experience with using
technology, 4 of them claimed to have "some" comfort and experience with using technology, and 3 of them

                                                          329                                                ICLS 2006
claimed to have "very little" comfort and experience with using technology.         Below are two drawings from the
sample (See Figure 1).

  Figure 1: Drawing from preservice teacher #1               Drawing from preservice teacher #23

        By using the drawings as the focus for the interview we were able to elicit each preservice teacher's
preconceived beliefs concerning technology in the classroom.          This was done by asking the preservice teacher to
give the interviewer a tour of his or her drawing; explaining why they selected particular items for their classroom.

        In order to analyze their interviews, the research question became How do preservice teachers self-identify
their orientation in relation to technology?  All 11 interviews were transcribed and then analyzed using inductive
content analysis (Strauss & Corbin, 1998), looking for categories of technology orientation. Technology orientation
was defined as: how a preservice teacher self-identifies with digital technology in their past, present, and future
classroom instruction. The interviews were emically coded and categories emerged from the data that pertained to
the 11 preservice teachers' orientations to technology.  Thus, we discovered that these preservice teachers did not
have just one  orientation to  technology but  rather,  five  dimensions    of orientation emerged in   the   data.   The
dimensions were:

        1.  Beliefs about integrating digital technology into classroom instruction,
        2.  Interest in integrating digital technology into classroom instruction,
        3.  Comfort with using digital technology resources,
        4.  Prior experiences with using and/or observing technology,
        5.  Interest in learning more about technology resources.

        We will elaborate on each orientation dimension.      The first dimension concerns the preservice teacher's
beliefs about integrating digital technology into general classroom instruction.   This category includes any comment
the preservice teacher made concerning their general beliefs about if and how technology should be integrated into
the k-12 classroom. It does not include their interest in integrating, just their beliefs about integrating. Below is an
example from the interviews of a "belief" comment:

Interview #23:
1       Just because I feel like kids can learn a lot and get really,
2       you know,
3       get ahead if they know even basic things like typing and searching,
4       there is so much stuff you can find so easily,
5       if you just know how to look for it.

        The second dimension concerns the preservice teacher's interest in integrating digital technology into their
future classroom  instruction. This dimension    focuses  on  the     preservice teacher's own interest in    integrating
technology in their future classroom (not just a general belief that technology is or is not useful in k-12 teaching and
learning). Below are a few examples from the interviews of "interest" comments:

                                                          330                                                   ICLS 2006
Interview #1:
1    I do think that more and more I probably will be using technology in my classroom.
2    I feel that especially in the math and science side of things schools are realizing more how helpful they can be,
3    so because of that I think that I will be using it quit a bit
4    and that districts will start to have math and science teachers use technology a lot more,
5    maybe more then in other subject areas,
6    but because of the subject area I think that I will be using it.

       The third dimension is the preservice teacher's comfort with using digital technology resources.         The
comments in this dimension refer to the preservice teacher's ease of use with technology tools, and their perception
of the how skillful they are in using them. Below are a few examples from the interviews of "comfort" comments:

Interview #22:
1    I think I said very little because I feel like I do not know how to operate it.
2    I might know about it,
3    I might have seen it,
4    I might have even watched somebody else use it.
5    But a lot of times,
6    like the VCR for example, I can put a tape in, but don't ask me to set the
7    clock or anything.
8    I did not want to say none
9    because at the same time I have done simple things.
10   The computer for me for a long time was a glorified word processor.
11   That's all.
12   So I do have some experience,
13   but I feel comfortable calling it very little.

       The fourth dimension is the preservice teacher's prior experiences with using and/or observing technology.
This is an incredibly important category because it focuses on any experiences (active or passive) that the preservice
teachers had before entering their teacher-training program. Below are a few examples from the interviews of
"prior" comments:

Interview #8:
1    And then through my seminars in my undergrad I had to do PowerPoint
2    presentations.
3    And so I did two nine-minute and one twenty-five minute PowerPoint
4    presentations.
5    And so just learning how to create those
6    and then you know
7    the different quick tricks I guess
8    about giving PowerPoint presentations
9    and how many slides to have
10   and how much information to have on them.

       The last dimension is the preservice teacher's interest in learning more about technology resources.     This
dimension focuses on the future.   We look for comments where the preservice teacher shows interest or lack of
interest in learning more about technology resources and new technology skills. Below are a few examples from the
interviews of "learning more" comments:

Interview #1:
1    I'd like to learn,
2    I've actually started to learn a lot of it on my own,
3    but this is just really for my own personal I guess,
4    but just some more stuff with the um film industry and stuff.
5    Just video editing,
6    I had some close friends that are in the industry and stuff,

                                                             331                                                 ICLS 2006
7    I've been learning things gradually
8    but because of time constraints,
9    I have not really been able to get into it that much
10   and its one   area of technology    I'd like to learn  more  just  because it is one of my   more  weaker   sides.

Findings
       Once the interviews were coded and the dimensions of orientation were identified, we utilized some ideas
from the Jones & McEwen's (2000) conceptual model of Multiple Dimensions of Identity, to construct a diagram of
preservice teachers' multiple   dimensions   of orientation  to technology.  Each of the 11 interviews were coded
according to the five dimensions of orientation, and those dimensions were plotted into a diagram to represent how
each preservice teacher self-identifies their orientation to technology (see Figure 2). The center of the diagram
represents neutral beliefs/experiences. The right side represents beliefs/experiences that are positive in relationship
to technology.  The left side represents beliefs/experiences that are negative in relationship to technology. The three
zones (neutral, some emotion, strong emotion) represent how weakly or strongly the belief/experience was conveyed
in the interview. Each colored line represents one of the five dimensions that emerged in the data. Each tiny hollow
circle represents a comment that this preservice teacher made during their interview that pertains to their beliefs,
experiences, or knowledge about technology.

   Comment from
   Interview #1
   example.

                      Figure 2: A preservice teacher's self-identified orientation to technology.

       Each    preservice  teacher's  interview   was  plotted  into a  diagram,   which  ultimately represented   that
preservice teacher's orientation to technology prior to beginning his or her preservice education.  Each tiny circle on
a line in the diagram represents a comment that was made in that particular preservice teacher's interview pertaining
to one of the five dimensions.  Figure A is an example of one preservice teacher's interview.     We will demonstrate
how each circle in the diagram represents a comment.      For example in Figure 2 this particular preservice teacher had
one very strong emotional negative comment about a past experience with technology, here is that particular
comment:

Interview #1
1    I realized how difficult technology could be
2    um I think
3    that is when I really learned that I had struggles with technology
4    of course being on computers all through life,

                                                           332                                                ICLS 2006
5    just how many different things could go wrong for random reasons
6    that you can't always know,
7    and um and so
8    that is kinda what I think on the negative side of technology.

This particular comment was plotted on the dashed line at the far left (negative, strong emotion) of Figure 2.
Diagramming the interviews is useful because, by looking each diagram, we can determine each preservice teacher's
general orientation to   technology.   For example   the preservice  teacher  in  Figure 2, has a positive  outlook on
technology, positive past experiences, and positive beliefs about how he or she might integrate technology into his
or her future classroom.

Discussion
        Compared    to   quantitative studies, our  diagrams   give us a unique   perspective  on preservice  teachers'
entering beliefs and experiences with technology.    Developing the diagrams is an emic process, where the beliefs
and experiences emerged in the interview, rather than the etic process of many surveys.       Thus, the diagrams are a
representation of the strength of the preservice beliefs and stories from their interviews.       Although it is time
consuming to develop the diagrams, we do not believe that it is necessary to diagram every preservice teachers'
orientation.  Rather, if we can develop a range or spectrum of technology orientations diagrams that preservice
teachers hold, we could develop various methods in teacher training courses to address the range of orientations.
Also, we could analyze the range of orientations by secondary subject area, and look for any similarities that may
emerge  amongst  entering  preservice  teachers  of certain subject  specialties.  For example if we knew that most
entering math teachers had a certain apprehension over integrating technology, we could begin to develop methods
to address this apprehension in their teacher training courses. Consequently, it is important to conduct further
research in order to develop a spectrum of orientations.    Through this spectrum, it is essential to create preservice
activities that will directly confront their beliefs, not just once, but throughout their preservice coursework in hopes
of changing certain preconceived beliefs.

Conclusion
        Thomas    &  Pederson   (2003)    argued   that unexplored   entering beliefs  could   be responsible  for  the
continuation  of ineffectual teaching   practices  with  technology.   Our   study  may  be  a  plausible beginning to
developing   methods to   understand   and confront  entering  beliefs about  technology    integration.  Although the
diagrams do not tell us exactly what their prior experiences are, they do give us a visual model of how each
preservice teacher currently views technology integration in the classroom and the strength of those views.     At this
point, it is important to continue to uncover different diagrams of orientation for secondary students in various
content areas.   This is the first step in a longer process, which is to ultimately improve preservice technology
education, by better addressing the entering beliefs and experiences concerning technology integration that the
preservice teacher's hold.   Consequently, this study may also be significant to other areas of education besides
technology education, where researchers are searching for methods to gather preconceived beliefs.

References
Albion, P.R. (2001).   Some factors in the development of self-efficacy beliefs for computer use among teacher
        education students.  Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 9(3), 321-347.
Becker, H. J. (2000). Who's wired and who's not: Children's access to and use of computer technology. The Future
        of Children: Children and Computer Technology, 10(2), 44-75.
Britzman, D. (1991). Practice makes practice: A critical study of learning to teach. Albany State University of New
        York.
Bruner, J. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Clandinin, D.J. & Connelly, F. (1987). Teachers' personal knowledge: What counts as personal in studies of the
        personal. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 19(6), 487-500.
Cuban, L., Kirkpatrick, H., and Peck, C. (2001). High access and low use of technologies in high school classrooms:
        Explaining an apparent paradox.    American Educational Research Journal, 38(4), 813-834.
Doering, A., Hughes, J., & Huffman, D. (2003) Preservice teachers:      Are we thinking with technology?     Journal of
        Research on Technology in Education, 35(3), 342-361.
Goodman, J. (1988). Constructing a practical philosophy of      teaching: A study of preservice teachers' professional
        perspectives. Teaching and Teacher Education, 4(2), 121-137.

                                                           333                                                 ICLS 2006
Haney, W., Russell, M., & Bebell, D. (2004) Drawing on education: Using drawings to document schooling and
         support change.  Harvard Educational Review, 74 (3), 241-271.
Holt-Reynolds, D. (1992). Personal history-based beliefs as relevant prior knowledge in course work. American
         Educational Research Journal, 29(2), 325-347.
Jones, S. R. & McEwen, M.K. (2000).     A conceptual model of multiple dimensions of identity.    Journal of College
         Student Development, 41(4), 405-413.
Kendrick, M. & McKay, R. (2002).      Uncovering literacy narratives through children's drawings. Canadian Journal
         of Education, 27 (1), 45-60.
Knowles, J.G. (1992).    Models for understanding preservice and beginning teacher's biographies.   In I. F Goodson
         (Ed.), Studying teachers' lives (pp.99-152). New York: Teachers College Press.
Pajares, M.F. (1992).    Teachers' beliefs   and educational  research:  Cleaning up  a messy   construct. Review of
         Educational Research, 62(3), 307-332.
Piscitelli, B., & Anderson, D., (2001). Young children's perspectives of museums settings and experiences. Museum
         Management and Curatorship, 19, 269-282.
Raths, J. (2001). Teachers' beliefs and teaching beliefs. Early Childhood Research and Practice, 3(1).     Retrieved:
         http://ecrp.uiuc.edu/v3n1/raths.html.
Richardson, V. (1996). The role of attitudes and beliefs in learning to teach. In J. Sikula, T. Buttery & E. Guyton
         (Eds.), Handbook    of research   on   teacher education   (pp. 102-119).  New   York:   Simon  &  Schuster
         Macmillan.
Strauss, A. &    Corbin, J. (1998).   Basics of  qualitative research:   Techniques and  procedures  for   developing
         grounded theory. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Thomas, J.A., & Pedersen, J.E. (2003). Reforming Elementary Science Teacher Preparation: What About Extant
         Teaching Beliefs?  School Science and Mathematics, 103(7), 319-330.
Ullrich, W. (1999).   Integrative  teacher education   curriculum.  Paper-presented  at the Annual   Meeting  of  the
         National Middle School Association, Orlando, FL.
Wang, M. (2002). When technology meets beliefs: Preservice teachers' perceptions of the teacher's role in the
         classroom with computers.    Journal of Research on Technology in Education.   35(1).
Weiss, R. S. (1994). Learning from strangers:    The art and method of qualitative interview studies. New York: The
         Free Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1978).     Mind in  society: The   development   of higher psychological  processes. Cambridge,   MA:
         Harvard University Press.

                                                          334                                                ICLS 2006
