                        The Social Formation of Youth Leadership
      Ben Kirshner, University of Colorado, PO Box 249, Boulder CO 80309-0249, ben.kirshner@colorado.edu

        Abstract:   In  recent years  policymakers  and  educators     have called  for  greater  youth voice in
        school    reform and   neighborhood  revitalization.  Few  studies,   however,     have  examined   adult
        assistance  strategies  that enable youth   to  assume  responsibility      for complex   campaigns   or
        formulate policy proposals.    Drawing on two years of ethnographic fieldwork in an urban after-
        school leadership group, this article examines how adults and youth jointly created a "youth-led"
        environment, in which youth took responsibility for making decisions and monitoring their work.
        Data analysis focuses on the cultural tools that youth appropriated in order to assume leadership of
        the project,  including group  agreements,  group    organizing   routines, and  a  youth empowerment
        ideology.  The paper concludes that to support youth voice adults must do more than just fade into
        the background, but must also seed the learning community with tools.           Implications address how
        adults can help young people lead efforts to improve their schools and neighborhoods.

        Youth activism groups comprised of high school students and adult supporters have successfully carried
out campaigns to shape policies affecting young people (Youniss & Hart, 2005).       For example, they have won
subsidized bus passes for low income youth, exposed environmental polluters, and persuaded policymakers to find
alternatives to "super jails" for juvenile offenders (Kwon, in press). Activism campaigns like these exemplify a
progressive educational tradition in which young people tackle meaningful social problems through project-based,
collaborative work (Dewey, 1902).

        Although researchers have begun to document the political accomplishments of such groups, we know little
about  assistance strategies employed  by  adult  leaders.   How do    adults lend   support   in ways  that foster youth
autonomy and initiative?  This article, based on two years of ethnographic fieldwork, presents a case study of adult
assistance strategies in a multiracial group that aspired to be "youth-led" (1).     The paper focuses on routines and
practices that students appropriated in order to assume leadership of the project.

Youth-led Activism
        Youth-led groups re-organize hierarchical adult-youth relations so that youth are responsible for organizing
and managing the group.   For example, in a youth-led group, young people might formulate campaign goals, create
ground rules for participation, and monitor the group's work, while adults would occupy the role of "advisor" or
"facilitator" (Camino & Zeldin, 2001, Larson, Walker, & Pearce, 2005).

        Adults who work in such groups often experience dilemmas about how to foster youth leadership and voice
while also providing assistance that is critical to campaign success (Kirshner, 2005).     For example, adults may want
to develop  students'  leadership skills and sense   of  ownership     of a campaign     by   leaving decisions   and task
responsibilities up to youth. But there also may be times when the complex demands of campaigns compel adults to
participate--by advising youth in their campaign strategy, instructing them in certain skills, or completing mundane,
but necessary, tasks, such as scheduling transportation (Larson & Hanson, 2005).

A Cultural Practice Perspective
        Studies of youth leadership programs often use surveys or interviews to examine youth perceptions of the
extent to which they have a say in decisions, feel safe speaking their minds, and play leadership roles (Roth et al.,
1998). What remain unexamined in such approaches are the ways that youth's authority is supported and reinforced
in particular kinds of social interactions between adults and youth (Greeno, 2001). Youth voice does not signal just
an accomplishment    of  youth themselves,  but instead  an  accomplishment    of   all the members    of a  shared social
practice. The unit of analysis, therefore, should shift from a narrow focus on youth to a broader attention to youth
and adults working together, linked by a shared set of resources for accomplishing goals (Rogoff, 1995; Saxe, 1991).

        Practice based approaches often examine three elements of a social practice--the division of labor among
members, the goals that motivate their activity, and the cultural tools or artifacts that people use as resources to
accomplish their work together.   Although these three elements are all present in this paper, I focus explicitly on the
third element--"cultural  tools." Cultural  tools refer to resources   that people   use   to accomplish  goals   together,

                                                          349                                                    ICLS 2006
whether material, such as pens, or symbolic, such as language or ideology (Wertsch, 1998). This paper will focus
specifically on  the features of the shared activity system     that enabled youth and   adults to move from    an adult-
initiated project to one that for which youth assumed major responsibilities.   It is organized in terms of two related
research questions.   First, in what ways   did the  distribution of  responsibility for decision-making    and planning
change over time?    Second, what resources helped members shift leadership responsibilities from adults to youth?

Program Background
        Youth Engaged in Leadership and Learning (YELL) was based in an urban high school but funded and
staffed by a nearby university.  Academic achievement levels at the high school, which was located in a high
poverty neighborhood, were below state and national averages.        For example, in 2003 (the second year of my
research) 20 percent were at or above national reading scores and 37 percent passed the math portion of the state exit
exam, compared to 74 percent statewide.   YELL's purpose was to train high school students in research and
leadership skills so that they could gather evidence about conditions in their school and develop proposals based on
their findings. The program met twice a week after school from October through May, with culminating events in
June.  Youth received stipends of $120/month.   YELL participants were African American, Asian American, and
Latino youth ranging in age from 9th to 12th grade. The adult staff included one director, who was European
American, and two AmeriCorps members.       In the first year both AmeriCorps members were African American; in
the second year one was Korean American and the other was Egyptian American.

        In its first year YELL conducted research, including focus groups, interviews, and surveys, to understand
students' experiences that would contribute to school reform processes that were underway at the school.     In the
second year participants changed the project, because they wanted to respond to the overwhelming number of
negative portrayals about youth of color from their neighborhood in local print and televised news.    They developed
a campaign, called Don't Believe the Hype, whose purpose was to improve the accuracy of stories presented in the
media. Participants conducted focus groups and then worked in small groups to produce a magazine, website, and
video to promote their goals.   They shared these documents in meetings with local journalists as well as at a
community forum attended by the school board president, journalists, students, and community residents.

        In year one the YELL project began with eighteen youth; nine months later eight youth were actively
involved. In year two the group began with nineteen youth and concluded with twelve.       Attrition in both years was
due to a variety of factors, including: students who moved out of the area, students who lost interest in the program
goals, or students whose parents wanted them to spend more time on their school work.      A core group of seven
students--who were called "youth staff" in their second year--remained in the program from year one to year two.

Methods
        This paper draws on ethnographic data collected for a larger multi-site study of youth activism (Kirshner,
2005). Data sources include field notes, interviews, and program documents.      Field notes were taken by hand during
weekly visits to the program and then typed.    Interviews were conducted with each participant at the beginning and
end of both years.   In interviews youth were asked to describe their experiences in the program as well as their views
on social and political issues facing the school and surrounding neighborhood.     Interview transcripts and typed field
note entries were compiled and entered in N6 (qualitative data analysis software).

        I employed interpretive methods to analyze data (Becker, 1998; Miles & Huberman, 1984). I began by
looking at the distribution of leadership responsibilities. For example, I coded activities as either youth-led or adult-
led (or both).  Youth-led activities were those that were initiated and facilitated by a youth participant. I also coded
other kinds of leadership tasks described in the field notes, such as developing agendas for group meetings, and
identified who had been responsible.   My next step was to look for recurring patterns in the kinds of resources that
participants appropriated when taking on leadership roles.      For example, I noted that on multiple occasions youth
participants invoked group agreements in order to limit or challenge adult authority.      This led me to examine the
process by which group agreements were formed and all the occasions when youth talked about them in interviews.
Also, I compared instances when youth were more or less successful in assuming leadership.          For example, YELL
was divided into four "small groups" that worked with minimal adult assistance.       One of the groups (the "magazine
group") routinely accomplished its goals, stayed on task, and shared responsibilities within the group.  I looked more
closely at processes across the groups and observed that the magazine group was the only one to regularly use group

                                                            350                                                 ICLS 2006
organizing routines that had been introduced by adults, such as assigning a facilitator and using a timeline.      The
other groups struggled to accomplish their goals and often ended up requiring adult assistance or intervention.

Results

Question #1:      In what ways did the distribution of leadership roles change over time?
        As shown in Table 1, from October 2001 to October 2003 the distribution of leadership roles changed in
recognizable ways.  Whereas at the program's inception adult staff members took responsibility for most planning,
decision-making, and monitoring, over time youth took on a greater share.         I generated this list by reviewing my
field notes for examples of tasks that appeared essential for the functioning of the group.    I then identified whether
youth, adults, or some combination      carried out that task.  For example,   in  the program's first year adults took
responsibility for recruiting, interviewing, and hiring youth participants. In the second year veteran youth recruited
other students, took part in interviews, and participated in hiring decisions.  Also, in the program's first year adults
took responsibility for deciding the agenda for group meetings and facilitating them.         In the second year youth
jointly planned agendas with adults and often facilitated meetings on their own.

Table 1: Youth and adult involvement in YELL leadership tasks
YELL Tasks                                                      2001-2                 2002-3            2003-4
Fundraising for the program                                           A                     A                A
Writing program curriculum                                            A                     A                A
Holding participants accountable for attendance                       A                     A            Y   A
Determining roles for youth and adults in program                     A                 Y   A            Y
Recruiting, interviewing, and hiring youth participants               A                 Y   A            Y   A
Planning agenda for group meetings                                    A                 Y   A            Y   A
Facilitating and debriefing meetings                                  A                 Y   A            Y   A
Deciding ground rules for the group                               Y                     Y                Y
Deciding on campaign topic and research methods                   Y   A                 Y                Y
Facilitating small group projects                                     A                 Y   A            Y
Presenting ideas to the public                                    Y                     Y                Y
*Y = youth; A = adults

        Program roles also changed over time.     What started with a simple distinction between adult staff and youth
participants became increasingly differentiated (see Table 2). Whereas in year one there was only one role available
to youth--"participants"--new     roles were  added  each  coming   year.   In the third year there were four different
positions available to youth, which were earned depending on different levels of experience in the program and the
level of commitment one wished to make.      The "youth staff" was comprised of students in their second or third year;
these youth met regularly to discuss problems and make long term decisions about program direction.

Table 2: Increasing differentiation of roles
            2001-2                                  2002-3                                  2003-4
Adult staff members                  Adult staff members                    Adult staff members
Adult researcher                     Adult researchers                      Adult researchers
Youth participants                   Youth staff                            Youth staff coordinator
                                     Youth participants                     Youth staff members
                                                                            Youth leaders
                                                                            Youth allies

        In interviews at the end of the second year, most youth interpreted these changes as a steady movement
towards greater  autonomy and     leadership.   They described  ways  in  which    the program had  become   less adult-
directed over the course of their time in the program.   For example, Dolores, a youth staff member, said:

        Interviewer: Now that the year is over, how do you feel about how it went?

        Dolores:   This year I think it was harder because last year the adults were more involved with the
        groups. And they helped pull us through and they kinda had an agenda and what they wanted us to

                                                           351                                                 ICLS 2006
        get done during that day and, they planned...And this year it was more like, "We're gonna let
        them do everything and we're just gonna sit back and watch and if they need help we'll be there
        but we're not really gonna take charge of the situation..." And I think that's good though, `cause
        that's what YELL's about: you making your own choices, you getting your things done.

Dolores observed that adults made room for youth input and ownership by detaching themselves from the project
and letting youth make key decisions.      Another veteran youth, Ellie, made a similar comment when I asked her to
compare YELL to the Junior Reserve Officers Training Corps (JROTC), where she was also a member:

        Well, um..ROTC has a teacher.       And he always, the first sergeant always tells us what to do but in
        here...they don't tell us what to do - we know what we should do (interview, spring 2002).

        These examples of changes in the distribution of roles, and how youth interpreted them, suggest that YELL
made a transition from adult-led to a program where youth had a great deal more input, autonomy, and leadership.
In the next section I discuss how youth and adults relied on certain resources to achieve this shift.

Question    #2:    What       resources     helped     youth       and   adults    shift the    program      from   adult-
initiated to youth-led?

        I focus on three aspects of YELL that youth and adults used as resources to support youth leadership: group
agreements; group organizing routines; and program ideology.             Each of these resources served slightly different
ends.  Group    agreements    helped create   a democratic    basis  for authority in YELL.     The   agreements    removed
authority from  adult  staff  members  and   situated it in   a collective process.   Group organizing routines became
resources for youth to regulate and manage their work independently of adults.             Program ideology about youth
empowerment served as an ideal to which youth and adults held each other accountable.

Group Agreements
        Several meetings were devoted to establishing detailed ground rules, such as expectations for behavior and
consequences for violating those expectations.      For example, youth defined unexcused absences, spelled out how
many   warnings   students   should receive   for absences,   specified   the consequences  of   disrespecting   others, and
differentiated acceptable  curses   (directed towards    oneself)   from  unacceptable   curses (directed   towards others).
Adults facilitated but did not offer their own input.  The deliberations took several afternoons.     Some students found
the whole exercise foreign.   During a conversation at the beginning of the first year, one student said, in frustration
at the slow pace, "I think ya'll (the adults) should make the rules."

        Group agreements became an important resource for dealing with problems that came up in the group,
ranging from interpersonal conflicts to absenteeism.     When used artfully, the agreements shifted rule enforcement
from adults' personal discretion to a more consistent and impartial set of rules established by the group. Even though
adults played   a role in  this   system,  by holding    youth   accountable   for violations of  attendance   rules, youth
acknowledged that the rules were a product of their own deliberations.         For example, in one case adults expelled a
male student, Earl, for missing too many days.     When I asked him why he had left, he said, "Well, actually I chose
to use my last unexcused absence."    He went on to say, "what is fair is fair.    I broke all the...Well, not all the ground
rules, but enough of them to be out of the program, so that is pretty fair." Earl's quote suggests that even though
adults enforced the consequences of the attendance rule, he felt some agency in the decision, perhaps because of his
role in shaping the rules.   As another participant, Marlene, said in an interview, "If we break the rules, we couldn't
get mad because we were the ones that put them in force..."

Group Organizing Routines
        Over the course of the second year there was a steady increase in the percentage of activities facilitated by
youth  versus  those  facilitated by adults.    Whereas   41.5     percent of activities were   facilitated in October   and
November,   91.5  percent    of activities were   facilitated   in April  and  May.   This  shift    resembles a  pattern in
apprenticeship  learning,  in which  experts    begin by modeling     but  over time  fade so   that novices  can take   over
(Collins, Brown, & Holum, 1991).

        But what enables youth to take over when adults fade?            In this case group organizing routines played an
important role.   By the middle of the year most of the work took place in small groups--video, magazine, website,

                                                            352                                                    ICLS 2006
and focus group. The small group projects were challenging enough that youth needed some coaching from adults.
But at the same time, adults wanted the projects to represent youth's authentic interests and goals; they did not want
youth to think they were "taking over." Adults therefore introduced certain routines that lent structure to youth's
work while still leaving them accountable for it.

       Of the    different small  groups,   the magazine   group  was  most successful   staying on  task  and  working
collaboratively. The magazine group chose to design and author a magazine that would represent youth's views
about stereotypes. Beyond the technical skills associated with magazine layout and story-writing, this task required
complex planning and collaborative skills: youth developed a three month timeline for completing the magazine,
delegated tasks, and monitored their progress from week to week--all while using an egalitarian form of decision-
making in which no one person was the boss. The following episode provides an example of how youth relied on
certain group organizing routines to get their work done.   Here I focus on two particular routines: using "agendas"
and assigning roles.

       YELL Observation: Working on small group projects
                 Today represents a new development in YELL: based on a vote taken among youth last
       week, adults will hang back from the small group projects and only help out if questions arise.
                 The meeting starts with Ellie (a 10th grader in her second year) reviewing the agenda and
       facilitating a brief game that uses role plays to reinforce the group ground-rules. When the game is
       over, Ellie announces, "Now we're working in research groups. Remember to pick a facilitator
       and note taker. You guys have to do that every single time."
                 After Ellie's instructions, youth assemble in their four groups: magazine, video, website,
       and research. Adults pursue other tasks: The program director is fixing the internet connection on
       a computer; another is working in the office. I go with the magazine group as an observer. Four
       youth are present.
                 The  first thing  the magazine   group   does is pick a facilitator (Arun), and a  note  taker
       (Marlene).    Arun   asks, "What   are our goals   today?" They   refer back  to the timeline they  had
       completed last week and formulate their goal for the day, which is to decide on the purpose and
       contents of the magazine.
                 After the group brainstorms ideas for contents of the magazine, there is a pause and Arun
       asks, "Is there anything else to add?" Marlene, the note taker, says she wants to rewrite the list
       because it is messy, but the other members of the group say they can read it. Then Marlene offers
       a new   idea  for the  content  of the   magazine, which   she follows  by saying, "but that's just my
       opinion,  don't   just agree."  This provokes  Arun  to  say,  "You're  trying to take my  job away!"
       Another youth agrees, saying "Arun's the facilitator." Marlene smiles, and says, "I'm sorry, I'll
       stop."

       In the above example Ellie, a youth participant, initiated the YELL meeting, facilitated an opening team-
builder, and then directed people to their "small groups." In keeping with a group organizing practice that adults had
introduced earlier in the year, she reminded each group to designate a "facilitator" and a "note-taker." The magazine
group proceeded to a corner of the room and, after allocating roles, set an agenda for itself by reviewing its goals
and timeline. When    Marlene   asked  for  a response  to her  suggestion, both  Arun    and Vannara  interpreted  her
comment as overstepping her bounds as "note-taker." They reminded Marlene that Arun was the facilitator, which
Marlene accepted without protest and the group resumed its work.      This excerpt shows how certain resources helped
the group to run smoothly without direct adult assistance.     Youth's appropriation of these local practices, such as
formulating goals and allocating roles, enabled them to work effectively together.

Program Ideology
       Adult staff members in YELL abided by an ideology that the project would only be authentic and
meaningful if it were truly driven by youth's interests and goals. As self-described "outsiders" to the high poverty
community where YELL was located, adults believed that young people had greater wisdom and insight into the
nature of the problems there and how to approach them.     Planning meetings among adults revolved around this
issue--how can we help organize things in such a way that youth feel and enact real ownership of the program?

       I observed several situations where adults invoked this ideology explicitly in speaking with participants.
For example, in their explanations of YELL at the beginning of the year, adults asserted that the program was to be

                                                           353                                                 ICLS 2006
guided by the youth. As the year continued there were multiple occasions where adults reinforced this message, by
saying things such as, "this project is up to you," "you chose the topic," or "it's not up to me to decide what to next."
Adults often invoked the youth-led ideology when they were disappointed by youth's level of engagement.                    For
example, on one occasion I was working with three students to develop survey questions about stereotypes, but they
were quite reticent to generate ideas.    Korina, one of the Americorps assistants, came over to help and said, "Well
this is your topic, you came up with it, what aspects of the media do you care about?"

        Over time this notion that YELL was supposed to be youth-led came to be a commonly accepted way that
people described the program.       For example, in an interview I asked a youth participant to describe the role of the
adult who supported her magazine project: "She helped us a lot. But (then) she told me she didn't wanna do that,
cause she  might  be     doing  too much...It's    supposed    to be the   youth [making    decisions]."  Other participants
appeared to endorse this notion when they voted, at the midway point of the second year, to have adults play limited
roles in the management of small group projects; they wanted adults to be available to answer questions but to
otherwise leave decisions and day to day work up to the youth.

        In interviews three youth participants drew on the youth leadership ideology to criticize the program.             For
example, I asked one person, Joseph, what would "be the best role for an adult to play" in programs like this:

        Joseph:   Best role....?      I mean  it's  alright to  give your   suggestions,  strong suggestions,  but it
        should   be  left up   to the   youth participant   to finalize the product--unless   you    know it's really
        going to have a negative impact on the program if they do it.           If you give your suggestions all the
        time and enforce your own implementation on a certain project, the youth is not going to feel that
        their own personal part, their contribution to the product is in there--because it's like so much
        suggestions.     And it's like after so many suggestions it's basically like the director, or whoever is
        over the participant, is actually telling him what they want to see the (product) look like...

Joseph expressed    concern    that adults had   too  much     influence,  that they  occupied   a position above    the youth
participants. His comment suggests that in his eyes YELL did not fully achieve its goal to be youth-led.              On one
hand Joseph's statement can be taken as evidence that the program fell short of its goal of achieving authentic youth
ownership.    But it can   also be  taken  as  evidence   that  the  group  had  generated  an  ideology  that members    took
seriously and used to critically evaluate, and even improve, the program.           It may also be that youth leadership was
an elusive target--as    young    people  gained   a stronger   sense   of their own   power   their analyses  of youth-adult
relations in the group changed as well.

        These   different   examples    illustrate  that the   program   ideology   about  youth   voice became    a recurrent
narrative that members of YELL invoked to help organize youth-adult interactions.            At times adults raised this point
in order to try to motivate youth.       At   other  times  youth   invoked  it  to limit adult involvement.    And   in some
interviews, such Joseph's, the program ideology provided a standpoint from which to criticize the program for not
living up to its ideals.

Conclusion
        In this paper I set out to understand how a program initiated by adults evolved into a program for which
youth assumed key leadership responsibilities.       I started by describing changes in the distribution of responsibility
for tasks among youth and adults.     I then analyzed resources available in YELL that people used in order to organize
each other's behavior, which included group agreements, group routines, and program ideology.

        The principal theoretical contribution of this paper lies in its focus on the role played by cultural tools and
resources in the shift from an adult-directed to a youth-directed activity system.        Accounts of apprenticeship learning
have focused primarily on changes in the behavior of experts to explain this process, through modeling, coaching,
and fading (e.g., Collins, Brown, & Holum, 1991).        Similarly, Tharp and Gallimore's account of learning in the zone
of proximal development focuses on the shift from assisted performance to solo performance (1989).             Less attention
has been paid to the enduring role that cultural tools play when adults "fade."           This paper asserts that adult fading
was possible because certain tools specific to the YELL learning environment, such as group organizing rituals and
group agreements, were available to youth.      Similar to other accounts of mediated action (e.g., Wertsch, 1998) even
during occasions where youth worked ostensibly "alone" they were using these resources.

                                                               354                                                   ICLS 2006
         The main practical implication of this study pertains to how adults support youth leadership and autonomy
in complex project-based activities. In YELL's first year adult staff members, as well as this researcher, sometimes
made naïve assumptions about how youth would respond to open-ended tasks.        That is, we thought that youth would
become motivated and engaged simply because they were not being told what to do by adults.      But engagement does
not stem merely from freedom to act; it also depends on strategies for how to act, participation norms, and agreed
upon goals.   Seeding the learning environment with such strategies, or cultural tools, gives youth ways to regulate
their actions and  perform   independently  of   adults, especially in  settings where  participants are performing
challenging and novel tasks, such as youth activism campaigns.      The process of seeding is most effective if done
explicitly ­ when adults model strategies and comment on them.

         Also, it is important not to forget that many activist groups have larger ends in sight, such as reclaiming
images  of youth of   color or making   schools more  engaging  and   equitable.  In these cases adult fading can be
counter-productive if  youth do  not have  the  tools necessary to  be persuasive  in policymaking   settings, such    as
meetings with journalists or school board members.    For example, young people may need to support their opinions
with empirical evidence or frame their proposals in terms of goals that have bipartisan support.   Strategies such as
these represent cultural tools that enable young people to be effective agents of change.  It is important, therefore,
that in the effort to foster a "youth-led" campaign veteran activists not overlook the critical roles they can play.

Endnotes
(1) Similar to definitions used by the groups studied, "youth" is defined here as high school age and younger.

References
Becker, H. (1998). Tricks of the trade. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Camino, L., & Zeldin, S. (2002). From periphery to center: Pathways for youth civic engagement in the day-to-day
         life of communities. Applied Developmental Science.
Cervone, B. (2002). Taking democracy in hand: Youth action for education change in the San Francisco Bay Area.
         Providence, RI: What Kids Can Do & The Forum for Youth Investment.
Collins, A., Brown, J.S., & Holum, A. (1991). Cognitive apprenticeship: Making thinking visible. American
         Educator, 15(3) 38-46.
Dewey, J. (1902/1990). The child and the curriculum. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Greeno, J. G. (2001). Students with competence, authority, and accountability: Affording intellective identities in
         classrooms. Stanford, CA.
Kirshner, B. (2005). Assistance strategies in three youth activism organizations: Facilitation, apprenticeship, and
         joint work. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Kwon, S.A. (in press). Youth of color organizing for juvenile justice. In S. Ginwright, P. Noguera, & J. Cammarota
         (Eds.) Beyond resistance: Youth activism and community change: New democratic possibilities for policy
         and practice for America's youth. Oxford, UK: Routledge.
Larson, R.W. & Hansen, D. (2005). The development of strategic thinking: Learning to impact human systems in a
         youth activism program.  Human Development, 48(6), 327-349.
Larson, R., Walker, K., Pierce, N. (2004). A comparison of high quality youth-led and adult-led youth programs:
         Balancing inputs from youth and adults. Society for Research on Adolescence, Baltimore, MD.
Miles, M.B. & Huberman, A.M. (1984).      Qualitative data analysis: A sourcebook of new methods. London: Sage
         Publications.
Rogoff,  B.   (1995).  Observing   sociocultural  activity on   three  planes:   Participatory appropriation,   guided
         participation, and apprenticeship. In Wertsch, Del Rio, Alvarez (Eds.) Sociocultural Studies of Mind. New
         York, Cambridge University Press.
Roth, J., Brooks-Gunn, J, Murray, L., Foster, W. (1998). Promoting healthy adolescents: Synthesis of youth
         development program evaluations. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 8(4) 423-459.
Saxe, G. B. (1991). Culture and cognitive development: Studies in mathematical understanding. Hillsdale, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Tharp, R.G. & Gallimore, R. (1989). Rousing minds to life: Teaching, learning, & schooling in social context.
         Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Pres
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as Action. New York: Oxford University Press.
Youniss, J., D. Hart. (2005). Intersection of social institutions with civic development. New Directions for Child and
         Adolescent Development, 109(Fall 2005), 73-82.

                                                          355                                                ICLS 2006
