Fostering Scientific Argumentation by Creating a Need for Students to
                      Attend to Each Other's Claims and Evidence
        Leema Kuhn, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Dr. Evanston, IL, l-kuhn@northwestern.edu
     Lisa O. Kenyon, Wright State University, 3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy Dayton, OH,            lisa.kenyon@wright.edu
        Brian J. Reiser, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Dr. Evanston, IL, reiser@northwestern.edu

        Abstract:     Scientific argumentation can provide students and teachers with opportunities to use
        evidence to make sense of the phenomena being studied and to engage in central practices of the
        scientific community. We posit that fostering the practice of argumentation requires transforming
        classroom interactions in order to create a need for students to attend to each other's claims and
        evidence. This paper examines the enactment of a 7th grade ecology unit created to generate this
        need and support these discussions. Our analyses of the student discussions show students moving
        beyond typical classroom interactions in order to understand the ways in which their claims
        differ and to evaluate one another's claims, in light of the evidence. Thus, we conclude that this
        approach of creating a need and supporting students as they attend to and critically evaluate one
        another's  claims   and  evidence   appears    to be  a  promising    strategy  for  fostering scientific
        argumentation.

        In the last two decades, two related themes of science education reform have emerged. First, reforms call
for conceptual understanding and sense making about mechanisms to be cast as the goals for science learning (e.g.
Linn, Songer, & Eylon, 1996). Second, engaging in the practices of scientists, developing an understanding of the
beliefs and values necessary for scientific inquiry, is thought to be core to science learning (e.g. Duschl, 2000; NRC,
1996).  Scientific argumentation     can help students   and teachers   achieve  both of these far-reaching   goals.  First,
framing the task as presenting and defending understandings focuses students on critically using evidence to make
sense of the specific phenomena being studied (e.g. D. Kuhn, 1993). Second, using available evidence and scientific
knowledge to defend and evaluate understandings in discourse is a central practice of the scientific community (e.g.
Driver, Newton, & Osborne, 2000; Duschl, 2000).

        Both of these aspects of argumentation ­ the sense making and discourse ­ create challenges for students.
First, students tend to be inconsistent in whether they carefully distinguish their claims or theories from the evidence
that supports them.   For example,   they are likely  to  ignore or re-interpret anomalous   data in   order to defend  an
erroneous knowledge    claim   (e.g. D.  Kuhn,   1989).  Kuhn    argues that these  findings suggest   that  learners have
difficulty distinguishing and coordinating theories and evidence and that this weakness affects students' ability to
engage in argumentative discourse, in which they must evaluate the fit between the claims and evidence. Hogan and
Maglienti (2001)   suggest that  these  findings reveal  another  difficulty facing students;  students may   not see  the
distinction between evidence and theories as useful or necessary for their task. That is, everyday arguments may rely
equally on coherence or plausibility and evidence, and thus do not depend as centrally on this distinction. Using this
interpretation, one design challenge to fostering student participation in scientific argumentation is helping students
to value evidence in sense making and evaluation.

        Second,    traditional classroom   activities often  inhibit  the social  discourse   of critically  attending  to,
defending and evaluating understandings. For example, the common classroom interaction in which the teacher asks
a question, a student answers and the teacher responds to the answer given (Mehan, 1979) largely prevents students
from engaging in student-to-student discussion (Lemke, 1990). Moreover, this interaction style neither enables nor
necessitates that students build upon one another's contributions. Thus, in typical classroom interactions, students
have little need to understand the substance of one another's ideas, nor consider whether they understand and agree
with them (Lemke, 1990). Motivating and enabling students to connect their own understandings to those of their
peers is a second challenge to fostering argumentation.

        The solution to these challenges lies in their combination; creating activities that motivate students to attend
to one another's ideas can provide a context in which the fit between claims and evidence is a meaningful and
important evaluative criterion (e.g. Driver et al., 2000; Duschl, 2000; Hogan & Maglienti, 2001). Fostering these
interactions requires classroom  activities that necessitate  and   value the students'  contributions  and  supports  that
emphasize the alignment between claims and evidence (e.g. Hatano & Inagaki, 1991; Herrenkohl & Guerra, 1998;

                                                           370                                                   ICLS 2006
Hogan   &   Corey, 2001;    Osborne,   Erduran,  &   Simon,   2004).   To  explore   this approach,  we  designed   classroom
activities and supports that motivate students to use evidence in order to convince one another that their claims
accurately explain the phenomenon under study. This approach is designed to provide students with the opportunity,
motivation  and   tools to  meaningfully   attend   to and  critically evaluate one   another's ideas  and   evidence.  In this
paper, we examine an enactment of these activities, examining this connection:            if we are able to motivate students
to attend to one another's ideas, will the fit between claims and evidence become a meaningful criterion?

Design Strategies
    To   examine   the  potential  connection   between    students    substantively attending  to  one  another's  ideas  and
evaluating claims with evidence, we engaged in a design study. We worked with a 7th grade teacher to redesign an
existing 7th grade ecosystems unit     (Bruozas et al., 2004). The original version of this eight-week unit was designed
to support students as they constructed "evidence-based scientific explanations." These explanations were typically
one  paragraph  long    and contained   a  claim  that  is supported   with  evidence   and scientific principles.  While  the
existing design   supported   students   in applying    ecosystems     concepts  to  understanding   interesting   phenomena,
students had no authentic reason to listen to each other or engage with one another's ideas.             Thus, our redesign
focused  on  creating   activities that  motivated   students  to  substantively   attend  to  one  another's   ideas, through
scientific argumentation.

    To   do this, we  extended     the existing task   of  "explaining" by   creating a   need for  students to attend  to and
critically evaluate one another's explanations and supportive evidence. In addition, we worked with our cooperating
teacher  to develop  scaffolds    that  helped  students   develop  criteria for defending     and  critically evaluating  one
another's   explanations.   These  supports    focused    students on   one  another's    evidence. For  example,    the class
developed a list of characteristics that good evidence must have, and a list of possible questions one might ask when
evaluating  explanations    (Kenyon,    L.  Kuhn    &  Reiser, 2006).   We   designed   two   kinds of  activities that placed
students in positions which required them to critically attend to the claims and evidence of their peers:

    1.   Argument Jigsaw: Pairs of students construct an explanation. Two pairs then combine, compare
         explanations and converge on a single explanation. The goal of this activity is for students with
         disparate ideas to agree upon a single solution, thereby creating a need for students to consider
         each explanation while determining how they fit together and use the available evidence to choose
         between them.
    2.   Whole Class Debate: The groups of four present their final explanations. During the presentations,
         other students are made responsible for asking the groups questions about their explanations and
         evidence. These questions reflected the students' criteria for evaluating evidence and explanations.
         By placing students in the role of questioner we are creating a need for the students to attend to
         one another's presentations.

These two activities work together in that the second, the Whole Class Debate, provides a forum for the product of
the first, the Argument Jigsaw.    Thus, during the Argument Jigsaw students are aware that the product of their work
will be presented to and questioned by their classmates. In this way, the Whole Class Debate is designed to create a
need for  the  product   of  the   Argument    Jigsaw.    Over the  course   of this  8-week   unit  the students   had  three
opportunities to engage in these argumentative activities.

Method
         The cooperating teacher enacted this unit in three classes, in a large Midwestern city. We observed and
videotaped the enactment in one of the classes. This class contained fifteen students, eleven girls and four boys,
from diverse  backgrounds.    We    met   with  the cooperating    teacher  weekly   to evaluate   and revise  the lessons, in
response to the students' and teacher's needs. While observing, the researchers would occasionally work with the
students, asking leading questions and facilitating discussions. This study focuses on the videotapes, but the data
corpus is augmented with pre and post interviews and the students' written work.

         In consultation with the teacher, we selected two "focus" groups to follow throughout the enactment. Both
groups consist of two student pairs that converged during the Argument Jigsaw activities.           Group 1 consisted of two
girls, Janelle and Jalen, and two boys, Peter and Toby. Group 2 consisted of four girls: Keisha, Lanelle, Sarah and
Vanessa. Examining the written work and the videos of the presentations reveals that our focus groups' answers

                                                              371                                                    ICLS 2006
were of similar caliber as those of the rest of their class. Further, the teacher reports having students similar to those
in these groups, in each of her three classes.

Analysis
         In this study, we designed activities to foster student participation in scientific argumentation. Our design is
predicated on the idea that typical school practices do not create a need for students to engage with one another's
ideas and that if we were able to foster substantive interactions, the students would use evidence to evaluate one
another's claims. This study examines this connection by examining two questions: 1) whether students attend to
one another's ideas during the enactment and 2) whether the students use evidence to evaluate one another's claims.
To address these questions, we focus on two aspects of critically attending to claims and evidence:           1) comparing
claims 2) aligning claims with evidence.

         Our analysis for this paper focuses on the third and final explanation that students construct, defend and
critically evaluate, in the unit. In this explanation, the students solve a mystery about why most of the finches died
on a Galapagos Island in 1977, and why some did not.        Solving this mystery entails a two-week investigation of a
computer  database  (Reiser  et al., 2001) in   which  students  gather   evidence   to answer three  questions:   1)  What
environmental  change  affected  the   finches'   survival? 2)  What trait affected  the  finches' ability   to survive  the
environmental change? and 3) How did that trait affect the finches ability to survive?. Halfway through the project,
pairs of students engaged in an Argument Jigsaw, forming groups of four and working to converge on a single
answer,  identify remaining  problems    and   complete  their  research. At  the conclusion   of  this  process,  the class
participated in a Whole Class Debate in which they evaluated and questioned one another's solutions.

Comparing Claims
         A key aspect of our design approach for fostering argumentation was to motivate students to substantively
attend to one another's ideas, building on them and identifying where the claims differ and agree. Unsurprisingly,
actively comparing one's own claims to some one else's is one of the challenges facing students (Hogan & Corey,
2001; Sandoval, 2003). In this study, evidence of this challenge emerges during step one of the Argument Jigsaw, in
which student pairs exchange work with their counterparts, and evaluate one another's explanations. The worksheets
supporting this evaluation ask students to score their counterparts' evidence and claims. In both of our focus groups,
students perform this evaluation quickly without discussing the scores within or across pairs. Thus, the explicit task
of evaluating the other pair's explanation did not seem to engage students in a substantive comparison or evaluation.

         In contrast, as the goal of the task changes from explicit evaluation to agreeing upon a group product, the
students in both  groups move   beyond   this  cursory  evaluation  and   discuss their explanations  in  more   detail. For
example, in Group 1, Toby performs a perfunctory evaluation of Janelle and Jalen's written work. Shortly after
receiving this evaluation, Janelle verbally restates her claim and evidence identifying the trait that allowed some
finches to survive and explaining why that trait mattered. Throughout her explanation, Toby responds affirmatively
saying things like: "yea, that is what we got" (05.26.05 tape #1, 00:33:43). These positive statements suggest that
Toby is comparing Janelle and Jalen's work to his own; in this case he determines that they agree. Later in this
exchange, Janelle   recognizes  that the pairs  differ on   the environmental  change    they claim   to have   affected the
finches' survival,  saying: "What    I notice  is that your  claim  and   our claim  is  opposite..." (05.26.05,   tape  #1,
00:40:25). This begins a lengthy discussion (described in the following section) in which the pairs compare the two
claims and their various supports for them. Thus, in Group 1, the students move beyond the cursory evaluation of
one another's claims and evidence to engage with one another's ideas by considering the relationship between them;
these students are substantively engaging with one another's ideas.

         In Group 2, the pairs also compare their solutions to the Finch mystery. Vanessa and Sarah report that the
finches' predator, the owls, increased causing the finches to die. They found that finches with longer wings survived
and concluded that the increased wingspan helped the birds escape the owls. Lanelle and Keisha found that the
changes in weather caused the birds' food to decrease, causing the finches to starve. This pair also reports that the
birds with a larger wingspan survived better, concluding that the wing length allowed birds to fly further to find
food. In this discussion, the pairs do not explicitly state their points of agreement and disagreement.      However, their
work to  converge   on a single  solution (discussed    in  the following  section), offers evidence    that these students
implicitly compared their solutions and identified their points of disagreement.

                                                            372                                                   ICLS 2006
          Thus, the students in both focus groups engage with one another's ideas, substantively comparing them in
order  to determine  how    they fit together.  In past   enactments  of  this unit, we  have   seen  students  evaluate   one
another's explanations without identifying their points of disagreement. However, in these interactions the students
go   beyond a  cursory  evaluation   and   develop    an  understanding   of  each   other's ideas.  Although   this  type  of
interaction is scarce in typical classrooms, it appeared to emerge naturally out of the students' discussions in which
they needed to combine their explanations in order to determine whether and how they differed. We hypothesize that
the students' engagement emerged out of this activity because the students' goal was to combine disparate answers
to construct a single explanation; the students needed to determine where they agreed and disagreed in order to
accomplish this goal.

Evaluating Claims with Evidence
          In this unit, we motivate students to evaluate the alignment between the claims and evidence by creating
activities that create a need for the students to attend to one another's ideas. In the above analysis we see students
substantively attending to one another's ideas by determining the ways in which their ideas are similar and different.
Our design rests on the claim that this type of engagement will make the need to evaluate claims with evidence
meaningful  for the  students.   Thus, in  this analysis  we  examine     whether   students use  evidence   to evaluate   one
another's claims.

          Group 1   chooses between    the pairs'  competing    claims about    the environmental   change   that caused   the
birds' food, the seeds, to decrease: Toby and Peter claim that it was torrential rains while Janelle and Jalen claim
that it was a drought. While working on resolving this difference, Janelle pushes Toby for evidence, saying things
such as: "but do you actually have numbers that says the rainfall increased? Because you can't say it increased
without numbers" (05.26.05, tape #1, 00:40:25). These prompts indicate Janelle's awareness of the importance of
evidence; she is unwilling to accept Toby's account unless he supports it with evidence. In this discussion, Toby and
Janelle discuss their  differing interpretations   of the data.  For  example,  Toby    sketches  the rainfall  graph that  he
remembers   in  which   the rainfall  spiked (indicating   torrential  rains)  while Janelle  counters   with   numbers    that
demonstrate the rainfall decreasing over the course of three dry seasons (indicating a drought) (05.26.05, tape #1,
00:42:33). Both of these interpretations have merit: Toby is looking at the changes from the dry to wet seasons in
which the rainfall increases substantially while Janelle is looking more broadly at the wet and dry season cycles. At
the conclusion of the discussion, Toby eventually agrees with Janelle's more accurate interpretation, saying:           "Yea,
it is possible" (05.26.05, tape #1, 00:42:37). Thus, not only do Toby and Janelle use evidence to evaluate a claim,
but  Toby  changes  his own   understanding     to more   accurately  align  with   the available data. Not    only are these
students actively engaged with one another's ideas, but they are using evidence to evaluate their theories.

          While discussing  their  different claims,   Group   2 originally   attempts  to   combine  the two   explanations.
Keisha suggests that they combine the claims causally:        "Maybe it is the weather that attracts the owls" (05.26.05,
tape #2, 00:02:52). Attempting to combine disparate ideas is a viable solution to resolving a conflict. However, in
this case, the combined claim is neither supported by evidence nor well thought out (this exchange takes less than a
minute). This solution does not last. Instead, while talking to the second researcher, the students realize that the
available evidence disproves Sarah and Vanessa's claim that the owls increased.

          After the students acknowledge that there is no evidence to support their claim, Sarah asks: "So what do we
do   now?"  (05.26.05, tape  #2, 00:21:53).    The  researcher  encourages     the  students to look  on  the  computers   for
evidence that will resolve the debate, but the students don't think they have enough time. Vanessa says: "Can't we
just agree on an answer and...I mean we have the numbers but theirs makes more sense because, because we looked
at the  graph and the  owl  population  didn't   actually  go up  [it decreased]"    (05.26.05, tape  #2, 00:22:34).  In   this
exchange, Vanessa appears to grapple with the fact that her evidence does not support her claim; it contradicts it.
The incongruity between the evidence and claim prompts Vanessa to worry about the criteria for selecting claims:
should they select the claim for which the students have not reported any supporting evidence or the claim for which
the evidence is contradictory? Through this struggle, Vanessa uses evidence to evaluate the claims; and in the end,
Vanessa chooses Janelle and Keisha's unsupported claim over her own. From a practical standpoint, this is a good
decision because the students are able to find evidence that supports this claim in future class sessions. Moreover,
this decision  demonstrates  Vanessa    conceding     the intuitive  appeal  of her  erroneous    claim that  an  increase  in
predators  affected the finch    population  and,  in  response  to   her group    members'   feedback,   accepting   that the
contradictory evidence disproves it. This decision demonstrates Vanessa using evidence to evaluate a claim.

                                                             373                                                    ICLS 2006
        This discussion is clearly not ideal: the other members in this group only participate minimally and an
authority figure  (the researcher)  encourages their  focus  on evidence.  However,   even with   these  caveats,   this
conversation reveals a student struggling to choose between competing claims by evaluating the evidence. Thus, the
need to agree upon a single claim and the pedagogical supports that focused on evidence seemed to help Vanessa
(and to varying   degrees, the rest of her group) to  evaluate  the  alignment between   their respective  claims   and
evidence.

        We also see the students take on the challenge of aligning the evidence and claims during the Whole Class
Debate. For example, when Group 2 presents their solution to the Finch mystery, the class discusses whether the
group has evidence to support their claims. This begins with Lanelle reading Group 2's answer:

        The environmental change that affected the finches' survival was when the Galapagos Islands had
        a drought during the years of 76 and 77. The trait that affected the finches' ability to survive the
        environmental change was the wing length because since the food was drying up, they had to fly
        farther for food and the finches with longer wings were better at flying farther for food (06.06.05,
        tape #2, 00:25:33).

While discussing this explanation, many students in the class question whether the group has evidence to support
their claim that the birds are flying farther for food. As one student puts it: "How do you know that they were flying
to get their food?" (06.06.05, tape #2, 00:29:01). This sparks a discussion, spanning two class periods, in which the
class attempts to determine whether the finches fly to find food. Members of Group 2 defend their assertion that the
birds fly to find food by presenting database descriptions of the birds "walking" and "wandering" to their food. But,
there is no conclusive evidence that the birds fly to find food. Throughout this discussion, the class struggles in
considering the inconsistency between the claim (birds fly to food) and evidence (birds wander or walk to food). In
the end, Group 2 resolves this question by assuming "wandering" means "flying." As they state in their final written
solution: "We know that the ground finches' were flying farther for food because in the field notes, it said that they
were  wandering    around  the island  searching  for food"  (emphases    added). The   group's  resolution   is a  bit
unsatisfying; they have interpreted inconclusive evidence in a manner that ignores the ambiguity and supports their
claim. However, given their time constraints and the lack of deterministic evidence, it seems understandable.

        In each of these examples, the students evaluate explanations by aligning the claims and evidence. During
the Argument Jigsaw the evidence led both groups to select the stronger of the two claims. In Group 1, the students
determined that a drought caused the birds' food (the plant seeds) to decrease. Likewise, in Group 2, the students
figured out that rather than an increase in predators, the finches died because of the weather. Moreover, in the Whole
Class Debate, the class realized the available evidence was too vague to conclusively evaluate the claim. Thus, in all
three of these examples, we see the students using evidence to evaluate their claims.

Discussion
        The activities in our curriculum were designed to foster argumentation by creating a need for students to
critically attend to one another's claims and evidence, thereby making the distinction between evidence and claims
meaningful and relevant to their interactions. This study was admittedly small and requires additional research with
more classes and teachers. However, analysis of this pilot study suggests that this approach of creating a need for the
students to substantively attend to one another's claims and evidence seems to be a promising solution to the dual
problems of supporting students as they 1) productively attend to one another's ideas and 2) evaluate claims with
evidence.

        First, the  students substantively attend to  their  ideas as they compare    claims,  identify the  points  of
disagreement   in order to construct a shared  response during   the  Argument  Jigsaw.  While  the first  step  of the
Argument Jigsaw seemed to motivate students to perform cursory evaluations of one another's work, similar to the
evaluations one might expect in a typical classroom, the larger goal of convergence seemed to motivate students to
move beyond these perfunctory evaluations, in order to identify their points of difference and similarity.

        Second, the instructional supports (Kenyon, L. Kuhn & Reiser, 2006) and teachers guide the students to use
evidence when evaluating one another's claims. While the students struggle with this emphasis, they appear to use
evidence in their final decisions. Moreover the Whole Class Debates provide additional opportunities for students to

                                                         374                                                 ICLS 2006
evaluate claims with evidence. In the example provided, the class works to interpret vague evidence in order to
determine whether that evidence supports the provided explanation.

         These conversations are challenging for the students; throughout the discussions, they struggle to articulate
and understand the differences in their interpretations of the data and are unsure of the criteria to choose between
their claims. Thus,  while this pilot study begins  to  support our conjecture that  creating a need for  students  to
evaluate claims with evidence fosters student participation in the practice of scientific argumentation, we need to
revise this approach to more explicitly help students develop a language to engage in these discussions.

References
Bruozas, M., Dodick, J., Finn, L.-E., Hug, B., Kuhn, L., Tzou, C., et al. (2004). Struggle in natural environments:
         What will survive? In J. Krajcik & B. J. Reiser (Eds.), IQWST: Investigating and questioning our world
         through science and technology. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University.
Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms.
         Science Education, 84, 287-312.
Duschl, R. A. (2000). Making the nature of science explicit. In R. Millar, J. Leach & J. Osborne (Eds.), Improving
         science education: The contribution of research (pp. 187-206). Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1991). Sharing cognition through collective comprehension activity. In L. B. Resnick, J.
         M. Levine & S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 331-348). Washington,
         DC: American Psychological Association.
Herrenkohl, L. R., & Guerra, M. R. (1998). Participant structures, scientific discourse, and student engagement in
         fourth grade. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 431-473.
Hogan, K., & Corey, C. (2001). Viewing classrooms as cultural contexts for fostering scientific literacy.
         Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 32(2), 214-243.
Hogan, K., & Maglienti, M. (2001). Comparing the epistemological underpinnings of students' and scientists'
         reasoning about conclusions. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(6), 663-687.
Kenyon, L. O., Kuhn, L., & Reiser, B. J. (2006). Student epistemologies of science to guide the practice of
         argumentation. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Bloomington, IN.
Kuhn, D. (1989). Children and adults as intuitive scientists. Psychological Review, 96(4), 674-689.
Kuhn, D. (1993). Science as argument: Implications for teaching and learning scientific thinking. Science Education,
         77(3), 319-337.
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning, and values. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex.
Linn, M. C., Songer, N. B., & Eylon, B. S. (1996). Shifts and convergences in science learning and instruction. In D.
         C. Berliner & R. C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 438-490). New York:
         Macmillan.
Mehan, H. (1979). Learning lessons: Social organization in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
         Press.
NRC. (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: National Research Council.
Osborne, J., Erduran, S., & Simon, S. (2004). Enhancing the quality of argumentation in school science. Journal of
         Research in Science Teaching, 41(10), 994-1020.
Reiser, B., Tabak, I., Sandoval, W. A., Smith, B. K., Steinmuller, F., & Leone, A. J. (2001). Bguile: Strategic and
         conceptual  scaffolds  for scientific inquiry in biology classrooms.  In S. M. Carver   &  D.   Klahr (Eds.),
         Cognition and instruction: Twenty-five years of progress (pp. 263-305). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
         Associates.
Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects of students' scientific explanations. The Journal of
         Learning Sciences, 12(1), 5-51.

                                                          375                                                ICLS 2006
