          Developing a Sustainable Instructional Leadership Model:
   A Six-Year Investigation of Teachers in One Urban Middle School

                      Hee-Sun Lee, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, heesun.lee@tufts.edu
    Nancy Butler Songer, University of Michigan, 610 E. University, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, songer@umich.edu
      Soo-Young Lee, Korea Research Institute for Vocational Education & Training, Seoul, Korea 135-949,
                                                sooyoung720@gmail.com

         Abstract: We introduce a model of instructional leadership that can self-sustain curriculum-based
         reforms   at school  sites. Our model  is  based   on a six year longitudinal    study of  science teachers
         who implemented an inquiry-based, technology-rich weather curriculum as part of their district-
         wide science education reform initiatives.       This   study defines a sustainable      leadership model
         similar to the flying geese metaphor. In developing our leadership model, we used multiple data
         sources   and  synthesized   three  bodies  of  literature  such   as   community     of learners   in social
         cognition    theory,  instructional  le adership   in   education,     and  leadership   in  organizational
         psychology.

Introduction
         Recently, science education reform goals focus on transforming traditional science instruction into inquiry-
based learning (NRC, 1996; Songer, in press a). Transformation of traditional science teaching into inquiry-based
teaching  with  technologies   has been   challenging    (Fishman   &  Krajcik,    2003). As   many   inquiry -based    learning
environments were designed with the intention of making this difficult transition easier for teachers, small pockets
of success   were  observed   in real classroom     settings.  However,   the   intense involvement      of researchers   in   the
teacher's  day-to-day   decision  making     processes as   mentors,  leaders,   or  teaching  assistants   has influenced      the
programs' scalability and self-sustainability. An important area of next -step research is the self-sustainability of
reforms.  In other words, can    locally successful  curriculum-based     reforms   be  scaled and  sustained   beyond   a well-
supported, initial group of teachers?

         Scaling research imposes challenges not typically encountered in studying a handful of teachers (Songer, in
press b). Songer et al. (2002) reported that reform through curricular innovations not only affects students and
teachers but also is substantially limited by physical and social environments surrounding the classroom. Research
with  a  small   number   of   teachers   mainly    concerns    curriculum      implementation    issues such    as  fidelity    of
implementation. Scaling to many sites involves additional issues like (1) how to respond to differential needs and
characteristics of teachers and students , (2) how to work within different school contexts, (3) how to define an
appropriate level of support needed for successful implementation, and (4) teacher leadership and empowerment
(Smy lie, 1995).

         This paper features teachers from Lake Middle School involved in a six year longitudinal study of an
inquiry -based, technology-rich    curricular reform   program     called Kids   as Global Scientists    (Songer,   1996).     This
school was chosen for the study of transitions from pilot site to self-sustaining site as several of the trends observed
at different school sites in our larger sample were manifested in this one school over the years. This paper begins
with a description of the major characteristics of the curricular reform and how these were enacted in Lake Middle
School, followed by a discussion of several leadership models.            Finally, we present a model based on the flying
geese metaphor    to  describe a path from    pilot site to sustaining    site. This study strongly  advocates      the need    for
refining current instructional leadership models (1) for researchers to plan adequate professional development in
order to scale  their innovations  and   (2) for teachers   to extend their experience    with the   innovations    to  th eir own
teaching of other curriculum areas.

The Case of Lake Middle School
         Lake Middle School was located in an urban school district in a Midwestern state. Initial participation was
voluntary.   The school  had   two  science   teachers   in each   grade.  Ms.    Adams   was   the  science    and technology
coordinator for the school and had her own computer lab. The technology portion of the weather curriculum (KGS)
was carried out in Ms. Adams' computer lab.          Table 1 shows the overview of         teachers, students, and external
challenges over the six year period. Across the six years, several patterns emerged: (1) a high turnover of science

                                                               376                                                      ICLS 2006
teachers from year to year, (2) high degrees of change in computer hardware and Internet connection settings, and (3)
the presence of interdisciplinary teaching in this school.

Table 1. Overview of Lake Middle School.

Year   Science           Teachers   Grade                                External challenges
       Teachers            N          level
1997   Adams                3         7th        School computers could not run real-time weather software.
       (coordinator)                             Internet connections did not work.
       Chiu, Terry
1998   Adams               5*         6th        School computers could not run real-time weather software.
       Mary*                                     Internet connections worked very slowly.
                                                 KGS Curriculum was taught at a different grade level.
1999   Adams               9**        6th        Internet connection speed was much slower than 1998.
       Mary, Pratt                               A new science teacher came.
                                                 Computer lab space was limited to afford all students.
2000   Adams               5*         6th        Two new science teachers came.
       Tara, Fox+                                Fox did not have a science teaching background.
2001   Adams               5*         6th        KGS weather software had minor data feeding problems .
       Tara, Fox+                                Internet was not available for the first two weeks.
2002   Adams                2         6th        KGS weather software had minor data feeding problems .
       F o x+
Note. * One interdisciplinary team of language, mathematics, social studies, and science teachers was formed.
** Two interdisciplinary teams of language, mathematics, social studies, and science teachers were formed.
+ The participation of Fox in the community of teachers changed over the three years. See findings.

Kids as Global Scientists (KGS) Weather Curriculum
        KGS is an 8-week inquiry-based weather curriculum and fosters inquiry-based learning as follows:

1.  Distributed expertise: Student activities are conducted in small groups. Each student group is specialized in one
    of four topic areas: clouds & humidity, precipitation, temperature & pressure, and winds. After conducting
    online and offline investigations relevant to their topics, students share their expertise with other groups. As a
    result, the entire class has distributed expertise. Another level of distributed expertise occurs when students
    become local weather experts and answer questions from students in different locations.

2.  Student-gathered information and analysis: Students collect, review, and interpret information from various
    sources to build their own understandings about weather. Students investigate a set of questions about their
    weather topics to find out their own answers through online and offline search as well as hands-on experiments.

3.  Synthesized understandings of weather: Weather measurement readings such as pressure and humidity are
    determined by weather systems such as fronts. In understanding such systemic weather behaviors, students need
    to synthesize their understanding of weather elements. After investigating systemic behaviors of weather fronts,
    students make real-time weather forecasting with students and leading scientists (Lee & Songer, 2003).

4.  Technology to facilitate analysis of real-time data: As no weather patterns at any given points are exactly the
    same, interpreting real-time data can provide  an      excellent learning opportunity for students to apply their
    weather knowledge. Using the KGS weather software, students can view a variety of professional weather maps
    for any region of the US in static images as well as in 24-hr or 4-day animation.

5.  Technology to facilitate the social construction of knowledge: Electronic message boards are used to facilitate
    spontaneous,  but  personally meaningful   inquiry     through   collaboration with other students and  scientists
    worldwide.

                                                           377                                                ICLS 2006
Findings
        The    purpose   of this  study was    to develop   a  teacher-initiated instructional  leadership  model  that could
adequately represent the case of Lake Middle School's efforts to sustain a curriculum-based reform. This study used
a case study   method    (Yin,  1994).  Over   the six  year   period, we  collected   classroom  observation   logs, teacher
interviews, and student assessment data. These data were then analyzed from the teacher leadership perspective as
we strongly believe the connection between sustainability and teacher leadership. This stance allowed us to find out
what teachers valued and how they saw themselves as active carriers of reform. This section describes several
patterns emerged from the analysis of Lake Middle School.

Site-based Community of Teachers with Defined Roles and Responsibilities Was Formed.
        Even before our weather curriculum was implemented, Adams was a strong leader who greatly influenced
the overall  selection of  science   curricula and activities.  Her   leadership was   recognized and   appreciated by  other
teachers because of her position as a science curriculum coordinator at the school and, more importantly, her broad
teaching ideas offered to the teachers over the years. The weather curriculum was never implemented by a single
teacher over the six year     period. As shown in Figure 1, under the presence of Adams's strong leadership,              the
weather curriculum instead was implemented by the communities of teachers. They shared the goal of improving
their instruction using inquiry approaches. The first community of teachers consisted of the seventh grade science
teachers, Chiu and Terry, and Adams. In the second year, the district's curriculum guidelines were changed so that
weather became a sixth grade science topic. As a result, a new community of teachers was formed between Mary
and Adams . An interesting observation was the formation of            an  interdisciplinary   teaching  team. The need for
interdisciplinary teaching  was    consensual   among   the teachers   after the first implementation   mainly  because  they
could not complete   all of the activities. In the following year,    Adams   and Mary   decided  to ask other teachers who
taught language, social studies, and math to participate. After a series of meetings, activities from the weather
curriculum were assigned: message board activities and literature search to the language teacher, local weather data
collection  and analysis   to the  math  teacher,  and  data   comparison    activities to  the social  science teacher. The
involvement of the math and        the  language teachers was greater than that of       the social science teacher. Mary,
therefore , had enough     time   to implement     the science   portion  of  the weather    curriculum  such   as  hands-on
experiments, real-time data use, and synthesis activities.         In the third  year,  the success  of the interdisciplinary
teaching in the previous year spurned the formation of the second interdisciplinary teaching team.

        As Mary and Pratt left the school for personal reasons, two new science teachers, Tara and Fox, came to the
school in 2000. At the time of arrival, Tara had one year of teaching the same weather curriculum in another middle
school while    Fox  never  taught    science  class   before. Fox    had to teach  weather     with the language   teaching
certification. Therefore, during the first year as a science teacher, Fox used her familiar teaching methods such as
reading the textbook and writing weather-related stories. This was why the interdisciplinary teaching team was able
to form around Tara but not around Fox. As Tara left for another school in 2002, Fox was the only science teacher
who  had    to teach   our weather     curriculum   in  the   school.  Though    Adams   always   supported   and   promoted
interdisciplinary teaching, how well the interdisciplinary team worked together depended upon whether the science
teacher had a strong leadership to negotiate teaching responsibilities with other members. Fox, for example, never
assumed and exercised this leadership position as she         was busy to learn   science content as well as    how to foster
student inquiry in her class.

Community Goals Were Shared and Changed over Time.
        The most important motivation for the initial group of teachers to try out the weather curriculum was
related to the fact that previous Lake Middle School students did not perform well on the weather items in the
annual state-mandated     tests . Adams,  Chiu    and  Terry   were    convinced  that  students  could  not learn  dynamic
behaviors of weather systems using textbooks. In 1997, these teachers' implementation goal was to find out "what it
[KGS] had and what we could do with it, and how it would impact our curriculum. I just knew that it was something
that offered a lot of potential and we had to try it [Adams]." Since that time, the teachers' implementation goals
changed over time. In the second year, the goal was to implement exactly what was written in the curriculum as they
recruited other content-area teachers to participate. After the teachers experienced the entire set of weather activities
in 1998, they started to think about how to use the curriculum to meet their own needs. The period from 1999 to
2000 was therefore devoted to find out ways to customize the curriculum. In the last two years, researchers' support
for the school was greatly reduced from two school visits per week prior to 2001 to once a week in 2001 and four
times during the entire KGS period in 2002. Therefore, teachers had to find their own ways to sustain the curriculum.

                                                               378                                                  ICLS 2006
                       Figure 1. Community formation changes in Lake Middle School.

Table 2. KGS Implementation.

                             Year       1997         1998          1999            2000___             2001___      2002
                         Teachers    Chiu          Mary *       Mary *       Tara*      Fox      Tara*     Fox      Fox
Framework:                           Terry                      Pratt*
   Activities
Distributed expertise:
   Jigsaw model                      x             x            --           --         --       --        --       --
Student-gathered information and    analysis:
   Curriculum questions              xx            xxxx         xxxx         xxxx       --       xxxx      xxxx     xxxx
   Hands-on experiments              xxx           xxxx         xxxx         xxxx       --       xxxx      xxxx     xxxx
   Local data collection             xxx           xxx          xxx          xxx        --       xxx       xxx      xxx
Synthesized understanding:
   Fronts & forecasting              --            x            xx           xxx        --       xxx       xx       xxx
Technology for real-time data:
   Real-time data                    x             xx           xxx          xxx        --       xxx       xx       xxx
Technology for communication:
   Electronic Message Board          x             xx           xxx          xxx        --       xx        x        x
Note. -- = not tried; x = tried, not successful; xx = tried, partially successful; xxx = tried, successful; xxxx =
customized; * indicates interdisciplinary team teaching

Community Adopted and Later Customized Curriculum.
       Table 2 lists central pedagogical approaches of the weather curriculum with matching activities. It also
shows how    Lake Middle   School   teachers implemented   each     activity over  time. Certain implementation   patterns
emerged. First, not all activities were implemented at the same rate. Some activities were easier to adopt than others.
In the first year, curriculum questions, hands-on experiments, and local data collections were implemented more
successfully than the other activities partly because of teachers' familiarity with these activities. Relatively minor
adjustments  were   needed  to carry    out  these   activities while   technology-based    activities posed   management
challenges with regard to pedagogy and technology. Second, teachers needed full exposure to the curriculum before
they could customize the activities to meet their needs. For example, the distributed expertise model was abandoned
after first two years of trying-out, as teachers decided to have students learn all of the weather concepts, instead of
specializing in one or two concepts.    In customizing the  weather     curriculu m  to meet their  needs, teachers revised
curriculum worksheets   to in clude the same  set  of questions    for all students. Third, despite necessary  adjustments
they had to make, the teachers maintained many aspects of the essential curricular framework intact such as real-
time data use and synthesis activities. This persistence was remarkable considering that the amount of researchers'
support diminished.

                                                           379                                                    ICLS 2006
Some Community Members Learned to Become Leaders.
        As the members of the teacher community in Lake Middle School understood and carried out defined roles
and responsibilities for one another, two interesting questions can be asked. Did the members learn to perform their
roles for the given positions? Or did the community define roles and responsibilities so that any willing eligible
member could fulfill the expectations for the position? The first question asks whether members learned from the
community to gain personal benefits. The second question asks whether the community presented in this school
turned into a    mature  self -functioning   (therefore self-sustaining) organization.  The   Lake Middle    School  case
exhibited both   characteristics. Table    2 shows   the  evidence   of how  Fox   learned to incorporate  a  core set of
pedagogical ideas embedded in our weather curriculum into her teaching over the last three year period. In 2000
when Fox   came   to the  school  with   a language  certification, her teaching  of weather  mainly focused  on reading
comprehension of curriculum materials , rather than understanding scientific concepts and inquiry. A fter watching
what other teachers valued and taught about weather, she tried several activities in her classroom in the next year:

        Interviewer:    How about your expectations about yourself while doing KGS (2001)?
        Fox in 2001:     This year, they were higher.    Last year I had no knowledge so I was not sure what I
        was getting myself into.      This year I was, um, better prepared.    I was more knowledgeable and I
        was more comfortable in teaching the curriculum because I was better prepared to do so... The
        [teacher] study groups helped this year.        If there was something that you did with your children
        that didn't really reach them or didn't really work with them you could kind of talk it over with
        other teachers that were teaching the same curriculum and they gave you ideas or other things to
        try that might, you know, give you an idea of how to better present that particular part of the
        curriculum.

Unfortunately, Fox did not develop a strong leadership enough to guide other teachers like Tara who led her own
interdisciplinary team. On the other hand, Tara's case demonstrates a possibility that a mid-ranking member of the
teacher community can learn to become a higher-ranking leader. In 2000 and 2001, Tara was a secondary leader
behind Adams.    When    she moved    to another school   in the following  year, she continued to implement   the  same
curriculum as a lead teacher for another science teacher in the new school.          Evidence of the presence of a more
mature teacher community was also found from 1998 to 2001 when interdisciplinary teams were formed despite the
high turnover of science teachers. As the leadership role for the science teacher was well perceived by the remaining
teachers, a willing science teacher like Tara could take the leadership role to maintain the interdisciplinary team.
However, the interdisciplinary team did not survive with Fox who did not pick up a secondary leadership role.

External Challenges Served as Opportunities to Exercise and Strengthen Leadership.
        As  listed   in Table 1,  the teachers  in Lake   Middle School   continuously  encountered  external challenges
every year. External challenges such as the lack of proper technologies and the lack of teachers' content knowledge
are most often interpreted as reasons why curricular reforms cannot survive in real classrooms (Songer et al., 2002;
Squire et al., 2003). However,    our data   suggest that external  challenges can provide  opportunities for teachers to
exercise and strengthen their leadership by encouraging the teachers to listen to each other's ideas, reflect on their
own teaching, and seek for help from others in the community.

Leadership Models
        A sustainable instructional leadership model that can represent the case of Lake Middle School should
describe at least three characteristics successfully. First, a community with leaders and followers is formed at the
school site. Second, members in the community can learn to become leaders so that the community can be sustained
even when the membership changes. Third, co mmunity goals should evolve over time. This section discusses four
different leadership models. We do not intend to discuss each model in detail here. However, we like to stress that
current leadership models need to be better elaborated to emphasize the sustainability of curriculum-based reform at
the school site.

Community of Learners
        Communities of learners (Lave & Wenger, 1991) are different from mere groups of teachers who simply
share work space or assignment. Teachers in the community are interdependent, share community goals, interact
with one another, and develop meaningful relationships (Westheimer, 1998). Individual learners learn as a result of
sharing the sense of community and working together toward a common goal. In describing Lake Middle School,
this community model can explain relatively well with regard to a school-site based community with shared goals.

                                                             380                                                ICLS 2006
However, this model does not explicitly address other important characteristics of this school such as differences
between leaders and followers, learning about others' work, sustaining the community over membership changes,
and encouraging  the  evolutionary  changes  in community     goals. The   community     of teachers  does  not  insist the
formation of a hierarchical structure that assigns different roles to leaders and followers as in other organization
models. The members are considered equal, and no urgent need exists to learn others' roles (Grossman, 2001).

Teacher Leadership
        Silva,  Gimbert, and  Nolan   (2000)  define  three  waves  of teacher   leadership.   In the first wave,  teacher
leadership is not performed by actual teachers but by administrators as managers. In the second wave, teacher
leadership is held by team leaders, curriculum developers, and department heads who may not be directly involved
in day-to-day teaching in the classroom. These two leadership models clearly assign different but permanent roles to
leaders and followers. These models assume that the learning of individual members in the school results in a higher
efficiency or productivity rather than being considered as a primary goal for the community. Community goals are
determined  by  leaders  with various administrative  posts.  The    existence  as  well as   the success   of the school
community is viewed as strict products of strong leaders. These two models cannot explain Lake Middle School
mainly due to (1) the permanent division between leaders and followers in the community and (2) no reference to
instruction in the classroom. The third wave of teacher leadership involves actual teachers. The benefits of this
leadership model are related to the fact that voices of students and actual teachers can be heard and incorporated in
decision making processes (Hart, 1995). This leadership can describe a regular classroom teacher who learns to
perform some of leadership roles usually played by those with higher power. As this model focuses on chronicling
how individual teachers acquire leadership qualities (Howe & Stubbs, 2003), the current version of this model does
not explicitly discuss interactions and benefits at the community level, not to mention the sustainability of the
community with membership changes.

Organizational Leadership
        In organizational psychology, leadership is held by leaders with the highest power in the organization.
Leaders  exist due to   the existence of followers   who    carry out  the   leaders' plan,  assessment,    and decisions
(Nahavandi, 2000). Role reversal is not promoted during the task, although input from followers can be considered
in the leaders' decision    making processes.   There are   various  types   of organizational    leadership   models   that
characterize leaders' styles (Messick & Kramer, 2005). The primary focus is on describing leader characteristics and
development and how they affect the performance of the organization. As the goal of the organization is related to
increased productivity, this leadership model is useful in explaining how Lake Middle School teachers responded to
outside pressures and modified their goals to maximize their curriculum implementation outcomes. However, this
model is not explicit enough to explain how individual teachers, like Tara and Fox, learned to beco me leaders in
Lake Middle School.

Flying Geese Metaphor
        As each of the leadership models we discussed have shown a limited application to our case, we looked for
more democratic leadership models like the flying geese metaphor:

        Do you have as much sense as a goose? When geese fly in the "V" formation, the whole flock
        adds considerably more to its flying range than if each bird flew alone. Whenever a goose fails out
        of formation, it suddenly feels the drag and resistance of trying to fly alone and quickly gets back
        into formation to take advantage of the power of the formation. When the lead goose gets tired, it
        rotates back in the wing, and another goose flies point. The back geese honk from behind to
        encourage those up front to keep up their speed. Finally, when a goose gets sick and falls out, two
        geese fall out of formation with it until it is either able to fly or it is dead. They then launch on
        their own, or with another formation, to catch up with the group. (Nahavandi, 2000, p. 155)

        The flying geese metaphor brings important insights       into scaling at Lake Middle School. Figure 1          is a
symbolic illustration of how  the  community    formation changed.    First, flying geese   as a  group represent  a  well-
established community    with shared  goals. In the case  of Lake Middle   School,    science  education  reform with the
weather curriculum was the shared goal. The community also protects individual participants by sharing expertise
and providing a support structure. Second, each goose in the formation has its own roles and responsibilities for the
entire group. The lead goose takes most of the responsibility during the flight, but the other geese are also learning
to become leaders when needed. In Lake Middle School, we observed how Fox changed her roles during the three

                                                          381                                                    ICLS 2006
year period, from an outsider to a limited follower, to a full follower. In addition, Tara changed from a secondary
leader to a primary    leader  in her new   school.  Third, as each goose   learns  how  to maintain the "V"  formation,
membership changes do not affect the goal of flying. This is an important characteristic of a sustainable leadership,
especially in urban settings where the high turnover of teachers is always expected. Fourth, shared community goals
can evolve  as  the  flying formation   can  change  depending   upon  how  the flock responds to outside  pressures. The
goals for the community of teachers in Lake Middle School evolved from trying out an unfamiliar curriculum to
customizing it, and to sustaining it without explicit support fromthe researchers.

Conclusion
          In this paper, we described a teacher leadership model by applying the flying geese metaphor to our six
year longitudinal data from Lake Middle School. The flying geese metaphor has been considered as one of the most
democratic and productive leadership models in organizational psychology. Our Lake Middle School case exhibited
many characteristics of the flying geese metaphor. However, we had to admit that some characteristics of the flying
geese metaphor were not observed, e.g. how the geese community helps an abandoned goose, because we did not
have any eligible cases -- those who initially implemented but later voluntarily abandoned our curriculum -- in this
school. Our study suggests that sustainable curricular reform can be more easily achieved when it is placed in the
school with  the   strong  presence   of the teacher   community.   In facilitating curriculum-based reform,  researchers
should help teachers form a self-sustainable community like the one presented in this paper, in addition to perfecting
curriculum materials to meet a wide range of instructional needs at each and every local school site.

References
Fishman, B., & Krajcik, J. S. (2003). What does it mean to create sustainable science curriculum innovations?
          Science Education, 87(4), 564-573.
Grossman, P., Wineburg, S., & Woolworth, S. (2001). Toward a theory of teacher community. Teachers College
          Record, 103(6), 942-1012.
Hart, A. W. (1995). Reconceiving school leadership: Emergent views. The Elementary School Journal, 96(1), 9-28.
Howe, A. C., & Stubbs, H. S. (2003). From science teacher to teacher leader: Leadership development as meaning
          making in a community of practice. Science Education, 87(2), 281-297.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
          University Press.
Lee, H.  -S., & Songer, N. B. (2003). Making authentic science accessible to students.          International Journal of
          Science Education, 25(8), 923-948.
Messick,  D.   M.,   & Kramer,    R.  M.    (2005). The  psychology    of leadership.  Mahwah,  NJ:   Lawrence   Erlbaum
          Associates, Inc.
Nahavandi, A. (2000). The art and science of leadership. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
National  Research   Council.   (1996).  National   science education  standards.   Washington, DC:   National  Academy
          Press.
Silva, D. Y., Gimbert, B., & Nolan, J. (2000). Sliding the doors: Locking and unlocking possibilities for teacher
          leadership. Teachers College Record, 102(4), 779-804.
Smylie, M. A. (1995). New perspectives on teacher leadership. Elementary School Journal, 96(1), 3-7.
Songer, N. B. (1996). Exploring learning opportunities in coordinated network-enhanced classrooms: A case of Kids
          as Global Scientists. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(4), 297-327.
Songer, N.  B.,  Lee, H.  -S., &  Kam,   R. (2002). Technology-rich inquiry     science in urban classrooms: What are the
          barriers to inquiry pedagogy? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(2), 128-150.
Songer,   N.B.  (in  press  a) BioKIDS:     An Animated     Conversation   on   the Development   of Curricular  Activity
          Structures  for   Inquiry  Science.  In   R. Keith   Sawyer,    (Ed.) Cambridge   Handbook    of the  Learning
          Sciences.  New York: Cambridge University Press.
Songer,   N.B.   (in press  b)  Curriculum-Focused     Professional Development:     Addressing  the Barriers to Inquiry
          Pedagogy in Urban Classrooms. In R. Floden and E. Ashburn (Eds.) Leadership for Meaningful Learning
          Using Technology: What educators need to know and do. New York: Teachers' College Press.
Squire, K. D., MaKinster, J. G., Barnett, M., Luehmann, A. L., & Barab, S. L. (2003). Designed curriculum and
          local culture: Acknowledging the primacy of classroom culture. Science Education, 87(4), 468-489.
Westheimer, J. (1998). Among school teachers: Community, autonomy, and ideology in teachers' work . New York:
          Teachers College.
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.

                                                             382                                                 ICLS 2006
