           "Ugly in a World Where You Can Choose to be Beautiful":
           Teaching and Learning About Diversity via Virtual Worlds

                                           Joey J. Lee & Christopher M. Hoadley
                College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University
                   311 Information Sciences and Technology Building, University Park, PA 16802
                                          Email: jjl209@psu.edu, tophe@psu.edu

        Abstract: In this paper, we discuss an approach to providing students with first-hand learning
        experiences that help them understand cultural differences and aspects of diversity.              As part of a
        five-week    course,   fourteen    high  school   students participated    in  activities  within  massively
        multiplayer    online  games    (MMOGs)      as   learning environments     to    explore issues  of   identity
        construction,     discrimination,  and  cultural  sensitivity.    Student attitudes    towards  diversity and
        towards the technology used in the course are discussed.           The students reported using the tool to
        explore    and    to equalize   cultural  and   demographic       differences.    They   showed    significant
        improvement       on a measure    of  sensitivity towards  an  understanding      of diversity, and  evidence
        suggests they were able to develop a more sophisticated, less essentialist model of diversity.

Introduction
        Problem    solving    today  requires  ever-increasingly   multicultural   approaches,    as   evidenced  by  trends  of
globalization  and  the   outsourcing   of information    technology   work.    More    than    ever, people   characterized  by
differences in gender, ethnicity, age, socio-economic status, religion, experience, etc. need to collaborate in order to
effectively solve today's inherently global challenges.        For young students, this can be a daunting task, as many
schools are characterized by a lack of apparent diversity which often reinforces stereotyping, generalizations, and a
naive understanding of these cultural differences.     Ethnocentrism, misunderstandings or overly simplistic views can
exist, leading to gaps and disconnects that hinder communication and coordination between cultures (Trauth et al.,
in press).

        With   this difficulty  in   mind, how    can  students be    educated  about   culture,  diversity, and  the   value of
differences in an evocative first-hand manner?         One possibility is to take advantage of online multiuser learning
environments   such    as identity construction   environments     (e.g., Bers, 2001).     Bers   (2001)  explored the   use  of
technology   purposefully    designed to   afford opportunities   for  exploring  identity   and  personal   and moral   values.
Building upon this and other similar work, we turn to massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs) ­ persistent,
online virtual worlds that connect thousands of diverse people from around the world like never before.

        The    intrinsic  characteristics  of MMOGs       that support    hands-on,    experiential   learning demand    further
investigation. For example, discovery learning (Bruner, 1956) and social constructivism (Dewey, 1966) occur in the
virtual worlds of MMOGs as participants construct their own knowledge during real-time, synchronous interactions
with other kinds of people (Gee, 2003; Squire, 2002). Participants can also explore and learn about issues of identity
and diversity (e.g., the formation of stereotypes) within MMOGs.          When one meeting someone for the first time via
face-to-face in real life, a person's physical appearance is typically judged first, which can often lead to prejudices or
presuppositions   based   on  assumptions    of  one's culture  or visible   attributes.     In online  environments    such  as
MMOGs, however, the reverse occurs; people get to know each other from the inside out, i.e., one getting to know
another person on a "deep personal level first, without letting anything like [real life] physical appearance get in the
way."  (Yee,  2003).   The   content of one's   character takes the   forefront rather    than  biases or prejudices  based   on
gender, race, age, sexuality, nationality, etc.    We therefore sought to explore the utility of MMOGs as a learning
intervention  for diversity   issues, including   the  existence   and    formation    of stereotypes,  identity  construction,
perceived cultural differences, etc.

        In this paper, we will first describe the design and implementation of a five-week summer course for high
school students   that made   use  of MMOGs       to explore   issues  related to diversity.    We then outline some of the
outcomes of the course related to student attitudes towards diversity and towards the technology used in the course.
Finally, we discuss the potential utility of MMOGs as an approach to provide an active learning experience that

                                                              383                                                     ICLS 2006
helps  students understand   identity construction, discrimination,       and aspects of diversity within   an   immersive,
interactive environment.

An Exploration of Virtual Worlds and Culture
         We developed and taught a five-week course, An Exploration of Virtual Worlds and Culture, as part of a
full scholarship, residential summer enrichment program that gives talented high school students across the state of
Pennsylvania a comprehensive experience in information sciences and technology.           Our class consisted of fourteen
eleventh grade students (eleven males and three females).

         Each class session, typically three hours, involved both in-world activities and face-to-face discussions.
Online  activities took place within  two virtual worlds:    Makena    Technologies'   social  MMOG     entitled There and
Linden Labs' Second Life, both chosen due to their ease of avatar customizability, low cost, and their dynamic,
social nature.  MMOGs, immersive, 3D virtual environments rich in collaboration and social interactions, house
thousands of real people from around the world, thus providing inherent international representation (Woodcock,
2005).  One's physical appearance can be custom designed in deliberate ways (Figure 1); each player constructs a
virtual identity in the form of an avatar, a visual representation of a user with customizable clothing, facial and body
features, accessories, etc. Interactions between avatars occur mainly in the form of text-based chat and animated
gestures to convey emotions.    Unlike traditional combat-style games with a predefined goal and victory or failure
end state, there is no way to ultimately win, lose, or die in these two MMOGs.           Instead, the primary focus is the
social interaction and  community   consisting of thousands      of  real people wandering    around in the virtual world.
Characters simply banter and have fun while mingling in various scenic locations; some also choose to purchase
clothing, vehicles, or other objects for their avatars' use.

                                Figure 1.   Customizing an avatar's appearance.

         MMOGs provide a place where people can create a brand new, second self -- that is, one can construct a
new virtual identity and experience interactions and life walking in the shoes of the persona of one's choice.         For
example, the practice of gender bending (e.g. a female player creates a male avatar and experiences being treated as
a male)  is not  uncommon.     Kolko   (1998)  describes     virtual identity  creation, and   subsequent interaction  and
experience as a form of autoethnography, in which the participant explores "both real and imaginary relations of
power and culture."     The lessons learned as a result of the self-presentation, contact, and conflict that occur in
MMOGs hold great value for understanding identity and empathy.            One has the opportunity to experience life as a
member of the minority or "other" population, to investigate the existence of cultural differences, and to gain a
better understanding of discrimination and the formation of stereotypes.         While other researchers (e.g. Bruckman,
1993;  Gee, 2003;   Squire,  2002; Roussou, 2004)   have     studied  other   forms of virtual communities   (e.g.  MUDs,

                                                             384                                                  ICLS 2006
MOOs,    or more traditional  online  games)   for pedagogical    purposes, we were    particularly interested in how   the
social phenomena that occur in non-combat MMOGs can promote students' learning of diversity-oriented issues
including the construction of identity.

         Our course featured in-game activities (Figure 2) in which students would be instructed to interact with
both random strangers and classmates within virtual worlds under certain specified conditions (e.g. posing as the
opposite gender) or to perform certain tasks (e.g. a scavenger hunt within the virtual world).      Students gained hands-
on experiences with discrimination, sexism, and stereotyping, as the students experienced life posing as someone
different from themselves.    One   activity was   to  design an  avatar to be the opposite  gender   and to   observe any
differences in treatment received.    Students experienced a very different set of social interactions and treatment as
they embodied    the new  gender   in  digital   form.  For   instance, the males  that posed    as females   noticed more
"freebies" as a female character, and in some cases, flirtation and unwanted advances.       In another activity, students
were asked   to make  their  avatar's appearance   very  strange   and  unattractive, and to observe   how  people    would
interact with the character. These activities led the students to formulate insightful thoughts regarding diversity that
will be discussed in the following sections.

         Discussions  of  interesting  in-game    occurrences    helped  students learn  from   each  other's  experiences.
Students were also asked to reflect on these online experiences in their personal weblogs.      At the beginning or end of
each class, students wrote their reflections and thoughts on their online experiences, or answers to specific questions
that we asked them (e.g. "How can virtual worlds be useful to teach someone about other cultures?").          Other aspects
of the course   included application  of learned   concepts   in the form of a design   project.  Students were asked to
choose a target audience different from themselves (e.g. grandparents, international students, etc.), and to design a
solution to address this audience's need.    The students conducted interviews and asked questions before a panel of
international students to help them with their design process.

Data Collection
         We collected data as part of a formative evaluation of the course.       A pre-test was administered on the first
day to collect the students' basic ideas and thoughts on diversity, an assessment of their own cultural sensitivity,
positive and  negative   aspects of   diversity, and   thoughts  on  MMOGs     -- their utility  as a teaching  tool, what
phenomena exist and what occurs in them, etc.         For more in-depth answers, weblog responses were recorded and
analyzed.   Audio and videotape recordings were also used on occasion.         On the last day of class, a post-test was
given on their thoughts about diversity and how their ideas had changed.

                             Figure 2.  Students' avatars interact within virtual worlds.

                                                            385                                                   ICLS 2006
Results
         Overall,   students demonstrated   a  greater understanding   of diversity  beyond    essentialist definitions, an
increased sensitivity to diversity after the course, and reported perceptions of high value of MMOGs for exploring
diversity. Specifically, they reported ways in which the online environments provided a social space both to explore
differences and to equalize them.

Growth in Sensitivity and Understanding Diversity Beyond Essentialism
         In addition to open-ended questions, the pre- and post-test included nine multiple choice questions on a 5-
point Likert scale related to perceptions of diversity (for instance, "How diverse is your high school?" or "Do I think
people  of other cultures  use  technology  differently  than my  own?")  and  to  sensitivity to diversity  (for instance,
"How   often  do  I challenge   others when    someone   makes  a racial, ethnic, or sexually   derogatory   comment?").
Students showed significant pre-post gains on this instrument in a repeated measures two-tailed t-test; all but one
student  had an  increased   score. (Mpre=29.786,  SDpre=3.534;  Mpost=34.000, SDpost=2.774),   t(13)=-4.382,    p=0.0007.
This increase might be explained by students trying to please the instructor, rather than by significant changes in
attitudes. However, students' sophistication about describing different dimensions of diversity suggests this is not
the case. Initially, students' comments and weblog posts focused on ethnic diversity (skin color), but later students
were able to describe more types of diversity. Several students reversed their positions on diversity in their own high
schools (names have been replaced by same-sex pseudonyms):

         I think my school is more diverse than when I started because there are more types of diversity
         than I thought.  (Anna)

         I think the best example of what I learned is that culture is more than just race and skin color.
         Diversity  comes    in many   forms.   It's about things like age, gender,  education,    philosophical
         beliefs, and socioeconomic background, too.     (Enid)

Students also cited sources of diversity beyond skin color, such as culture and personality development, as well as
how stereotypes can be formed:

         I learned that people from other cultures are tangibly different in some fundamental ways, but that
         all people have a basic commonality.     (Mike)

         I've learned that it is easy for people to assume things about a society that they do not understand
         or  come   into contact    with.  Many   generalizations are  made  that   are sometimes    completely
         unfounded.   (Enid)

         There are a lot of ways things and people could be misunderstood.     In order to eliminate them, we
         must be listeners and learners.   (Vince)

         I learned a lot about how culture can shape a person's personality.   I also learned how technology
         can be used to unite people of different cultures.     This class also helped me see how stereotypes
         can be formed.   (John)

Developing   an  understanding   of  diversity that  moves beyond   essentialist, demographic     categories  is especially
important because it opens up greater potential for students to empathize with others who are different, and allows
constructive responses to differences other than merely tolerating them (Trauth, 2002).

Technology's Role in Learning About Diversity
         How did technology influence students' learning about diversity? Certainly, the students were enthusiastic
about using MMOGs in general, calling them "fun, engaging...amazing learning tools" with "the potential to teach
many things."    Using a five point Likert-type scale on the post-course evaluation, the mean student rating for the
statement "MMOGs are fun" was 4.1 (SD=0.73), while "useful for educational purposes" and "useful for exploring
culture" also scored   highly,   3.71  (SD=0.579)    and 3.79   (SD=0.469), respectively.      The students   enjoyed    the
immersive and interactive properties of the technology.

                                                            386                                                   ICLS 2006
        Students not only appreciated the fun and motivating aspects of the technology; they also cited ways in
which the technology allowed them to experience diversity issues firsthand. When we specifically asked student
whether virtual worlds are helpful for learning about diversity, students unanimously said yes, elaborating:

        Yes, a virtual world is useful for teaching and learning because they let people experience things
        firsthand and that is the best form of education.     (Mike)

        Yes, these games provide a risk-free environment for exploration and discovery.           When coupled
        with course material correctly, they can be used for learning.     (Bill)

        Yes.   Culture is all about daily experiences.       Only a truly interactive experience can mimic that.
        Any attempt to teach through normal educational channels about a cultural artifact will probably
        fail. A virtual world is a poor substitute for physical reality.   However, it alone is close enough for
        layer  of depth  that is   culture to  become  seen.   Better than simply    trying to explain  how   other
        people are different, it is easier to learn from the people themselves. (Mike)

        One important way that online environments allowed students to experience diversity was to permit them to
explore differences  experientially. Students      commented   on   how  real world  phenomena    such    as discrimination,
stereotypes, and social status also transfer into the virtual domain:

        If you are ugly in a world where you can choose to be beautiful, it's bad for you. (Daphne)

        There is discrimination based on perceived qualities, but not real ones.            Cool avatars are more
        popular.  Ugly ones lead to a person being unpopular or disassociated.       Courtesy is given to female
        avatars.  I designed my avatar to be very unattractive, and as I would walk up to groups of people,
        they   would all   scatter and avoid     talking  to me.    Even  though  stuff  like  digital money   and
        appearance isn't real, it still affects the way people respect you and interact with you in the game.
        (Bill)

        Yes, the avatar can resemble the real person, but it can also be completely different from the real
        person.   This allows fat people to become skinny and tall people to be short.           One reason why
        people make their avatars different from them is because people treat people differently based on
        looks and some people do want to be treated differently even in a virtual world.        (Vince)

        Another way students reported virtual worlds could help them learn about diversity was by leveling the
playing field so  students could   interact   with others in  spite  of differences.   "It's much easier for people to be
accepting of one another in a digital environment," said Bill.    Other students had similar sentiments:

        In a virtual world, everyone is a little more equal, so conversations that might be hindered by
        cultural differences are considerably more fluid.      In a virtual world, it is very easy to find people
        with similar interests to you. (Gabe)

        Interacting  in a  virtual world   is  not so much   lesson  in diversity as an  equalizer.    As a  virtual
        person, you can create all of your attributes and even you personality to some extent.          It may be
        helpful  in diversity education,    if a person   is honest, because  it bridges  the  space gap  between
        people.   (Sandy)

        Virtual   worlds  allow  for people    from   all over   to meet  each   other in   a system   that  doesn't
        discriminate except usually in the case of a digital divide.    (Daphne)

Thus, the MMOGs appear to provide the ability to not only explore differences realistically, but also to reach across
those differences to discover similarities.

                                                             387                                                   ICLS 2006
Discussion: Diversity and the Digital Generation
         The line of demarcation between reality and virtuality is increasingly blurred each day as teenagers devote
more of their time as online inhabitants.        Many teenagers in today's digital Google-and-gaming age currently spend
exorbitant amounts of time online as a normal part of daily life: shopping, playing games, maintaining friendships
via instant messenger and email, getting news, reading weblogs, etc.        Over 80% of the nation's teenagers go online --
and many of them can scarcely remember what the world was like when people weren't always connected (Pew
Internet, 2005).   Over 43% spend more than an hour per day online, and the majority of teens (57%) also prefer the
Internet to the telephone (Brignall & Valley, 2005).

         Another    noticeable  trend    is that today's teenagers   can be seen   as a generation of "virtual kids."   Many
teenagers create and maintain new identities (or virtual lives) online and engage in activities that are very different
from their everyday face-to-face interactions and experiences.          For example, the shy introvert in the classroom can
lead a double life as the fearless leader of a band of dragon-slaying warriors in the virtual space of an online fantasy
role-playing game, while the increased anonymity of the Internet may liberate others to use aggressive behavior or
hate speech towards others in chatrooms, message boards, or games.

         As the data from our class and an apparent emotional investment that goes into online gaming suggest,
virtuality does    not equate   to being    less important   or real to  students. Turkle  (1995)  observes  that people    are
"increasingly comfortable with substituting representations of the reality for the real."        In many cases, the overlap
between    real and  virtual effectively    causes   no practical reasons to distinguish   the two.   For example, it is not
uncommon for teenagers to have developed significant friendships or even romantic or intimate relationships with
strangers online.      Yee (2003) found that over 59% of men and 74% women who play in massively multiplayer
online games (MMOGs) reported having become good friends with someone they met online.                 In many cases, these
friends are often described as better than their real world counterparts, and even real-life marriages have resulted
from online in-game friendships.

         This    new   form  of multiple,   shifting identities poses challenges   but  also opportunities for understanding
differences. As teenagers invest more into their virtual identities, it becomes increasingly important to consider how
to design new learning environments that can foster greater unity amid all kinds of cultural differences.             Virtual
world technology continues to become more realistic, and as the social dynamics of immersive worlds continue to
blur the   lines of  reality and   virtuality,   we  believe virtual worlds  will  become    more  prominent   and useful    in
classrooms for understanding human nature, how technology can bridge cultures, and how we can find unity amid
differences. While this study does not present conclusive evidence, it is highly suggestive that MMOGs could play
an important role in teaching teens about diversity.         As our course demonstrates, phenomena such as stereotypes,
prejudices, and the relationship between appearance and identity can be explored experientially, and students benefit
additionally from the motivational boost of using engaging online environments. Online experiences such as these
can  become     an object   lesson on distinguishing     between  social  behavior    and an individual's  characteristics. As
Turkle (1995) says:

         Virtual spaces may provide the safety for us to expose what we are missing so that we can begin to
         accept ourselves as we are.         Virtuality need not be a prison.    It can be the raft, the ladder, the
         transitional space, the moratorium, that is discarded after reaching greater freedom.        We don't have
         to reject life on the screen, but we don't have to treat it as an alternative life either.   We can use it
         as  a   space  for  growth  ... Like    the anthropologist  returning home     from a foreign culture,   the
         voyager in virtuality can return to a real world better equipped to understand its artifices.      (Turkle,
         1995, p. 263)

References
Bers, M. (2001).    Identity construction environments: Developing personal and moral values through the design of a
         virtual city.  The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(4), 365-415.

Brignall, T. W. & Valey, T. V. V. (2005).        The impact of internet communications on social interaction.
         Sociological Spectrum.      25(3), 335-348.

                                                                388                                                 ICLS 2006
Bruckman, A. (1994).     Gender swapping on the internet. Paper presented at The Internet Society (INET '93)
       Conference, San Francisco, CA.

Bruner, J. S. (1961).  The act of discovery. Harvard Educational Review. 31: 21-32.

Dewey, J. (1966).   Democracy and education.    New York: Free Press.

Gee, J. P. (2003).  What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy.
       Computers in Entertainment. 1(1): 20-24.

Kolko, B. (1998).   Bodies in place: Real politics, real pedagogy and virtual space. In (Eds.) C. Haynes and J.R.
       Holmvik (Eds.), High Wired:    On the Design, Use and Theory of Educational MOOs (pp. 253-265).          Ann
       Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Pew Internet & American Life Project (2005).    Internet: the mainstreaming of online life. Retrieved October 25,
       2005, from pewinternet.org Web site: http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/Internet_Status_2005.pdf

Roussou, M. (2004).    Learning by doing and learning through play: an exploration of activity in virtual
       environments for children.   Computers in Entertainment.    2(1): 10.

Squire, K. (2002).  Cultural framing of computer/video games.   Game Studies.   2(1).

Trauth, E.M. (2002). Odd girl out: An individual difference perspective on women in the IT profession. Information
       Technology and People. 15(2), 98-118.

Trauth, E.M., Huang, H., Morgan, A.J., Quesenberry, J.L. and Yeo, B. (in press). Investigating the existence and
       value of diversity in the global IT workforce: An analytical framework.    In Niederman, F. and Ferratt, T.
       (Eds.), Managing Information Technology Human Resources.

Turkle, S., (1995).   Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the internet. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Woodcock, B.    (2005).  MMOGCHART.COM.          Retrieved August 5, 2005, from MMOGCHART.COM Web site:
       http://www.mmogchart.com

Yee, N. (in press). The demographics, motivations and derived experiences of users of massively-multiuser online
       graphical environments. PRESENCE: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments.

Yee, N. (2003). The daedalus project. Retrieved August 5, 2005, from The Daedalus Project Web site:
       http://www.nickyee.com/daedalus

Acknowledgements
We are grateful    to D. Benjamin Hellar as   co-designer and  co-instructor of the   course, and to the  Pennsylvania
Department of Education for providing funding.

                                                          389                                                 ICLS 2006
