The Interplay between Self-Directed Learning and Social Interactions:
         Collaborative Knowledge Building in Online Problem-Based
                                                   Discussions

  Silvia Wen-Yu Lee, American Institutes for Research, 1000 Thomas Jefferson St. NW, Washington DC 20008,
                                                     wyl@umich.edu

      Abstract:   This   paper illustrates collaborative   knowledge      building  through   problem-based   learning
      (PBL) in online threaded discussions. PBL has been one of the most popular instructional approaches
      in health  education.  However,   few    qualitative    studies described    the essential  aspects of the  PBL
      learning   processes, such   as self-directed  learning,    and  its impact   on  the  building of  professional
      knowledge.    Therefore,  this  study illuminates   students'   ability  to  select, evaluate  and  make use   of
      learning resources, a form of self-directed learning, embedded in a social context.         This study aimed to
      1) reveal different kinds of resources acquired and presented by students during discussions and to 2)
      describe patterns of knowledge building that emerged from integration of the above learning resources
      and   consequently   led to  professional   knowledge     building.     Using qualitative  research  methods,   I
      analyzed   751 text   messages   from  a  distance   learning   class.  The   results  revealed seven  kinds   of
      commonly used resources in the discussion. Results also show knowledge building occurred through
      the process of 1) enriching conceptual understanding, 2) connecting textbook information and personal
      experiences, and 3) comparing theories and practical approaches.

Introduction
         This paper is part of a larger study investigating social interactions in problem-based learning.           Over the
past two  decades,  problem-based     learning has   been  one    of  the  most popular    instructional approaches  that has
challenged  traditional  lecture-based  learning  in professional     health  education    (Barrows,  1998).  However,    few
qualitative studies have been conducted to describe the actual learning and report the impact of the PBL learning
processes,  such as  self-directed learning    on  the building    of professional     knowledge.    Researchers   have  little
knowledge about how human resources are used and why, and which aspects of the social interactions in PBL affect
learning (Blumberg,  2000;   Hmelo    & Evensen,     2000).    In order    to gain  insights into the collaborative  learning
process  in PBL,    this study  investigates   the interplay   between     self-directed   learning  and  group   discussions
emphasizing the students' ability to make use of learning resources in a social context.       This study aimed to 1) reveal
different kinds of resources explored and presented by students during discussions and to 2) describe patterns of
knowledge   building that  emerged    from  integration of    the above    learning resources.    I posed the following two
research questions:

     1.) What kinds of learning resources are presented during the online discussions?
     2.) How does the group build professional knowledge collaboratively by using different learning resources?

         I chose the term knowledge building to foreground my observation that obtaining professional knowledge
requires students to integrate meanings and relationships among information and to search and evaluate information.
The depth and range of knowledge built together depends on how much students explored in multiple resources and
the extent students reflected on the content in the messages.

Online Learning Activities
      This  study  was   conducted   on a  graduate    level, distance    learning  class  designed for  students in a  nurse-
midwifery program.   Students in the class spent 7 weeks studying off-campus without face-to-face class meetings.
Online asynchronous discussions were the major learning approach during off-campus study. The online discussions
took place in a text-based, message board environment created by the university. The message board allows its user
to either start a new thread or respond to a previous message.       Students can also share resources by attaching files to
the messages.    Three pedogogical approaches of problem-based learning were adopted in online discussions: 1)

                                                              390                                                    ICLS 2006
using a puzzling or problemtic situation as the starting point for learning, 2) encouraging student-centered learing
and self-directed learning, and 3) utilizing small group discussions (Barrows, 1998).
        Each week, a problem was posted by the faculty to focus on a selected health-care topic. The instructors
prepared a situation requiring improvement or a general scenario requiring attention from the midwives in prenatal
care. Associated with the situation or scenario, several questions were listed to invite solutions or recommendations.
Questions were written in a general and open-ended manner.        Students were also provided with supporting reading
materials. I present below a sample question:

        Anemia in Pregnancy
        Sherrie, 20 year-old, G1P0 (one pregnancy, no deliveries), Euro-American is in for her initial OB
        visit at 12 weeks. Your "spun Hct" is 34% (in your practice, you commonly order Complete Blood
        Count only if risk factors exist for anemia).
           ·     Would you do further lab studies? If so, which? If not, why not?
           ·     How would you counsel Sherrie regarding nutrition?
           ·     Would you give Sherrie iron supplementation? Why or why not?

        Students were asked not only to articulate their plans for patient care, but also to include evidence from their
readings to support their decision making.      Each student was responsible for posting three kinds of messages for
each online discussion: 1) one initial response to each question, 2) responses to other messages, and 3) a summary
for the week. After posting their initial message, students were required to read and reflect on each other's messages.

Data Collection and Data Analysis
         To address my research questions, I adopted a naturalistic research approach (Moschkovich & Brenner,
2000) and qualitative research methods.       Seven hundred and fifty one messages from 85 threads were analyzed.
Twelve   students  and   two instructors participated in the online    discussions.  Data  collected  for  this study also
includes student interviews and a teacher interview.     To enhance the trustworthiness of the analysis, I triangulated
findings from discussions with interview data.

         Both    content analysis  and  discourse analysis  were  conducted   to  reveal  patterns   in the asynchronous
discussions.  I am interested in not only what had been generated as artifacts during the asynchronous discussion,
but more importantly, how the discussions evolved and resulted in explorations of professional knowledge.         The first
level of analysis involves coding different kinds of learning resources being incorporated into the discussion and
counting   their frequencies. Seven  different  kinds of learning  resources grouped      into three major  categories: 1)
assigned   materials, such   as lecture  notes, publications   assigned in the reading    list; 2)   experiences, such  as
professional experiences, personal experiences, and stories (from friends, families or heard from the news); and 3)
information found by students, such as journals, additional textbooks, and other information gathered through phone
calls or internet searches.

         The  second   level  of  analysis  examined  connections  built  among     these messages.     I emphasized    the
interactions between online messages by viewing online discussion as text connection practices.           The intertextual
links were interpreted from thematic relationships of how the information in these messages related to information
in other message (Bloome, 1993).     Intertextual links are categorized as 1) extending ideas, 2) alternating ideas, 3)
reflection, 4) posing questions, and 5) summarizing ideas.      Each category contains several subcategories of coding
keys.   After identifying learning resources and connections between messages, I searched patterns of collaborative
knowledge building.      Different patterns were identified by the kinds of learning resources included as well as by
how   each text  was  justified in relation to  previous texts  (types of intertextual links).   Three different patterns
emerged from the analyses.

Learning Resources Presented in the Discussions
         Figure 1 shows the percentage of resources used, grouped by their origins.         It is shown that 44% of the
resources are experiences (i.e., personal experiences, professional experience, and stories), 29% of the resources are
acquired by students through their own searching (i.e., journal papers, additional textbooks, or online information),
and 27% of the resources are suggested by faculty (i.e., lecture notes and publications in the reading list).         The
results show  that  students  were  able   to make use   of information   from assigned    reading   materials  and,  more
importantly, were able to search for new resources outside of the class during online discussions. The later finding is

                                                            391                                                   ICLS 2006
a notable  outcome   of self-directed learning.                                              This  result      suggests              the       students'            ability       to independently   search
learning materials when needed and to evaluate the appropriateness of those newly found materials for learning.
          Besides academic  publications,                                 both       professional              and     personal                 experiences                were      alternative substantial
learning  resources. Figure 2 illustrates                                the       dominating              number       of           professional          experiences               shared  during  online
discussions.  Sharing   information gained                                 from               prior work-related                     experiences           and        gained         from   current clinical
practicum were highly valued by students during online discussions.                                                                           Some       students          were      registered  nurses and
some had some midwifery experiences before attending this graduate program.                                                                                 Each student gained professional
experiences through participating and observing clinical practices during the weekly visit to a clinical site.                                                                                     Students
expressed  during  the  interview that                                  knowing              what   other      classmates                     were       experiencing              on  their  own   was  an
important aspect of learning.

                                                                          Learning Resources Grouped by Origins

                                                                                                                            Assigned Mat erials
                                                                                                                                       27%

                                                                            Ex p er i en ces
                                                                               44%

                                                                                                                         St u d en t Fo u n d
                                                                                                                          I nform at ion
                                                                                                                             29%

                               Figure 1.                                 Learning resources grouped by their origins.

                                                                      0         10            20        30        40        50            60          70

                                            Exercise in Pregnancy

                                           Prenat al Breast feeding

                                                    Anem ia during
                                                        Pr eg n an cy                                                                                       Lect ure Not e
                                                                                                                                                            Publicat ionAssigned
                                                                                                                                                            Publicat ionFound
                                            Adolescent Pregnancy                                                                                            Professional Experience
                                                                                                                                                            Personal Experience
                                                                                                                                                            St or y
                                                 Substance Abuse                                                                                            Ot her I nform at ion

                                                Dom estic Violence

                                                   Counseling and
                                                         Tea ch i n g

                              Figure 2.                                 Usage of learning resources displayed by week.

Patterns of Collaborative Knowledge Building
          Three major patterns of knowledge building were revealed in the data. The essence of these processes is the
continuous   tailoring of knowledge                                   gained        from          various            sources          both       from       retrieving               prior knowledge    and
experiences and from acquiring new information from purposeful searches in academic publications and from the
Internet. The process of collaborative knowledge building takes advantage of the diverse levels of existing expertise
among students as well as individual's self-directed learning skills that bring in new information to the discussions.

          Because self-directed learning is the center of the analyses, all three patterns started with information from
nursing literature and then expanded into other resources. Table 1 summarizes the major intertextual links and kinds
of learning resources in the three patterns of knowledge building.                                                                   The first pattern only involves information in
publications. Students connected different information in publications through discussions.                                                                                          In the second pattern,

                                                                                                           392                                                                                    ICLS 2006
students   gained insights  into  theoretical  perspectives  when   other students  introducing personal experiences of
pregnancy.   The third and the most complicated pattern is that students confirmed or disconfirmed information in
textbooks or other publications by comparing it to experiences in the actual practices.    In the following, I introduce
the three patterns of collaborative knowledge building with a representative case selected for each.

Table 1.   Characteristics of different patterns of knowledge building.
Patterns of knowledge building              Intertextual links involved             Learning resources used
Enriching conceptual                      ·  Agreement with new information       ·  Lecture notes
understanding                             ·  Refinement of ideas                  ·  Publication assigned
                                                                                  ·  Publication found
Connecting textbook information           ·  Agreement with new information       ·  Publication assigned
and personal experiences                  ·  Refinement of ideas                  ·  Publication found
                                          ·  Reflection on experiences            ·  Personal Experiences
                                          ·  Reflection on professional roles     ·  Stories
                                             and practices
Comparing Theoretical                     ·  Agreement with new information       ·  Publication assigned
Perspectives and Practical                ·  Disagreement with new                ·  Publication found
Approaches                                   information                          ·  Professional experiences
                                          ·  Refinement of ideas or suggestion
                                             for alternative ideas
                                          ·  Reflection on experiences
                                          ·  Reflection on professional roles
                                             and practices
                                          ·  Reflection on learning

1. Enriching Conceptual Understanding
         The     first pattern of  knowledge     exploration refers to a  process  wherein   students enrich conceptual
understanding collaboratively.     This pattern is characterized by rich information drawn from academic publications
for the support of a single issue.  During the discussion, it was very common for students to collaboratively explore
information from multiple nursing literature sources.      One student's presentation of information from the literature
invoked    other participants  to further perform  self-directed learning  ­ searching for supporting  information from
other academic publications.      As a result, those correlating messages did not only strengthen the argument by the
quantity of repetitive postings regarding the same topic, but also elaborated the argument with new information.

         In an example (see Figure 3), various pieces of information cited from textbooks and research articles were
presented together to enrich the understanding of the central concept about the impact of strenuous work activities
during pregnancy.      Four students who took part in this discussion agreed on the same point of view that some job
activities may   cause   negative effects   on a pregnant  woman.    This  perspective was confirmed   through different
sources and enriched with additional details.     Each text was posted in agreement with information in previous texts
and further nurtured through the discussion.

                                                             393                                                ICLS 2006
                                 Figure 3.  Example of enriching conceptual understanding.

        Although this discussion did not involve any clinical examples, robust theoretical knowledge is essential
for students' future practices.  Through  collective efforts  of  self-directed learning, students gathered theoretical
perspectives regarding a substantive issue shown in multiple research publications.

2. Connecting Textbook Information and Personal Experiences
        A second pattern of collaborative knowledge building involves the connection of textbook information and
personal experiences.  In a social context, students made connections between the theoretical perspectives shown in
nursing literature and the health-care situations  that they  experienced in    person.   Those experiences provided
testimonials for a particular issue regarding health-care management or treatment.    The following example illustrates
how personal experiences elaborated results of self-directed learning.

        In an example   (see Figure   4), a student  shared   her own  experiences    during pregnancy  to support the
significance of exercise stated in a textbook.  This instance of knowledge building started with a statement of the
benefits of exercise. During the discussion, this student switched her identity from a health-care provider to a health-
care receiver (a pregnant women) and stated the benefits of exercise from a first-person point of view.  Her personal
story provided her colleagues with insights into pregnancy and confirmed the theoretical statements drawn from
textbooks. As stated in the interview, her personal experience with giving birth to four children contributed to her
midwifery knowledge.    For  students who   have  not experienced   pregnancy,    the opportunity  to hear about these
personal stories may be particularly valuable.   Other students expressed on many occasions during the discussion
their needs to learn from others' experiences.

                           Figure 4.  Example of connecting textbook and personal experiences.

                                                          394                                                 ICLS 2006
3. Comparing Theoretical Perspectives and Practical Approaches
        A final pattern of collaborative knowledge building involves the comparison of theoretical perspectives and
practical approaches observed at clinical sites.  Students explored the relationships between nursing guidelines found
in different resources as well as the relationships between nursing guidelines and clinical implementations.   In online
discussions, students  had a   chance to  explore the complex    relationships between   nursing guidelines  and clinical
approaches undertaken at the clinical sites.    This example demonstrates multiple comparisons between theoretical
guidelines  and actual practices  (see  Figure  5). The  discussion started with  an  attempt to explore  the suggested
hematocratics (Hct) levels for assessing anemia.     Students found inconsistencies between different textbooks (i.e.,
Youngkin's, Beard's and other readings), as well as between textbook information and clinical practices. In the first
part of the case, students and faculty reflected on actual approaches used in clinical sites when discovering that two
guidelines were inconsistent.    Later in the same thread of discussion, a student argued that theoretical perspectives
found in a textbook disagreed with a clinical decision made by health care professionals at a clinical site.

                 Figure 5.    Example of comparing theoretical perspectives and practical approaches.

        Ideally, before making clinical decisions, health-care providers should consult guidelines in publications
and evidence   from   the latest research  publications. However,   guidance   from   textbooks  and research results is
decontextualized from     the complex  clinical situations.  Information   from multiple  sources  may   suggest slightly
different standards for dealing with the same situation. Applying knowledge in clinical practice requires students to
accommodate     textbook   information  in relation  to  actual situations  to develop   knowledge-in-use.    Therefore,
sometimes, textbook information is not necessarily the perfect guideline.      As one student stated in her interview, it
was difficult for her to learn medical, hard-science content like anemia treatments and evaluation.       She said, "The
results from different research might be contradictory and doesn't match the situations in the clinic.   It's hard to pull
out, to know what I should take away from this."

        By posting conceptual information and clinical situations together in one discussion, students and faculty
created the  opportunity   to examine  the   consistency (or reveal the  inconsistency)   of information  acquired  from
different resources. One student's reflection on the discussion provides the evidence for the significance of this kind
of knowledge exploration.      She commented on the discussion, "As students, I think so often we just accept the
current practice as the right way. Good job trying to look beyond the way its always been done to an evidence-based
practice."  Moreover, by collecting and accommodating both theoretical and practical information, students may
avoid  over  reliance on  either textbook  guidelines   or  conventions  of practice. In  order to stay  current in their
practices, students need to be aware of the discrepancy and be able to think critically and clinically.

Conclusions and Discussion
        Research  in   the past  judged  the effectiveness  of  online discussion by  the length of  the threads and the
duration of sustaining topics (e.g., Guzdial & Turns, 2000).     Nonetheless, the above findings suggest considering
what students have accomplished through bringing in new information and through making connections between
pieces  of  information.   Students   searched   and  retrieved   information   from  different  learning   sources  and
accommodated new pieces of information into their on-going discussion. With attention to the detailed information
of the  online interactions,  researchers  can  understand  what  actually  happened  during  PBL   and  develop  further
approaches to promote self-directed learning with the best use of social environments.

                                                            395                                                 ICLS 2006
          The collaborative knowledge building process valued self-directed learning skills adopted by individuals to
search for information and also valued critical judgment of existing messages.         In responding to new information,
students  declared   acknowledgement,   showed    agreements  or  disagreements,  and   elaborated ideas. As  an iterative
process of knowledge building and information searching, knowledge exploration provided opportunities for the
group to enhance professional knowledge.     The group had a chance to collect theoretical perspectives distributed in
different kinds  of   academic  publications.  When     more  than  one   kind of information     was  introduced  in the
discussions, students made the connections between theoretical perspectives and personal experiences as well as
between medical guidelines and actual clinical approaches. Students also had a chance to develop a more thorough
image of actual midwife practices with information from various clinical sites presented by their colleagues.         As a
group, students examined the congruency and the inconsistency between information through self-directed learning
and by incorporating real life experiences.

          As Brookfield    and Preskill (1999) asserted:   "Discussion is  a powerful  educational  tool to help students
develop an awareness of and appreciation for the multiplicity of views and perspectives that reflect the complexity
of human experiences."      In online   discussions, I witnessed  the  multiplicities of views and  perspectives.  In this
learning community, individuals were committed to sharing information for the purpose of building understanding
in all participants. In Scardamalia & Bereiter's (1994) story of the copy machine repairperson, information sharing
within the   community     improved every  repairperson's   ability to fix   copiers.  Shown   in this study,  the overall
knowledge    in the  community   improved  when   results  of self-directed  learning  were shared among    members   and
when the members commented on the information.

          The   interplay  between  self-directed learning    and group    interactions, resulted  from   the search  and
integration of multiple learning resources, also helps students to adapt to professional nursing roles.       Wong et al
(1995) concluded      that nursing students who      adopt multidimensional    perspectives  and   search for  alternative
resources tend to be more courageous and       open-minded.     The skills of critically judging the appropriateness of
information and the attitudes towards searching for alternative perspectives are essential for the ongoing learning
processes in an era when nurses face unprecedented social, technical, and professional change (Brown, Mattew-
Maich, & Royle, 2001).      As shown in this study, online message board provides the environment for students to be
apt at these skills.

References
Barrows, H. S. (1998). The essentials of problem-based learning. Journal of Dental Education, 62(9), 630-633.
Bloome, D., & Egan-Robertson, A. (1993). The social construction of intertextuality in classroom reading and
          writing lessons. International Reading Association, 28(4), 305-333.
Blumberg, P. (2000). Evaluating the evidence that problem-based learners are self-directed learners: A review of the
          literature. In D. H. Evensen & C. E. Hmelo (Eds.), Problem-Based Learning: A Research Perspective on
          Learning Interactions (pp. 199-226). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brookfield, S., & Preskill, S. (1999). Discussion as a way of teaching: Tools and techniques for democratic
          classrooms. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Brown, B., Mattew-Maich, N., & Royle, J. (2001). Fostering reflection and reflective practice. In E. Rideout (Ed.),
          Trsnforming Nursing Education Through Problem-Based Learning. Mississauga, ON: Jones and Barlett
          Publisher Canada.
Guzdial, M., & Turns, J. (2000). Effective discussion through a computer-mediated anchored forum. The Journal of
          the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 437-469.
Hmelo, C. E., & Evensen, D. H. (2000). Problem-based learning: Gaining insights on learning interactions through
          multiple methods of inquiry. In D. H. Evensen & C. E. Hmelo (Eds.), Problem-based learning: A research
          perspective on learning interactions (pp. 1-16). Mahwah, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Moschkovich, J. N., & Brenner, M. E. (2000). Integrating a naturalistic paradigm into research on mathematics and
          science cognition and learning. In Handbook of research design in mathematics and science education.
          Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of the
          Learning Sceinces, 3(3), 265-283.
Wong, F. K. Y., Kember, D., Chung, L. Y. F., & Yan, L. (1995). Assessing the level of student refelction from
          reflective journals. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 22, 48-57.

                                                            396                                                  ICLS 2006
