        Beyond transparency: How students make representations
                                                    meaningful
        Victor R. Lee, Bruce Sherin, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Dr., Evanston, IL 60208-2610
                              Email: victor@northwestern.edu, bsherin@northwestern.edu

        Abstract:    In  current science   education    reform,  two    criteria are     considered most   critical for
        determining    whether   or not   an   external representation   is pedagogically        productive.   One   is
        whether or not the representation maintains a high level of epistemic fidelity.          The other is whether
        or  not  the representation   is transparent relative to the    content  it   is supposed   to represent.   We
        believe that these criteria are too limited in scope and have been considered acceptable in part
        because     we   have  a  very    limited   understanding     of  how       students  construct    meaningful
        interpretations of unfamiliar representations.      To remedy that, we propose a new framework for
        understanding acts of interpretation that focuses on four major constructs: registrations, symbolic
        forms, interpretive genres, and interpretive maxims.         We demonstrate this framework's utility by
        applying it to excerpts of middle school students interpreting unfamiliar representations of light
        reflection.

Introduction
        One core belief of reform-oriented science educators is that it is important to apprentice students into the
same  kinds   of interpretive practices  as  those  of  professional    scientists,   especially those  that involve   scientific
representations.  However, we lack sufficient guidance regarding the manner in which we should design for this.
Rather, what we have is a loose set of evaluative criteria for determining the quality of a representation based on
intuitions about epistemic fidelity (Roschelle, 1990) and representational transparency.            The general idea is that in
order for a representation to be included in a curriculum, it must be scientifically accurate, and it must minimize
possible misinterpretations and subsequent misconceptions (Kesidou & Roseman, 2002).                This is in line with a large
body of research that has documented mistakes students make when interpreting external representations in science
and mathematics (e.g., Leinhardt et al., 1990 for examples involving graphs).

        We find these evaluative criteria to be an inappropriate stopping point, in part because they rely on some
unverified assumptions    about  science    learning   in relation   to representations.       One  such    assumption   is that
conceptualizations crystallize rapidly after exposure to misinformation, thus rapidly leading to misconceptions (e.g.,
Driver, 1994). A second assumption is that students simply do not come fully equipped to deal with the unfamiliar
and  abstract representational   forms    that pervade    scientific practices      ­ there  are  some   classes    of scientific
representations that are too complex and others where students are likely to make mistakes.              A third assumption is
that interpretation can  be equated   to seeing.    Knowledge    is  encoded     in a representation   and  the student  simply
decodes  what    is  presented to   him   or   her.   Taken   together,   the    images    we    have  are  of  students  being
representationally weak and of interpretation being a relatively simple act.        Our larger research agenda is intended to
refine those ideas. However, the goal of this paper is to specifically address the latter.

        Our contention is that acts of representation interpretation have not yet been carefully examined and as a
consequence,  we    lack the  tools needed     to develop  more    productive    criteria  for   evaluating  representations  as
pedagogically appropriate.    Therefore, we should allocate some of our resources to unpacking what happens in an
act of representation interpretation. To do this in a manner that can better inform theory and practice, we believe a
naturalistic approach is needed.  This involves capturing instances of students interpreting scientific representations
and characterizing how and why those interpretations are made.        Simply stated, we need to understand how students
can take marks on paper, a chalkboard, or from a computer screen and from those marks construct a meaningful
understanding.

        There have been some significant steps taken in this direction.          As a field, Learning Sciences is becoming
increasingly aware of the range of representational abilities and resources students can utilize in the classroom and
beyond (diSessa, 2004; diSessa et al., 1991; Lehrer & Schauble, 2004; Sherin, 2000).             Still, there remains significant
work to be done. What we hope to do here is present a theoretical framework that can aid in the characterization of
student resources and interpretive strategies and begin to inform how students construct meaningful interpretations.
This paper attempts to demonstrate the utility of this framework through a brief analysis of some interview excerpts

                                                             397                                                       ICLS 2006
with middle   school  students  who    were in the  midst  of learning content  around   light and  optics and  who  were
encountering some unfamiliar representations in the domain.

          As we will discuss later, light and optics seemed to be an appropriate place to do this work since much of
what would be traditionally considered content in this area is structured around recurring technical representations,
such as arrows and lines that are used for representing light rays and reflective surfaces. In the following section, we
will describe some of the key aspects our framework for understanding how students construct interpretation of
representations (Sherin & Lee, 2005).    Following that, we will briefly apply this framework to the interview excerpts
to identify two specific resources that these students used to facilitate interpretation, the event narrative and the
completeness maxim.    We hope that by the end of the paper, we can demonstrate the potential of this framework and
provide some rationale for why they settled on their respective interpretations.    From that, we hope that we can do a
small part to help reframe how we think about representations for both learning and design.

Theoretical Framework
          In this section, we  introduce,  by  way  of  an example of  a   hypothetical interaction around   a  graph, our
theoretical  framework    for discussing our  cases  in the following  sections.  We do this as both a rhetorical and
theoretical strategy.  The following example, abstracted from others we have seen, allows us to briefly illustrate
some key phenomena.       It also establishes a theoretical yardstick: our framework must, at a minimum, be able to do
the work of accounting for these interpretive phenomena.

          Consider the following situation.     Lisa and   Earvin are  lab partners  in class  and  they are producing   a
representation of the motion of two wind-up cars they have just observed.         Lisa has just drawn the representation
shown in Figure 1 in her notebook.

                                                     Figure 1.  Lisa's graph.

          Earvin sees this and says "So that's a graph.     One of the lines is pretty much flat.  The other curves a lot
more ­ it's like exponential".   Lisa responds "Yeah, I think this does a good job of showing how those cars were
moving".    Earvin adds, "I agree. Say, here I'm the green car going pretty much the same speed the entire time.       But
then here I'm the black car, starting really slow, but then I go really fast!" Lisa says "Huh.   Yeah, and I can see now
then the black car passes the green at this point. And then it gets to the end way before the green car.    That's like we
just saw in the demo."     She points to where the lines intersect as she speaks.   Then she adds, as she points between
the two lines, "Yeah, that's right because the distance between them gets smaller and smaller".        Earvin ends with,
"Yeah, I see that."

          In this example, there is a lot happening when Earvin and Lisa interpret this graph.     First, Earvin interprets
the graph as being made up of two lines that he can name and describe as flat and exponential.        Then he produces a
narration for each of the lines and associates them with each of the cars they had seen earlier.      Lisa then interprets
the graph as showing where the black car surpasses the green one and justifies it both with the point where the lines
intersect and with the area between the two narrowing.      Note that throughout this joint interpretation, there are some
key features of how the interpretations are constructed.      First, they carve up the marks in the notebook in many
different ways.   Sometimes the lines are the focus, whereas at other times, points or regions of space may be more
relevant. Second, they engage in acts of creative construction.       Earvin, as part of his interpretation, becomes the
green and black car and is following the path of the lines on the graph.        Lisa, as part of her later interpretations,
begins to blend,   albeit incorrectly, when  the black  car passed the  green   car with specific  portions  of the graph.
Third, we can make the observation that there is a tremendous amount of agreement and coordination that happens
quite seamlessly in this dialogue.     Earvin and Lisa quickly can follow the other's interpretations and infer each
person's intended meaning given just a quick utterance or finger point.    These observations provide the backbone for
our framework.     The major    constructs  we propose,  described below,   are  1) registrations, 2) symbolic  forms,  3)
interpretive genres, and 4) interpretive maxims.

                                                            398                                                  ICLS 2006
Registrations
          The first component of this framework relies on the observation that the marks in an external representation
may be "carved up" in a multitude of ways. For this, we borrow from Roschelle (1991) the term registration, which
for our   purposes, is used   to identify  the representational  structures that   may  be  made   selectively  salient and
potentially meaningful during the course of an interpretive action.      In the above example, the registrations include
the two lines, the point of intersection, and the area between the two lines.    In other situations, there could easily be
others.  We do not assume that all registrations are meaningful, nor must they be at a particular grain size.           For
example, in an equation, any character, term, or combination of operation symbols and terms could be a registration.
In a graph, some segment of the line, a point on one line, or slope could all qualify.

Symbolic forms
          In some limited, but extremely important situations, we believe that registrations are associated with simple
conceptual schemas.    We call these associations between registrations and conceptual schemas symbolic forms. This
has been worked out in some detail for the case of physics equations (Sherin, 1996, 2001b).          Examples of this also
exist for graphing,  as discussed   by Nemirovsky    (1992)  which  we   applied   in the  above example.    When Earvin
describes the motions of the black car, the curvatures of the bottom line is adjoined to conceptual schema of rapid
growth.   He could have also been more sensitive to the slight dips in the top line and conceptualized them as slight
decline.

Interpretive Genres
          We   noted   before  that the interpretations   in the   example    with  Earvin  and    Lisa  involved  creative
constructions.   We  believe   that interpretation  of  external representations   in science regularly   involves acts  of
creative  construction   in    which   individuals   integrate   registrations,  conceptual   knowledge,     and   familiar
representational  conventions,   and they  reason   through  these created  spaces.   These creative constructions,   while
often novel, will frequently display regular patterns of interpretations. These patterns could be regular sequences
through registrations and symbolic forms or be recurring interpretive games that are played through which meaning
is momentarily constructed with the representation.       We call these games and patterns interpretive genres.         For
example, Earvin's constructions are consistent with comparative and narrative classes of genres.          The comparative
genre is invoked in the beginning, when he notes that the bottom line is "more curved" than the top one.                The
narrative genre is invoked when Earvin constructed a story that unfolded over time as the marks were traversed.         We
see a sort of  dual  narration   in Lisa's construction  in  which  two   agents each  follow   narratives that eventually
overlap.  It is our belief that interpretive genres can serve multiple purposes in the interpretation of representations.
By invoking a genre, an interpreter has a sort of template with some constraints on what registrations and what
conceptual   knowledge  may    be optimally   relevant.  Examples   and  comparisons    of  interpretive genres in physics
equations and computer programs can be seen in work done by Sherin (2001a).

Interpretive Maxims
          Our last component, interpretive maxims, deals with aspects of communicative interaction.            Specifically,
we understand interpretation of representations to always involve the making of inferences about their meaning.
Therefore, it was appropriate for us to turn to ideas that have long been investigated in the linguistics branch of
pragmatics.  At the core of pragmatics is the notion that inference is based on the integration of a few externalized
clues given verbally (or gesturally as may also be the case) by a speaker or author along with implicit rules for
determining relevance and meaning, dubbed maxims (Grice, 1975).          Our move is to apply these notions, which have
been developed for communication generally, to representation interpretation.         We see this as an appropriate move
both because much of the data that we examine includes video of communicative interactions and because we are
explicitly adopting a naturalistic approach.   We expect that some of these maxims may apply generally across many
kinds of representations and some may be more specific to particular classes, such as equations.        In situations where
all interpreters have   expert knowledge    of  the representation,  we   can   understand  interpretive  maxims   to   have
crystallized into   particular   conventions,  often   unspoken,   that  individuals   follow   in the   construction   and
interpretation of representations through communicative interaction.

          Interpretive maxims operate in the background of interpretation, helping to constrain the space of meanings
for registrations and genres.  In the Earvin and Lisa example, we can understand Earvin as following an interpretive
pattern that bears some similarity to what we have previously identified as a maxim of global exhaustiveness (Lee &
Sherin,  2004).  He  makes    attributions to  each line as  distinctly being   associated with  one of  the cars and   also
attempts to make sure all elements in the representation are made meaningful.          Similarly, some other interpretive

                                                            399                                                   ICLS 2006
conventions briefly appear ­ Lisa's move to interpret the intersecting lines as one car passing the other, follows
conventions of interpreting lines as traversed paths.

Application of the framework to representations of light reflection
        In this section, we present excerpts from interviews done with eighth grade students learning about light
and optics   as part of  their science class.   This comes  from   a   larger corpus  of data  that includes   videorecorded
observations and interviews done with two eighth grade classrooms, one of which was each enacting a curriculum
published by McDougal Littell (2005). The examples discussed here come from mid-unit interviews conducted with
three students during the third week of the six-week McDougal Littell unit. The interviewed students comprise a
focus group whose members had been videorecorded and interviewed throughout the entire unit as they were using
the curriculum.

        The     mid-unit interviews  discussed   here  were  timed   such  that, the  day   before, the  class had   done an
exploration of mirrors and been presented with a series of diagrams showing the law of reflection, diffuse reflection,
and reflection in concave and convex mirrors.       The goal of these interviews was to expose some of the interpretive
strategies that students  were   using for representations  of   light for phenomena     in which   they  were  just gaining
familiarity.  Each   student   was  interviewed  individually  and   presented   with copies   of   the diagrams  that  were
discussed the previous day and asked to explain what each was showing.            The interviewer then proceeded to ask
follow up prompts for clarification.

        As mentioned earlier, we chose to examine optics specifically because it is an area that often involves
instruction around a regular set of simple and presumably familiar representations, that employ arrows, waves, and
various lines for reflective or transmissive objects.   Also, the study of optics often involves explicit focus on two
graphically represented models of light: the ray model and the wave model.            Furthermore, research that involves
students understanding of light tends to focus on misconceptions (Driver, 1994) or challenges involved in using the
representational conventions (Ramadas & Shayer, 1993; Ronen & Eylon, 1993) rather than interpretive resources
and interpretive acts.  We see the opportunity to indirectly contribute to that body of student conceptions literature as
well.

Interpreting simple reflection with an event narrative
        We    present   first an excerpt of   a student interpreting   a representation   that was   quite typical   in most
interviews and helps us to lay the groundwork for the subsequent excerpts.           In this first excerpt, Lily is shown a
picture similar to the one shown in figure 2.   It was the first one that was presented in class the previous day and the
teacher intended for it to illustrate the law of reflection, in which the angles formed by an incident ray with the
normal is always equal to that formed by the reflected ray and the normal.

                                         Figure 2. Diagram of light reflection.

        Lily immediately provides an interpretation of this drawing. ("L" is Lily, "I" is Interviewer)

        L: This picture shows the light, say a beam of it as it comes down, hitting a surface and bouncing off.
        I: So this is the light, hitting a surface.
        L: And it bounces off.

        Her interpretation is relatively straightforward, and one that we would expect given the simplicity of the
representation  and  the fact  that Lily knew   the  purpose  of  the  interview.  However, we can still identify some
important resources in the context of the above framework that she draws upon to do her interpretation.            First, she
describes a short sequence of events, suggestive of a simple interpretive genre ­ that of an event narrative ­ which
enables her to parse this representation into three conjoined sequential segments in which an arrow first comes in,
hits/bounces off a surface, and then continues in a new direction.     Both arrows and the point of contact between the
arrows and the horizontal line are active registrations here.     She construes the first arrow as being both a sort of
traveling entity and a straight-line path.  This is consistent with particular interpretive conventions relevant to the

                                                             400                                                   ICLS 2006
use of arrows in these sorts of diagrams involving light. Rather than serving a labeling or connective function as it
could in other representations, here it is an invocation of conventions of arrow-as-entity and arrow-as-path.     At a
more cognitive level, we see her invoking a symbolic form ­ bouncing ­ that occurs at the point of contact between
the arrows and the horizontal line.  This symbolic form is both a determiner of the final segment of the narrative
(that the light changes direction and moves on) and the rationale for the behavior.

Registrations, Forms, and Genres for Interpreting Diffuse Reflection
       The next interview question that was asked of all students involved having each student explain a diagram
that was intended to show diffuse reflection, the reflection of light on a rough surface.   In the previous day's class,
they were shown a diagram much like the one shown in Figure 3.

                                          Figure 3. Diagram of diffuse reflection.

       When Lily explains this one, she again invokes an event narration, but infers a new behavior of light from
this representation.

       L: ...This surface, when the light beam hits it, it's not like, it can't bounce off the same way.       It's not
       smooth because it's sort of indented like this, I'm not sure, I think, but I'm not completely sure, it's not that
       it gets stuck, but it doesn't reflect at the same time. Because some of it goes further down because some if
       it is jagged. So the beam splits off into different directions, like that.
       I: Okay. So the beams split off in different directions after this one beam comes in and hits it?
       L: Yes, because- because of the way the surface is jagged, some of the beam may hit at a higher point or at
       this point or this point or that point so it causes them to split like that.
       I: Okay, and so let me say it back to you to make sure I understand.       This is one beam coming in?
       L: Yeah
       I: So this is one beam coming in and it comes here and it hits and it splits into four little beams
       L: Yes.  Because it's a rough surface, not a smooth surface.
       I: Okay. So then these arrows come from the first one?
       L: Yes.  It's the beam splitting into multiple parts.

       In this interpretation, the arrows are registrations, as is the jagged line.    Furthermore, she also attends to
specific segments of the jagged line, some of which are closer or further from the largest arrow. Her narration again
initially involves three segments.  The first segment is the single arrow coming in, which is again a beam of light.
The second segment differs from her earlier interpretation:    this time it involves a symbolic form of splitting at the
varying points of contact.  The final segment involves multiple arrows that are going in new directions after the
splitting has occurred.

       Susan makes a similar interpretation.

       I: So where are these little arrows coming from then?
       S: Cause there's not a big surface to have a single reflection, it's not like big smooth, it's bumpy so it takes
       a light and goes fshew! ... And it goes out in all different directions.
       I: Okay. And how does it do that when there's only one arrow coming in?
       S: Diffraction? ... I think.
       I: What do you mean?
       S: When light hits something and it goes boom and bursts into lots of little things.    It separates, into lots of
       little beams and the reason you can't see anything in it is because it's not one focused beam but lots of little
       ones that go ­ light.

       One difference in Susan's interpretation is that she carves the bumpy line in a different way than Lily.
Rather than following the path of the arrow into the nooks of the bumpy line, she treats the entire bumpy line as a
primary registration. Therefore, her interpretation does not go into the same level of descriptive depth, but she still

                                                          401                                                   ICLS 2006
has a complete narrative, where the key event is the arrow's encounter with the bumpy line.                What is common to
Lily's and Susan's explanation is a perceived interpretive constraint where the first segment of the narrative involves
a single arrow while the third involves multiple arrows.       Because the narrative requires an event to account for the
transition, they both converge on a splitting primitive, but associate them with different registrations.

         Rita's interpretation follows the same event narration, and she fills the second slot of that narration with
diffraction, like Susan did.  However, her interpretation at this point does not place much priority on the bumpiness
of the horizontal line.

         I: So where are these arrows coming from then?
         R: Umm, the same place, I think?      Yeah, the light is here and it's just bouncing back from the surface.
         I: Okay, so these four little arrows, they're bouncing back from the surface.            Where did the come from
         cause there's only like one arrow coming in?
         R: It diffracts, so like, yeah, here it spreads and then it sort of spreads out and bounces off, like if you have
         water and you push it through, it spreads out, sort of what it's doing, so it's bouncing and it just bounces
         off.

         Rita's   account is focused   even more   on  the  spreading    behavior   of   the arrows  that  she infers from   the
diagram. It appears that the most relevant feature of the arrows that she reasons from is their individual headings,
rather than any other features such as their size or linear form.     She draws on diffraction as the event that accounts
for this behavior, an idea that was discussed earlier in her class as a general behavior of waves and was consistently
represented   with  arrows  moving   in outward   directions.  In  this  understanding    of  diffraction,  the arrows   do  not
necessarily come from splitting ­ rather, it is simply part of the diffraction phenomenon where the motion becomes
spread out.

Pragmatics of interpreting diffuse reflection
         Throughout these examples of interpretation of diffuse reflection, we can see that part of the work for the
students is inferring the intended meaning of this diagram given their novice understanding of the phenomenona.
This is instantiated in a couple of ways in these interviews.     First, in all of these interpretations, we see that they do
not arbitrarily   construct separate   meanings   for each   arrow    in the  diagram.       Rather, there  is  an  interpretive
consistency in the arrows' ontology.     For Lily, both the incoming and outgoing arrows are beam-like entities and
paths. For Rita, they are indicators of directionality.

         Secondly, all the students are inferring some intentionality and deliberateness in the representation.          Lily's
interpretation  involves  noting  that the incoming   beam     splits into "4  little beams"   -  suggesting   attention to  the
relative shortness of the outgoing arrows and privileging that feature to inform her construction.         (In truth, the size of
the arrows was more of an incidental feature of how the diagram was drawn.)            Rita and Susan attend to the outgoing
directionality of the arrows as if those were the author's intended feature.     They also interpret the incoming arrow as
being the only arrow that comes in.

         We    understand   these interpretations to  follow   many   interpretive  maxims     and,  included   among  them,   a
completeness maxim.      Following completeness, the students assume that the inscriptions that are present are the only
ones that would be needed to do their interpretive work.      We consider this to be very reasonable in most interpretive
situations, and to be expected.    However, the challenge is that completeness is relative to the intent of the author.
The teacher,   in presenting  this representation  the  previous  day,   had   particular    intentions in mind  for  what   this
diagram would show compactly.        It does not seem unusual, though, for individuals learning the domain to not be
aware  of this  specific intent and  to apply  completeness    too    generally, thus    leading to  what  we  would  consider
undesirable interpretations.

Discussion
         In this  paper,  we  have  taken  the position   that in order    to take  a  move   beyond    epistemic   fidelity and
transparency as the best criteria for evaluating representations, we need to do more to unpack how it is that students
interpret representations.  We believe more work can be done to identify interpretive resources that students have in
unfamiliar domains, and we believe that we can do more to account for why the use of these resources lead students
to various patterns of interpretation.  In the limited space of this paper, we briefly presented a framework for how
students  interpret representations  and illustrated  its application  with   cases   of middle  school    students interpreting

                                                             402                                                      ICLS 2006
simple optics diagrams. As part of that application, we examined how, in interpreting representations of reflection,
the students discussed here made frequent use of an event narrative to structure their interpretations. We also briefly
talked about how this narrative was elaborated with various registrations and conceptual primitives.    We also began
to discuss the role that    students' assumptions of completeness       in a representation may  influence   students'
interpretive constructions. In future work, we hope to discuss these ideas much further in depth and with examples
from other domains.  Regardless, we hope that this paper has illustrated how this framework may be a productive
tool for us to better understand how students interpret scientific representations.

References
diSessa, A. A. (2004). Metarepresentation: Native competence and targets for instruction. Cognition and Instruction,
        22(3), 293-331.
diSessa, A. A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., & Kolpakowski, T. (1991). Inventing graphing: Meta-representational
        expertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10, 117-160.
Driver, R. (1994). Making sense of secondary science: Research into children's ideas. New York: Routledge.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics (Vol. 3, pp. 41-
        58). New York: Academic Press.
Kesidou, S., & Roseman, J. E. (2002). How well do middle school science programs measure up?      Findings from
        project 2061's curriculum review. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(6), 522-549.
Lee, V. R., & Sherin, B. L. (2004). What makes teaching special? In Y. Kafai, W. Sandoval, N. Enyedy, A. Nixon &
        F. Herrera (Eds.), Sixth international conference of the learning sciences (pp. 302-309). Santa Monica, CA:
        Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2004). Modeling natural variation through distribution. American Education Research
        Journal, 41(3), 635-679.
Leinhardt, G., Zaslavsky, O., & Stein, M. M. (1990). Functions, graphs, and graphing: Tasks, learning, and teaching.
        Review of Educational Research, 60, 1-64.
McDougalLittell. (2005). Waves, sound, and light. Evanston, IL: McDougal Littell.
Nemirovsky, R. (1992). On the basic forms of variation. Cambridge, MA: Technical Educational Research Center.
Ramadas, J., & Shayer, M. (1993). Schematic representation in optics. In P. J. Black, Lucas, A. M. (Ed.), Children's
        informal ideas in science (pp. 172-189). London: Routledge.
Ronen, M., & Eylon, B. (1993). To see or not to see: The eye in geometrical optics - when and how? Physics
        Education, 28(1), 52-59.
Roschelle, J. (1990). Designing for conversations. Paper presented at the AAAI Symposium on Computer-Based
        Environments for Learning and Teaching, Stanford, CA.
Roschelle, J. (1991). Students construction of qualitative physics knowledge:  Learning about velocity and
        acceleration in a computer microworld. University of California, Berkeley.
Sherin, B. (1996). The symbolic basis of physical intuition: A study of two symbol systems in physics instruction.
        Unpublished dissertation, UC Berkeley.
Sherin, B. (2000). How students invent representations of motion: A genetic account. Journal of Mathematical
        Behavior, 19(4), 399-441.
Sherin, B. (2001a). A comparison of programming and algebraic notation as expressive languages for physics.
        International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 6, 1-61.
Sherin, B. (2001b). How students understand physics equations. Cognition and Instruction, 19(4), 479-541.
Sherin, B., & Lee, V. (2005). On the interpretation of scientific representations, 2005 Annual Meeting of the
        American Educational Research Association. Montreal, Canada.

Acknowledgments
Work on this paper was partially supported by a Graduate Research Grant from the University Research Grants
Committee at Northwestern University.    We would like to also acknowledge the participant students and teachers as
well as Heather Johnson for feedback on an earlier draft of this paper.

                                                          403                                                  ICLS 2006
