       Tensions and Tradeoffs in a "Design for Science" Classroom:
                                 The "Forces in Balloon" Lecture

                          Mary J. Leonard, Sharon J. Derry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
                    Educational Sciences Building, 1025 West Johnson Street, Madison, WI 53706
                                 Email: mjthelen@wisc.edu, derry@education.wisc.edu

          Abstract: "Design for science" curricula employ engineering-type design challenges as means for
          students to learn science concepts as well as skills in science and design.        Teaching science in the
          context  of  engineering  design,  however,   is not straightforward;     it creates   certain tensions  and
          requires  tradeoffs.  This paper   represents  part  of  a larger  study     that examines    and describes
          tensions and tradeoffs in a "design for science" classroom, Learning by DesignTM.              We examine
          tensions  in  a  lecture  on  forces  in  which    the   teacher  finds      herself   challenged  to    build
          representational bridges   between    students'  designed      artifacts and  abstract   science  concepts.
          Constrained  by  time  and difficulty  of the concepts,    the  teacher   chooses    a tradeoff  that uses  a
          lecture to provide students a model for the science underlying their designs.              Our examination
          reveals the teacher's struggle with representation, the requirement that she engage in modeling,
          and the importance of in-depth pedagogical content knowledge to successful design-based science
          instruction.

Introduction
          Many   curriculum    developers have  been  drawn    to engineering      design activities as  a means   of  providing
students  real-world   contexts for science  concepts   (e.g., Fortus,   Dershimer,    Krajcik,   Marx,   & Mamlok-Naaman,
2002; Kolodner et al., 2003; Seiler, Tobin, & Sokolic, 2001).      In these settings, engineering design is typically used
to scaffold science learning, as well as to support general education goals such as decision-making and working in
teams.   However, engineering design has significant distinctions in its goals, activities, and knowledge that make it
not a simple "plug-and-play" context for science learning (Leonard, 2004); it gives rise to tensions and requires
tradeoffs in   the science classroom.     In light of educators'   and    education    researchers'  interest   in design-based
contexts for science, it is important to further our understanding of what happens in such classrooms, to enable us to
more effectively capitalize on design for science learning.

          This paper presents a piece of analysis from a larger study (overview provided in Leonard, 2005) that is
investigating tensions in an enacted "design for science" (DS) curriculum, Learning By DesignTM (LBD) (Kolodner
et al., 2003). The setting is Ms. Harding's (a pseudonym) middle-school classroom where students were challenged
to design and build a balloon-powered miniature car to go as straight and far as possible over level terrain.               The
study draws on activity theory (Engeström, 1999; Leont'ev, 1978, 1981) and discourse analysis (Gee, 1999) in an
ethnographic   approach   that  examines   practices, goals    and other   factors   that   mediate  activities in  the  enacted
curriculum.    Two concepts are of particular interest to this analysis: what activity theorists have termed tensions
occurring at places in the activity system where some of its elements are not well-aligned, and tradeoffs made when
deciding between several possible solutions to a design problem.

          The  LBD     classroom under    study was   originally   videotaped for      production  of a    teaching case   of an
innovative curriculum to be used in a pre-service teacher education course (Derry, Seymour, Steinkuehler, Lee, &
Siegel, 2004).  However, video is especially amenable to secondary analysis and this classroom video later became a
"remnant case" (Hall, 2003) and the focus of further study.        The present analysis focuses on an approximately 4½
minute, videotaped episode from a lecture in which the teacher explains how forces-in-pairs (i.e., Newton's Third
Law) act to propel students' balloon cars ­ dubbed the "forces in balloon" explanation. This episode came to the
fore when   the educational    researchers editing  the video  for   its original   purpose    became caught    up  in trying to
understand the "forces in balloon" explanation themselves.         It was subsequently made the subject of analysis by a
science education professor and physicist, by the teacher in a video-stimulated retrospective interview, and by our
lab's research group in an interaction analysis.      Our analysis revealed that although scientific modeling was not
explicitly addressed in the curriculum or discussed by the teacher, developing and communicating an explanatory
model was exactly what she was challenged to do in her lecture.       Indeed, as in science and mathematics, modeling is
inherent to working within engineering design.      The teacher's explanation further required her to draw on a base of
knowledge and skills closely related to modeling, that of pedagogical content knowledge (PCK), which includes a

                                                             411                                                       ICLS 2006
collection of  analogies,   explanations,  and  representational  systems    that can be   used  to help students    acquire
conceptual understanding (Shulman, 1986, 1987).        The teacher and some of the curriculum developers identified the
lecture as critical in "getting to the science" (Ms. Harding, Reflection, 11/30/01) of balloon car motion.        Although
not discussed here, the larger study goes on to consider how students' own conceptual models of balloon car motion
are revealed in their discourse and how expression of their models may have changed as a result of the "forces in
balloon" explanation.

          The  lecture episode  illustrates important   issues  related  to teaching  science in  the context  of  a design
activity. Specifically, the teacher is challenged to build representational bridges between the design artifacts created
by students  and the   abstract science  concepts  that are the  goals  of  instruction.  Faced with the difficulty of the
concepts and under the constraint of time, the teacher elects to provide an explanation to the students.    In her words,

          The balloon engine, as an entity, is complicated for kids; it's complicated for adults.     And to have
          them understand exactly where there are forces, in something that is very abstract, even though it's
          sitting in front of them ­ we think we've given them a tool, but it's still very abstract to them.
          They need help with that.      That's what they need the teacher for.       (Ms. Harding, Reflection,
          11/30/01).

In examining   this  example  of   explanation in inquiry   instruction, we  uncovered    and illuminated  the nature  of a
struggle with representation that underscores the role and importance of the teacher's science understanding as well
her ability to flexibly represent that understanding and to make spontaneous decisions about pedagogically-effective
representations.

The "forces in balloon" explanation
          Part of what attracts researchers to video is its richness of detail, but reporting a video analysis on the
printed page forfeits much of that richness.    Seeking to preserve some of video's affordances, we chose to include
here as detailed an account of the "forces in balloon" explanation as possible within our constraints of medium and
space.

          The classroom under study is Ms. Harding's eighth-grade, talented and gifted physical science class in a
suburban area of a large Southern city.      The  curriculum    began   with a three-week   introductory  unit intended   to
"launch" them into the practices of LBD.     Three "design challenges" followed the introductory unit, each lasting an
average of two weeks; the balloon-car was the second of the three.          The balloon-car activity focused on iterative
experiment and design by small groups of students but also included whole-class lecture, discussion, and student
presentations.   By    the time  of the  forces-in-pairs lecture,  students   had  progressed    through a  first round   of
experiments and presentations on variables thought to affect their cars' performance.       Ms. Harding began the lecture
with several demonstrations to show that forces operate in pairs, "this idea, that when two objects interact they each
experience a force that's equal in size and opposite in direction" (Ms. Harding, Interview, 08/09/05).         The lecture
ultimately arrived at the point of examining how forces in pairs propelled the students' balloon cars.         (All quotes
following in this section come from Ms. Harding, Lecture, 11/30/01 unless otherwise attributed.)

          The teacher started her "forces in balloon" explanation by drawing a balloon car on the board with arrows
representing a pair of forces:   "air pushing balloon" and "balloon pushes air" (Figure 1a).        When her questions of
students did not return the understanding she sought, Ms. Harding took a new approach; "Okay, we need to look at
the anatomy of this a little bit ... more carefully." She demarcated a section of the balloon opposite the straw using
two lines (Figure 1b) and pointed out,

          Right here something interesting happens.     This is the part of the balloon that if this were closed
          (draws a   line  closing  off balloon at straw),  right,  this  opposite  part,  there would   be some
          resistance on the other side (points to balloon opposite the straw), right? ... But when this gets
          opened (erases line at straw), the air can get out.   So this part of the balloon (draws over balloon
          opposite the straw) doesn't have a resistance on the other side.        So this air that's pushing here
          (points to balloon opposite the straw) is still here.

                                                            412                                                   ICLS 2006
Again Ms. Harding determined that students didn't understand the concept, so she took another tact; "Okay, let's
look at this a little bit different, I see confused   looks."   Under the balloon  car drawing,    she drew  two  arcs
representing opposite sides of the balloon (Figure 1c). She began,

        This is all air in here (writes "AIR" between arcs), and these lines represent your balloon (traces
        over arcs).   The air's pushing here and here (draws arrows pointing out to each arc, a1 & a2).
        The balloon is pushing back.... The balloon is pushing this direction (draws arrow pointing in
        from each arc: b1 & b2).

                             (a)                                                   (b)

        b1                   b2                                    b1
        a1                   a2                                    a1

                             (c)                                                   (d)

Figure 1.  Teacher's "forces in balloon" drawings:    (a) balloon car with force arrows, (b) car with balloon segment
                      opposite straw highlighted, (c) balloon walls when balloon is closed, and
                                        (d) balloon walls when balloon is open.

She then erased the right arc, saying that if it disappeared, so would two of the arrows, and erased arrow b2, then
arrow a1.    She paused,    then corrected   herself, saying   "whoa, somebody    disappeared     who  shouldn't have
disappeared."  She redrew the arc and arrows and started over.     She again erased the right arc, then arrow b2 and
next, arrow a2 (Figure 1d) and explained,

        So that whole side is gone (indicates right side), right?     So then just this bit (draws two lines
        isolating part of left arc) is where I have force. So I've got some air streaming out this way (draws
        thick arrow to right), and I've got some air still pushing here (traces over arrow a1).

        She erased this representation, then directed students' attention back to the balloon in the drawing of the car
(Figure 1b), concluding,

        So you've got the air being pushed in this direction by the balloon (moves chalk to right).      But
        there's still some air left that's pushing on your balloon (gestures with chalk to left). So you get
        forces in both directions, do you see why?

                                                           413                                                ICLS 2006
In summary, she then asked the class, "What makes your car go?... What is it that's pushing in that direction (points
left)?"  One of the students offered, "Maybe the rest of the air that's still pushing back on the balloon?"   To which
the teacher responded, "Exactly!"

Tensions & tradeoffs in the "forces in balloon" lecture
         We focus on tensions related to the teacher's efforts to communicate a model of balloon-car propulsion in
terms of forces ­ i.e., linking the design to the science. We further query why a lecture was used to deliver a model
to students in a project-based, inquiry classroom ­ i.e., why developing the model was not itself an object of student
inquiry. We offer an explanation for the lecture mode in terms of tradeoffs in the activity design.

Tensions in modeling and representing the forces
         The "forces in balloon" lecture challenged the teacher to develop and communicate an explanatory model
of the science that accounted for balloon car propulsion.   As she noted in the earlier quote, "the balloon engine, as an
entity, is complicated for kids; it's complicated for adults" (Reflection, 11/30/01).  It was difficult for Ms. Harding
herself: "I `get' the balloon. But it took me awhile.... I just had to stew over it for awhile.... And then I got the point
where I `got' where things were going on" (Interview, 08/09/05).      Newton's Third Law, or the concept of forces in
pairs, provided the explanatory model of balloon propulsion.     But "once a model has been constructed, the next step
is to find a representation that communicates the ideas of the model" (Carpenter & Romberg, 2004, p. 16).           Ms.
Harding still faced the challenge of explaining the model to students; "I thought, `okay I get the basic thing, but how
am I going to turn around and explain this to fourteen year olds?'" (Interview, 08/09/05).       The teacher's efforts to
represent the forces-in-pairs model of balloon-car propulsion in this video episode exhibit two notable tensions:
representing an abstract  science  concept   in a concrete    design  context, and  finding an   appropriate amount  of
complexity to include in the model.

Modeling an abstract concept in a concrete artifact
         The first tension is created by the need to represent forces in the context of the balloon car.     The teacher
found herself up against a core demand of engineering design:      re-representing abstract scientific knowledge in the
concrete circumstances of the artifact under design (e.g., Gilbert, 1992; Layton, 1993).    Engineering design requires
an intermediate form of knowledge between the abstract and concrete.        As Ms. Harding pointed out in her earlier
quote, that the balloon car is an embodiment of forces in pairs did not by itself make the concept concrete.     "Even
though it's [the balloon car] sitting in front of them ­ we think we've given them a tool, but it's [the forces] still very
abstract to them" (Ms. Harding, Reflection, 11/30/01).     She was left with the challenge of finding a way to represent
the abstract in the concrete.

         Ms. Harding moved from her first representation through a second and a third (Figures 1a-1c), seeking a
level that would communicate the concept to students.      As she progressed, she focused in on narrower regions of the
original drawing, "blowing up" sections while representing them more abstractly.      In effect, she stepped up in levels
of abstraction from the first through the third drawing, then reversed direction, increasing in levels of realism until
she arrived  back at the artifact itself and asked students,    "What  makes   your car [italics added] go?"  (Lecture,
11/30/01).

         Afterward, Ms. Harding questioned the value of the representations she had employed.        Reflecting on the
lecture a few days later, Ms. Harding reported, "I went back and I looked at everything we'd done and they [the
students] were confused" (Reflection, 12/04/01).   After viewing the video of the lecture, Ms. Harding said, "I could
tell when I did it I wasn't happy with it. It wasn't making the points I wanted made or was confusing them to some
point" (Interview, 08/09/05).    The teacher  struggled    to explain the forces using different representations of the
balloon car and, while she thought her explanation eventually "got there" (Interview, 08/09/05), she noted, "I don't
draw as many pictures with it [the balloon anymore] because I think the pictures are more confusing" (Interview,
08/09/05).

         The day after the lecture, Ms. Harding revisited forces in the balloon, abandoning balloon-car drawings for
a set of abstract representations provided in the curriculum that included motion storyboards, free-body diagrams,
and net force diagrams.  However, as a researcher on the curriculum development team noted, "there's a gap in-
between those two [the abstract representations and the car itself] that another representation would facilitate, more

                                                            414                                                ICLS 2006
understanding  or a   deeper understanding"   (Researcher  54P,   Interview, 05/04/05).   It was at this level that Ms.
Harding   had  attempted  to communicate   with   her  balloon-car drawings.     And   while Ms.   Harding  thought    her
explanation had been confusing to students, upon reviewing her third drawing (Figure 1c) in an interview four years
later, she commented, "I may have to pull that back in" (Interview, 08/09/05), implying she still lacked an effective
representation to link the balloon car and the forces operating within it.

          The set of abstract representations Ms. Harding returned to work well for explaining the concepts at a high
level, but it appears representations at multiple levels of abstraction are needed to communicate the model of forces-
in-pairs in the balloon.  The tension exhibited in Ms. Harding's lecture indicates a need for another, intermediary
level of representation that would complete the link between the abstract and the concrete.   Some research in physics
education has also recognized the need for this link in teaching about forces and has demonstrated the value of
intermediate-level diagrammatic representations that may support the engineering design context as well.        System
schemas (Hestenes, 1996) and the symbolic representation of interactions (SRI) notation (Jiménez & Perales, 2001)
are two approaches that focus specifically on Newtonian forces.    Because of the design-based context of instruction,
however, Ms. Harding was attempting to do more than explain Newton's Third Law in the context of the balloon
car; she was also attempting to lead students to a form of technological knowledge (Rophol, 1997) that translates the
science law into a specification for designing their cars.  Ms. Harding's next statement after the "forces in balloon"
explanation was "so, if you could have more area here (points to area of balloon opposite straw), then you'd have
more space    where  that push  was  happening"   (Lecture, 11/30/01).     Making   this further link into technological
knowledge provides yet another representational challenge; the curriculum provides support for doing so (Ryan,
Camp, & Crismond, 2001), but a fuller discussion must be left for another paper.

Modeling complexity
          A second, related, tension in the lecture is finding the appropriate level of complexity to include in the
model of "forces in balloon."     In scientific and   engineering modeling   practice,   "identifying key  features to be
modeled focuses attention on what is essential and strips away what is not, thereby reducing the complexity of the
original  situation" (Carpenter & Romberg,      2004, p. 16).  In  her "forces   in balloon" explanation,  Ms.  Harding
iteratively applied this concept as she stepped through more and more pared-down representations of the situation in
the lecture.

          Earlier in the lecture Ms. Harding had started to draw forces in the balloon, but stopped herself, saying
"We're not going to draw this....  There's some forces that ya'll don't know about, ... we're not drawing this one"
(Lecture, 11/30/01).  When she did later draw the balloon (Figure 1a-1c), she included only the forces of balloon-on-
air and air-on-balloon, ignoring, for example, more complex elastic forces in the balloon.        And while Figure 1b
included forces operating all around the balloon, her third drawing (Figure 1c) reduced them to two sets of pairs on
opposite sides of the balloon, representing the operative forces as a summative set of pairs.    As she stepped through
her drawings Ms. Harding also whittled away at the balloon car itself until she arrived at a representation depicting
the balloon engine with only two lines.

          Even a  seemingly  simple  artifact can embody    complexity     that has to be  reduced to  focus on desired
concepts under study and avoid others considered beyond the scope of the course or of student understanding.           In
seeking a representation that would effectively communicate the "forces in pairs" model to students, Ms. Harding
iteratively  reduced  complexity in  her drawings   until  the balloon  car  became    two lines  and  the forces   under
consideration, a pair.  The tension existed in finding the right level of complexity to represent the model without
losing too much of the context it meant to explain.        Finding the right balance is necessary for effective use of
models in teaching; explanations that include irrelevant entities and structures will not aid student understanding
(Gilbert, Boulter, & Rutherford, 1998).

Tradeoffs in the activity design
          Taking a step back and considering the function of the lecture in this design-based, inquiry classroom, one
might question why the lecture existed at all in the activity, i.e., why developing their own explanatory models of
forces in the balloon was not a subject of student inquiry itself, assuming it would lead to deeper understandings of
"forces in balloon."  We offer an explanation in terms of tradeoffs in the activity design.  Two factors are especially
relevant. First, a constant mediating factor in project-based, design-based, or inquiry science classrooms is time, of
which there is never enough.    The teacher acknowledged time to be a challenge for her, "I'm really bad about time.
It takes me forever....   I just can't seem to condense it" (Interview, 08/09/05).   A second factor is the difficulty of

                                                           415                                                  ICLS 2006
understanding how "forces in pairs" propel the balloon:      "That's it with the balloon, is that it is, it's confusing. They
[students] don't really get how it works" (Ms. Harding, Interview, 08/09/05).       The teacher summarized her decision
that led to the lecture:

         I don't know, maybe it's just I'm not a good inquiry teacher in that I just can't let them discover
         this all on their own.  But I just feel like this is one of those times where you have to step in and
         just show them.    (Ms. Harding, Interview, 08/09/05).

         Kimbell, Stables, & Green (1996) provide a framework of tradeoffs in design-based curricula that helps
explain the lecture.  They point out design tasks require a balance between a) product purposes and teaching &
learning purposes of the task, b) an open, ill-defined context and a highly-specified task, and c) teacher control and
student autonomy.    Specific to the "forces in balloon" explanation was a need to balance product purposes, i.e.,
designing and building a balloon car, with learning purposes, i.e., understanding forces in pairs.      While designing a
car was intended to facilitate understanding forces, the design challenge actually limited the extent to which the
curriculum could be suspended to allow students to develop their own explanatory models through further inquiry.
Time limitations required the curriculum to continue to move forward to meet the overarching challenge to students
of designing and building their optimal balloon cars.      According to one of the curriculum developers, "there is an
end that we want you to get to, not just in the content understanding, but in the actual performance of the vehicle
you designed" (Researcher 55A, Interview, 05/05/05).         Foregoing the challenge would also have meant forfeiting
what were perceived to be some of the primary benefits it brought to the classroom:              its role in structuring the
inquiry and motivating students to learn the science.

         Additionally,    having students   understand     "forces  in pairs"   was   more important    than  having     them
understand "forces in balloons."   Asked what she expected students to know as a result of the balloon car challenge,
the teacher replied, "I want them to have a good idea about forces occurring in pairs" (Interview, 08/08/05).             The
balloon-car challenge    primarily afforded    students a  contextualized  understanding   of "forces   in pairs."  Had    the
primary objective of the activity been inquiry into "forces in balloon," the task more open-ended, and the approach
more student-driven, it might have been feasible for the class to take time for students to develop their own models
of what was driving their balloon cars forward.     However, some DS curricula have found design tasks that are more
open and ill-defined and student-driven produce tensions that frustrate students rather than facilitate their learning
(Hmelo, Holton, & Kolodner, 2000; Kolodner et al., 2003).        Finding the "right" balance among Kimbell, Stables, &
Green's (1996) dimensions requires taking into account myriad mediating factors in the DS activity; achieving a
balance necessitates tradeoffs.

Conclusion and Implications
         The "forces in balloon" explanation provides a window into some of the tensions and tradeoffs that can
arise for teachers in the DS classroom.    Engineering design is not an unproblematic context for teaching and learning
science. Engineering     design  introduces  tensions   in that  it requires new   representations,  at multiple   levels  of
abstraction and appropriate levels of complexity, to link science concepts to the concrete circumstances of design.
It demands  new    PCK   for  teachers that includes  skills in  scientific/engineering modeling;   an  ability to facilitate
students' explanatory models, whether by direct instruction or through inquiry; and an understanding of and means
for representing targeted science concepts in the concrete circumstances of an artifact under design.         The teacher's
choice of a lecture for communicating the explanatory model for balloon-car propulsion reflects a tradeoff resulting
from  decisions made     in  instructional design.  Design-based     activities require striking  a balance  along   several
dimensions in response to such mediating factors as time and goals of the activity.        Regardless of the instructional
method chosen for building explanatory models, teacher professional development in the DS context must supply
teachers with tools and opportunities to develop the ability to conceptualize and communicate models at varied,
appropriate level(s)     of abstractness   and complexity.      The    present  study indicates  providing   teachers     with
opportunities to reflect on practice can advance this agenda.

References
Carpenter,  T. P., &  Romberg,     T.  A.   (2004).  Powerful    practices   in mathematics   and science.   University    of
         Wisconsin-Madison:      National Center for Improving Student Learning and Achievement in Mathematics
         and Science.

                                                             416                                                   ICLS 2006
Derry, S. J., Seymour, J., Steinkuehler, C. A., Lee, J., & Siegel, M.       (2004).  From ambitious vision to partially
         satisfying reality: An evolving sociotechnical design supporting community and collaborative learning in
         teacher education.  In S. A. Barab, R. Kling, & J. H. Gray (Eds.), Designing for Virtual Communities in the
         Service of Learning.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 256-295.
Engeström, Y.     (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation.    In Y. Engeström, R. Miettinen, &
         R.-L.    Punamaki   (Eds.), Perspectives   on  activity theory, (pp.  19-38).   New   York,  NY:    Cambridge
         University Press.
Fortus, D., Dershimer, R. C., Krajcik, J.,     Marx, R., & Mamlok-Naaman, R.       (2002, April). Design-based science
         and student learning.     Paper presented at the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, New
         Orleans, LA.
Gee, J. P. (1999).  An introduction to discourse analysis:  Theory and method.      New York, NY:   Routledge.
Gilbert, J. K. (1992).    The interface between science education and technology education.      International Journal of
         Science Education, 14, 563-578.
Gilbert, J. K., Boulter, C., Rutherford, M.     (1998). Models in explanations, part 2:    Whose voice?    Whose ears?
         International Journal of Science Education, 20, 187-203.
Hall, R. (2003, April). When is a case? Using video recordings as cases in educational research.        Paper presented
         at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Hestenes,  D.   (1996,    August).   Modeling   methodology  for  physics  teachers.    Proceedings of the International
         Conference       on   Undergraduate       Physics     Education,      College   Park,    MD.         Available:
         http://modeling.la.asu.edu/R&E/ModelingMeth-jul98.pdf
Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D. L., & Kolodner, J. L. (2000).      Designing to learn about complex systems.     The Journal of
         the Learning Sciences, 9, 247-298.
Jiménez, J. D., & Perales, F. J.     (2001).   Graphic representation of force in secondary education:     Analysis and
         alternative educational proposals.    Physics Education, 36, 227-235.
Kimbell, R., Stables, K., & Green, R.      (1996).  Understanding practice in design and technology.       Buckingham,
         England:   Open University Press.
Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., Puntambekar, S., & Ryan, M.       (2003).
         Problem-based     learning  meets case-based   reasoning   in the middle-school   science  classroom:   Putting
         Learning by DesignTM into practice.     Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 495-547.
Layton, D.  (1993).  Technology's challenge to science education.      Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press.
Leonard,   M.  J. (2004,  April).  Toward    epistemologically   authentic engineering  design activities in the science
         classroom.   Paper presented at the 2004 National Association for Research in Science Teaching Annual
         Conference, Vancouver, Canada.        Available: http://www.wcer.wisc.edu/stellar/res_presentations.htm
Leonard, M. J.    (2005).  Examining tensions in a "design for science" activity system:    Science versus engineering
         goals  and  knowledge.      Tidskrift för Lärarutbildning  och  Forskning   [Journal  of Research   in  Teacher
         Education], 3, 132-146.     Umeå, Sweden: Umeå University, The Faculty of Teacher Education Board.
Leont'ev,  A.  N.   (1978).  Activity, consciousness,   and personality    (M. J. Hall, Trans.). Englewood   Cliffs, NJ:
         Prentice-Hall.
Leont'ev, A. N.   (1981).  Problems of the development of the mind.    Moscow:    Progress Publishers.
Ropohl, G.  (1997).  Knowledge types in technology.      International Journal of Technology and Design Education, 7,
         65-72.
Ryan, M., Camp, P., & Crismond, D.      (2001, April).  Design rules of thumb:    Connecting science and design.  Paper
         presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Seattle, WA.
Seiler, G., Tobin, K., & Sokolic, J.    (2001).    Design, technology, and science:    Sites for learning, resistance, and
         social reproduction in urban schools.     Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38, 746-767.
Shulman, L. S.    (1986). Those who understand:    Knowledge growth in teaching.     Education Leadership, 15(2), 4-14.
Shulman, L. S.    (1987).  Knowledge and teaching:      Foundations of the new reform.    Harvard Educational Review,
         57(1), 1-22.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the Joyce Foundation and by National Science Foundation Grant No.
0107032 (ROLE). Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.

                                                            417                                                 ICLS 2006
