 Effects of Conceptual Representation on Learning from Hypermedia

                                Lei Liu, Surabhi Marathe, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver,
                  Graduate School of Education, Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Place, NJ, 08817
                   leiliu@eden.rutgers.edu, surabhim@eden.rutgers.edu, chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu

         Abstract: Studying complex systems is increasingly important in many domains. Several features
         shared by complex systems hinder deep understanding. For example, understanding complex
         systems  involves  thinking about  multiple  interdependent    levels,   non-linear causality and/or
         emergence.   Conceptual representations offer opportunities to become integrating frameworks
         across different domains.   This study investigates   how    alternative conceptual  representations
         embodied in hypermedia can help middle school students better understand a complex system, the
         human  respiratory  system. We   designed  two    versions  of instructional  hypermedia   based  on
         structure-behavior-function  theory. SBF   is a   conceptual     representation that  is part of  the
         disciplinary toolbox of biologists and thus is an appropriate representation for learning in this
         domain.  One  hypermedia    was  function-centered  while    the other was   structure-centered. We
         contrasted the instructional effects of these two alternative conceptual representations. Students
         using the function-centered hypermedia developed deeper understanding than those using the
         structure-centered version on one of the two measures. Implications and limitations are discussed.

Introduction
         Complex systems have the potential to be a unifying framework across many aspects of science education
(Jacobson & Wilensky, in press). However, such systems have many characteristics that make them difficult to
understand. They tend to be hierarchically organized and are comprised of multiple interdependent levels (Wilensky
& Resnick, 1999).  Moreover, the whole nature of the system cannot be predicted from isolated parts but occurs
through their interactions (Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo, in press).  These characteristics make them difficult for
students to understand (Feltovich, Coulson, & Spiro, 2001; Wilensky & Resnick, 1999).

         Hypermedia has been used to teach about complex systems (e.g., Azevedo, Cromley, & Seibert, 2004;
Jacobson & Archodidou, 2000).      Jacobson  &  Archodidou     (2000)   demonstrated  that  hypermedia  could  support
problem-centered learning about complex systems using design elements based on learning sciences principles.
They addressed the representational affordances of hypermedia in varied forms such as text, pictures, and digital
video, animations. Azevedo, Cromley, & Seibert (2004) examined the role of self-regulated learning in learning
from a complex systems hypermedia. Their study investigated various types of scaffolding techniques on supporting
learning of complex   topics with  hypermedia.  However,     little research has  been done   to  examine  the role of
conceptual representations underlying hypermedia. The study is an attempt to fill this gap and investigate how
alternative conceptual representations embodied in hypermedia can help middle school students better understand a
complex  system,  the human   respiratory  system. In  particular,   we   contrasted two  alternative  SBF conceptual
representations by asking students using two different versions of hypermedia to learn about the human respiratory
system.

Obstacles to Learning about Complex Systems
         Novices in a domain find complex systems difficult to understand (Hmelo-Silver & Pfeffer, 2004, Hmelo-
Silver, Marathe, & Liu, 2004; Marathe, Liu, & Hmelo-Silver, 2004; Jacobson, 2001). Thinking about complex
systems  is often counterintuitive and taxes  working  memory       resources   (Feltovich,  Coulson,  &  Spiro, 2001;
Narayanan & Hegarty, 1998). Novices have a piecemeal understanding of complex systems because education about
complex phenomena often ignores the phenomena themselves and instead has learners focus on memorizing the
names of the parts of the system (AAAS, n.d.). Thus, it is not surprising that most people understand complex
systems as collections of parts with little understanding of the multiple levels and interdependencies with the system
(Hmelo-Silver & Pfeffer, 2004; Hmelo-Silver et al., 2004).

         In general, novices tend to focus on superficial details and have difficulty seeing the underlying principles
that are visible to experts, and complex systems are no exception (Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). Previous
research has shown that novices tend to think about the human respiratory system and the aquarium system as

                                                         439                                                  ICLS 2006
composed of isolated structures whereas experts tend to integrate behavioral and functional perspectives of the
composed elements in the systems (Hmelo-Silver et al., 2004; Hmelo-Silver & Pfeffer, 2004). We also found that
novices focus on perceptually salient macroscopic phenomena (e.g., lungs, rib) in the human respiratory system,
whereas experts went beyond the visible structures and consider the invisible and microscopic phenomena (e.g.,
diffusion, cellular respiration).  The   results suggest  that   experts use  a  structure-behavior-function   conceptual
representation  for reasoning  and  that these conceptual     representations   play  an important   cognitive function in
building a deep understanding of complex systems. It is, however, always implicit in many learning resources.

         In order to facilitate students to learn about complex systems, it is necessary to provide artifacts that use
appropriate conceptual representations that are consistent with how experts understand and reason in the domain.
Previous research (Hmelo-Silver et al., 2004) led us to hypothesize that SBF is such a conceptual representation. It
can be embodied by hypermedia to mediate student understanding. We hypothesize that alternative conceptual
representations, underlying different versions of the hypermedia, might lead to differences in learning processes as
well as outcomes.

SBF Conceptual Representation Embodied in Hypermedia
         Hypermedia uses varieties of media, such as diagrams, text, and animation, to represent knowledge systems
in a non-linear fashion. In addition to concrete representations, such as diagrams, hypermedia can also embody
conceptual representations thus help learners to think more like "experts". Some research has investigated the
relation between hypermedia, conceptual representations, and cognitive models (Eklund, 1995; Jacobson, Maouri,
Mishra, & Kolar, 1996; Jonassen, 1992). For example, Eklund (1995) suggested that if learning is facilitated by the
formation  of node-linked structures  in  the  learner's cognitive    model,  it was   possible to maximize    learning in
hypermedia by using an expert's construction of the domain to form the basis for the creation of nodes and links.
Jacobson, Maouri, Mishra, and Kolar (1996) claimed that non-experts lacked an interconnected understanding of the
deep structure of knowledge, thus hypermedia should embed explicit cognitive modeling to facilitate student
learning. The fundamental assumption is that the conceptual representation underlying hypermedia can map fairly
well to human knowledge structures and facilitate learning. Our assumption is that if the underlying conceptual
representation of hypermedia can make the expert models of how they organize and solve problems overt and
tangible to students, it can help students organize knowledge in an efficient way and build a deep understanding. In
this study, we use a structure-behavior-function (SBF) representation to frame the knowledge structures in the
domain of the human respiratory system (Goel et al., 1996). This representation is effective for reasoning about
complex systems, as the expert-novice studies demonstrated, and is a cultural tool for reasoning in the biological
sciences (e.g., Tabak  & Baumgartner,     2004).   In the     SBF representation,  structure  refers to the elements   that
comprise a system, such as lungs, alveoli, ribs, and diaphragm. Behavior refers to how these elements operate and
coordinate to make the system work as a whole. For example, the blood carries oxygen and carbon dioxide in
capillaries to conduct the gas exchange with the gas in alveoli. Functions refer to the roles of each element in the
system as well as the role of the whole system. For example, the function of alveoli is to provide enough surface
area for gas exchange in the respiratory system.

         The navigation sequence in hypermedia can guide students' thinking by making the SBF conceptual
representation explicit. For example, in order to foreground function, the links in the hypermedia can lead students
to first explore the functional aspects of the system and only later the structural aspects. So for the respiratory
system, a functional orientation might lead students to explore why we need oxygen and then how we transport it
and finally, the structures that are used to accomplish this. A structural orientation would do the opposite.

         For  this  research, we  designed  two   versions    of  the hypermedia      system to embody    two  alternative
conceptual  representations.  Since our  interest  lies  in   investigating the  role of conceptual   representations,  we
controlled the content and amount of information in both versions so that the only difference was in the underlying
conceptual representation that is used to organize the navigation pages in hypermedia (Figure 1). We used the
organizational structure of the hypermedia to guide students' explorations.      However, the students were instructed to
freely explore the hypermedia pages. The observation during the experiments showed that most students followed
the expected navigation sequence in both conditions. The Function-centered hypermedia embodied a function-
oriented conceptual representation by stressing information about how the system works and how parts of the
system   behave  and  interrelate  with  each  other.   The   navigation    sequence  generally  moves   from   functional
information to behavioral and finally to the structural. In order to do that, we designed two big functional questions
on the main navigation page: "Why do we need oxygen?" and "How does oxygen get into our body?"                 Clicking on

                                                            440                                                  ICLS 2006
the links from the two questions led students to the functional aspects of the system, such as cellular respiration and
diffusion. Then the links on the functional pages led the students to the behaviors and the links on the behavioral
pages to the structures. In contrast, the structure-centered hypermedia sequence was generally ordered from the
structural knowledge to the behavioral and finally to the functional. In a manner similar to most traditional textbooks
(AAAS, n.d.), the structure-centered hypermedia uses a conceptual representation that emphasizes the structures that
compose the system. The main page of the structure-centered hypermedia displays a diagram with all the structures
labeled and linked to respective structures, then the behaviors and finally the function. They can then explore
behavioral and functional aspects of those structures. In summary the two versions of hypermedia embody two
alternative conceptual representations   of the human  respiratory  system, namely     a function-centered versus a
structure-centered representation.

                                   Figure 1. Opening screens of F and S hypermedia.

Method
Participants
       Forty-two seventh grade students from a suburban public middle school volunteered to participate in this
study. They were from two classes taught by one teacher and were randomly assigned to one of the two conditions:
the function-centered condition (F-hypermedia) and the structure-centered condition (S-hypermedia).

Materials
       We designed two versions of hypermedia for students to learn about the human respiratory system: the
function-centered (F-) and structure-centered (S)- hypermedia. The only difference across the two conditions was
the version of hypermedia they used to learn about the human respiratory system. The content of both hypermedia
systems was strictly controlled. Both shared the same information and most pages were the same in both versions.
The major difference between these two versions of hypermedia was in their underlying organization framework,
which embodied different conceptual representations. In the F-hypermedia, the embodied conceptual representation
was function-oriented. That is, the organization of the hypermedia system was on functions of the system. In
contrast, the organization of the S-hypermedia was on the structures, as described above. In addition, another
purpose of the two versions of hypermedia was to use the embedded navigation sequence in the hypermedia to
influence students' exploration sequence. Students using the F-hypermedia began their exploration with two big
functional and behavioral questions (see in Figure 1), which led them to the functions and behaviors of the system.
Then they would explore the respective names of the parts. On the other hand, students using the S-hypermedia
began their navigation from a diagram with labels of the structures of the system.

Procedure
       The study was conducted in a lab at the middle school using laptop computers. Half the laptops displayed
the main page of the F-hypermedia and the other half displayed the main page of the S-hypermedia. Students
explored the hypermedia for about 40 minutes. Later that week, students completed a written posttest to assess their
understanding of the respiratory system. The posttest asked students to draw the system and answer a number of
open-ended questions.

                                                          441                                                 ICLS 2006
Coding and Analyses
        In order to contrast the different effects of alternative conceptual representations on student learning about
the human respiratory system, we conducted two levels of coding on the post-test: a mental model analysis and an
SBF analysis. All the coding was conducted blind to condition. In both analyses, one primary researcher conducted
the majority of the coding and a second independent rater coded 20% of the posttests. The inter-rater agreement was
above 90% in both cases.

        The SBF analysis used a fine-grained coding to assess the students understanding in terms of SBF. Any
mention of parts of the system, such as lungs, ribs, was coded as a structure, mention of mechanisms were coded as
behaviors, and mention of roles in the system as function (see Hmelo, Holton, & Kolodner, 2000 for details). In
addition, we divided the components of the human respiratory system into the salient and nonsalient levels. The
salient level includes understanding of macro level phenomena involved with external respiration, such as airways,
brain, diaphragm, heart, lungs, muscles, ribs, which are surface organs noticeable to students. The nonsalient level
includes understanding of micro level phenomena related to gas exchange, transport, and internal respiration, such
as alveoli, blood, capillaries, cellular respiration, red blood      cells, vascular system. The  mental  model  coding
attempted to capture the holistic level of the student's understanding after using the hypermedia.    Based on previous
research (Hmelo-Silver, Marathe, & Liu, 2004), we identified five categories of mental models of the human
respiratory system as shown in Table 1. The models progress from simple, structure-based models to more elaborate,
interconnected models that consider behaviors and functions.

Table 1. Human respiratory system mental models.

Mental Model                                                         Description
Egocentric               Limited understanding of the structures involved.         These structures are thought to exist
                         independently and their connections are not understood.       The person also thinks of his/her
                         own lungs as central.
Simple Healthy           Lungs are regarded as central but the model also has a limited understanding of other
Lung                     structures like heart, diaphragm and ribs. Though the person understands that the other
                         organs influence lungs, the functional relationships are not understood.
Healthy Body             Understanding centered on the respiratory system as a whole. There is some understanding
                         of the  functional  and behavioral        interdependence  and interactions between   different
                         structures.
Pragmatic                An expert view with elaborate systemic structure, behavior and functional connections.
                         The lungs are central and the other knowledge radiates outwards from them.
Hierarchical             An expert view with elaborate systemic structure, behavior and functional connections.
                         There is an understanding of the centrality of controlling mechanisms (e.g. regulation by
                         brain) for the proper functioning of the respiratory system.

Results
         We hypothesized that there would be differences across conditions, particularly in behaviors and
functions. Secondly, we hypothesized that the F-hypermedia would help students understand the nonsalient
phenomena better than the S-hypermedia because the nonsalient phenomena are critical for understanding the
ultimate function of the system--to provide oxygen for cellular metabolism and remove waste products. Finally, we
hypothesized that there would be difference across conditions in the level of mental model. We summarize the
findings here, each statistically reliable at the p < .05 level.

        A Chi square test was conducted to compare the mental model levels across conditions. Among the total 41
students, 13 students' mental models were identified as the egocentric level, 22 as the simple healthy lung level, and
6 as the healthy body level. None of them reached the fourth and fifth level. We did not any find differences for the
mental model (c2 (1, 39)= .72) analysis across conditions. In both conditions, the majority distribution of students'
mental models   remained    at the low levels  (the egocentric      and the  simple  healthy lung level) after using  the
hypermedia   intervention.  ANOVA     tests followed  to compare       the  SBF concepts understanding   using  types of
hypermedia as the independent variable and structures, behaviors and functions as dependent variables. As shown in
Table 2, an ANOVA demonstrated that the students using the F-hypermedia identified more behaviors than the S-

                                                          442                                                     ICLS 2006
hypermedia groups (F (1,39)=8.30, p<. 05) and a trend towards more functions (F (1,39)=3.72. p=. 06). There was
no difference for structures.

Table 2. Means and standard deviations of total SBF by hypermedia type.

              Group                  N              Structure           Behavior             Function
            F-hypermedia             21            8.62 (2.75)          2.47 (1.75)          5.09 (2.53)
            S-hypermedia             20            7.45 (1.96)          1.20 (  .95)         3.65 (2.25)

         Table 3 shows that students using the F-hypermedia identified more non-salient phenomena than students
using the S-hypermedia (F(1, 39)= 8.20, p=.007 for structures, F(1, 39)= 6.19, p=.017 for behaviors, and F(1, 39)=
9.21, p=.004 for functions). However, there were no differences for the salient structures, behaviors or functions.

Table 3. Means and standard deviations of nonsalient SBF by hypermedia type.

              Group                     N                                   Nonsalient
                                                         S                      B                        F
           F-hypermedia                 21          3.29 (1.31)              .67 (.86)             1.95 (1.40)
           S-hypermedia                 20          2.15 (1.23)              .15 (.37)             .75 (1.12)

Discussion
         Understanding the differences in conceptual representation between expert and novice is a critical starting
point in developing the instructional materials because it points to the kinds of domain-specific thinking that are
useful. The SBF conceptual representation captures the features of expert thinking about this domain, and thus may
have the potential to facilitate student learning about the complex systems.   Moreover, putting function first may
also make the information more coherent. By stressing what the system does, how it accomplishes its function, and
finally the structures involved,   learners focus on deep     understanding  of the   whole rather than    superficial
understanding of isolated parts. This study compared the effects of two different versions of hypermedia embodying
alternative conceptual representations on student learning in a single domain. Overall the results of the SBF analyses
demonstrated that the function-centered hypermedia helps students develop a deeper understanding of complex
systems by moving their focus from superficial structural knowledge to the deep interrelated functions and behaviors
as evidenced by their improved understanding of nonsalient structures, behaviors, and functions. We did not find
any differences in the mental model analysis across conditions. However, Compared with the previous baseline
study (Hmelo-Silver, Marathe, & Liu, 2004), the student mental models went from the egocentric level at baseline to
a modal model at the simple healthy lung level. This result implies that even though students' mental model of the
human respiratory system did not differ across conditions, the hypermedia intervention did help students understand
the human respiratory system and that both versions of hypermedia helped students construct a more sophisticated
mental model than the students in the expert-novice baseline study. It is also notable that in both conditions, students
were more   likely to mention   behaviors than students in the  expert-novice  study.  We suspect that even in the
structure condition, there is more function and behavior information than in a standard text. This could be the reason
for the improvement of mental model level compared with the previous baseline data.

         In addition to the mental model analysis, the fine-grained SBF coding successfully captured the effects of
alternative conceptual representations on complex systems learning. Students, rarely notice non-salient phenomena,
because they are invisible and dynamic. The students in F-hypermedia condition better understood the nonsalient
functional and behavioral aspects of the system than the S-hypermedia students as indicated by the improved student
understanding of the system. This result might be contributed to the different conceptual representation underlying
the F-hypermedia. The function-oriented conceptual representation highlights connections between salient and
nonsalient phenomena. Thus students were able to see the link between the functions of nonsalient structures, the
functions of the salient structures, and the function of the whole respiratory system, which was previously ignored
by them. In contrast, without such a link, the structure-oriented hypermedia embodied the piecemeal conceptual
representation, which failed to help students realize the importance of nonsalient phenomena. The results indicate
that the SBF conceptual representation can be used as an instructional tool to help students organize and make
connections among the huge amount of information (salient or nonsalient) in complex systems.

                                                          443                                                ICLS 2006
        In order to replicate the results for other systems, and further investigate the effect of alternative conceptual
representations we are currently developing additional hypermedia for learning about aquarium ecosystems. In
addition, we are embedding the SBF representation in a curriculum that will be implemented in middle school
classrooms in the coming year. Emerging theories of learning and thinking stresses the importance of integrating the
roles of context, experience, and active engagement of learners (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999). Hence, in addition to
the static hypermedia systems, we are developing computer simulations that help make behaviors and functions
visible and more importantly provide opportunities for students to test and repair their ideas. We have developed
simulations of gas movement and exchange in the alveoli and oxygen uptake at the cellular level. Students will be
able to manipulate the variables and observe the difference these changes will make to the system at different levels
and as a whole. This interaction with the complex causal system will also make the connections between different
behaviors and functions explicit. For example, as students increase the need for energy, they will be able to see how
this one change affects the oxygen demand, breathing rate, and heart rate. Moreover students will be able to see how
these changes happen simultaneously and not just observe the end point differences. We feel that this dynamic
interaction will help  students  better understand the nature    of complex systems.    It will    also aid  them   in
conceptualizing the system as function-driven. Overall the results of this study can inform future curriculum design
in science education demonstrating that foregrounding function may be an effective approach to facilitating learning
about complex systems.

Conclusion
        In  considering the differences   between  expert    and novice thinking, it is evident      that conceptual
representation matters. The SBF representation can be used in the hypermedia system to guide and support growth
in student understanding about complex systems. Indeed, it can help student learning in two ways: 1) Making the
functional perspective salient helps students see the interrelationships within a complex system; 2) The interrelated
functions facilitate student to notice the existence of nonsalient elements that play extremely important role in the
system.

References
AAAS. (n.d.). AAAS Project 2061 Biology Textbooks Evaluation. Retrieved November 19, 2003, 2003, from
        http://www.project2061.org/research/textbook/hsbio/about.htm
Azevedo, R., & Cromley, J.G. (2004). Does training on self-regulated learning facilitate students' learning with
        hypermedia? Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3), 523-535.
Chi, M., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and
        novices. Cognitive Science, 5,121-152.
Eklund, J. (1995). Cognitive models for structuring hypermedia and implications for learning from the World-Wide-
        Web. Proceedings of Ausweb' 95, pp. 111-116.
Feltovich, P. J., Coulsen, R. L., Spiro, R. J., & Dawson-Saunders, B. K. (1992). Knowledge application and transfer
        for complex tasks in ill-structured domains: Implications for instruction and testing in biomedicine. In D.
        Evans & V. L. Patel (Eds.), Advanced models of cognition for medical training and practice (pp. 213-244).
        Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Goel, A. K., Gomez de Silva Garza, A., Grué, N., Murdock, J. W., Recker, M. M., & Govinderaj, T. (1996).
        Towards designing learning environments: Exploring how devices work. In C. Fraisson, G. Gauthier & A.
        Lesgold (Eds.), Intelligent tutoring systems: Lecture notes in computer science. NY: Springer.
Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D., & Kolodner, J. L. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 9, 247-298.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. & Azevedo, R. (in press). Understanding complex systems: Some core challenges.      Journal of
        the Learning Sciences.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2004, August). Understanding complex systems: An expert-novice
        comparison.   Paper presented at annual meeting of the American Psychological Association.   Honolulu, HI.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex system from
        the perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. Cognitive Science, 28, 127-138.
Jacobson, M. J. & Archodidou, A. (2000). The design of hypermedia tools for learning: Fostering conceptual change
        and transfer of complex scientific knowledge. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9, 145-199.
Jacobson, M. J., Maouri, C., Mishra, P., & Kolar, C. (1996). Learning with hypertext learning environments:
        Theory, design, and research. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 5, 239-281.

                                                         444                                                 ICLS 2006
Jacobson, M. J. & Wilensky, U. (in press). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importance
       and implications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Jonassen, D. H. (1992). Designing hypertext for learning. In E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.), New Directions in
       Educational Technology (pp. 124-130). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Marathe, S., Liu, L. & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). A breath of fresh air: Alternative approaches to learning about
       complex systems.  In Y. B. Kafai,      W.   A. Sandoval, N. Enyedy,    A. S.  Nixon, & F. Herrera.     (Eds.),
       Proceedings of ICLS 2004 (p. 621). Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Tabak, I., & Baumgartner, E. (2004). The teacher as partner: Exploring participant structures, symmetry, and
       identity work in scaffolding. Cognition and Instruction, 22, 393-429.
Wilensky, U. & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems perspective to making sense of the
       world. Journal of Science Education and Technology. 8, 19.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NSF CAREER Grant # 0133533 to Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation.

                                                        445                                                  ICLS 2006
