      Using interviews to investigate implicit knowledge in computer
                                                  programming
                                            Rebecca Mancy, Norman Reid
                Centre for Science Education, University of Glasgow, 11 Eldon Street, Glasgow G3 6NH
                                Rebecca.Mancy@educ.gla.ac.uk, N.Reid@mis.gla.ac.uk

         Abstract: The notions of implicit learning and implicit of tacit knowledge first became popular in
         the 1960s (Reber, 1967; Polanyi, 1967).        However, they have rarely been applied to education.
         Most    empirical studies  of implicit learning  and  knowledge     have used   experimental  paradigms.
         We argue that in order for these notions to be investigated in real-world educational situations,
         other research methods are necessary.     In light of this, we report the results of an interview study
         of implicit   knowledge    in computer   programming      education.    Several cues  that  helped  us  to
         determine that knowledge was implicit are explained and illustrated with examples.          We conclude
         the interviews can be useful in investigating nonconscious knowledge and offer some observations
         concerning implicit knowledge about programming that became apparent from this study.

Introduction
         Implicit learning first appeared in cognitive psychology in 1967 with the work of Reber (1967), the same
year that the philosopher of science, Michael Polanyi, published The Tacit Dimension (Polanyi, 1967).              Although
implicit knowledge     has  been  investigated  in both   philosophy     and  psychology,   we   shall concentrate   on the
psychological literature as we feel this offers greater insights into the processes by which this knowledge is gained.
As a consequence, we use the vocabulary associated with that area of research.            Reber introduced the Artificial
Grammar Learning paradigm with experiments that use strings of letters generated by a complicated rule base (the
strings were generated using a finite-state machine).    Artificial Grammar Learning experiments usually take place in
two parts: a learning and a testing phase.  Participants see letter strings generated by the artificial grammar and are
required to carry   out a  task  on these  words   (for example,    they may  be  asked  to repeat   them  back  correctly).
Following the learning phase, subjects are informed of the existence of the grammar underlying the patterns in the
letter strings. During a second phase (the testing phase), participants see letter strings that they have to classify as
conforming to the rules of the grammar or not.       Alternatively, they may see pairs of letter strings, one of which
conforms to the rules of the grammar, whereas the other does not, and must choose between the strings (for further
discussions of the procedure, see Pacton, Perruchet, Fayol and Cleeremans, 2001).

         The    empirical  finding  from   such   experiments    is that  participants  are able  to   correctly  categorise
grammatical strings at above chance level, even though they are unable to articulate the rules governing the material
(Reber, 1967).    In other words, participants act as though they possess abstract rules, but if this is the case, these
rules are not declarative, and participants usually claim no conscious awareness of the rules.      We use the term `high-
level abstraction'  to  describe knowledge    structures that  embody    such  regularities beyond     reference to specific
concrete  examples.    Implicit  learning  of   regularities has    been shown    to be   robust  with   numerous    studies
unambiguously demonstrating the same phenomenon.             Similar results have been found for other implicit learning
tasks where     underlying rules are   apparently learnt but  that  participants  cannot articulate.   Examples include a
simplified version of the artificial grammar task where four-digit strings were used, each containing an invariant
digit (McGeorge and Burton, 1990), interactive computer-based tasks with complex underlying mechanisms (e.g.
the Berry and Broadbent sugar factory and "Clegg" tasks (Berry and Broadbent, 1984), and serial reaction tasks
participants appear to be able to predict one instance from those preceding it (Nissen & Bullemer, 1987).

         The diverse nature of these tasks indicates that implicit learning is not simply a specific process confined to
grammar   learning.    What  all of  these tasks  have   in  common   is  the need   to  acquire sensitivity to  a  complex
underlying pattern, although as noted by Seber, different mechanisms may be at work when detecting different kinds
of regularities.   For  example,   some  have   claimed  that  learning  such  regularities in   natural language   may  be
supported by an innate Universal Grammar (Chomsky, 1965), but this argument presumably does not apply to the
acquisition of programming knowledge.      Although most empirical studies of implicit learning have concentrated on
local perceptual patterns (Goswami, 2004), Kuhn and Dienes (2005) found implicit learning of a non-local musical
rule, leading us to think that it may be useful to investigate less superficial forms of implicit learning.

                                                             460                                                   ICLS 2006
Implicit and Explicit Learning in Education
          The distinction between knowledge that is acquired and encoded with or without conscious awareness is
relevant  to education  both   during learning and    also    assessment.  If we assume that both modes of learning are
possible, the question in education becomes one of identifying those aspects of a task that are learnt more efficiently
via one or the other process, in order to best exploit these two modalities.         In doing so, it is necessary to be clear
about not   only the  kinds  of knowledge    that   are best   gained implicitly or    explicitly, but similarly  how    we  can
encourage this learning to take place.    Teaching strategies that foster implicit and explicit learning are likely to be
different.   However, the reasons to use one strategy or another may vary: for example, it may be that in foreign
language education, better long-term proficiency is gained by implicit learning of grammatical structure (and this
would need to be confirmed), so despite the fact that teachers are fully able to explain the rules explicitly, and that
learners can integrate these to an extent in either way, an implicit learning strategy may be preferable.            However,
other regularities - for example the plan structures in programming - may not be conscious or declarative for the
teacher, and as such he or she can only hope to set up situations in which they can be learned implicitly.

          From   the  point of  view   of testing,  educators    need  to  be  aware   that students   may     have  declarative
knowledge    of some   aspects  of their  learning, whilst    other aspects   remain   impossible  or  difficult to consciously
describe.    Implicit and   explicit knowledge    need     to be  tested  differently: we   can ask   students   to recall their
declarative  knowledge;   that  which  is stored  implicitly   can  only  be  reliably examined    by  testing performance   on
pertinent tasks.  It  may   be  that this distinction   is made    naturally, since, for example,     testing second  language
proficiency using questions that probe students' declarative knowledge of grammar would for most appear counter-
intuitive, and comparing skiers on their ability to recount what they are doing when they ski is nigh on farcical.
However, this is no guarantee that inconsistencies will not occur and as such clearly distinguishing the two types of
knowledge could guard against such problems.

Investigating real-world implicit learning
          Despite the importance of the distinction between implicit and explicit learning in education, it has proven
very difficult to find studies in the education literature that discuss implicit learning.   Perhaps it is not surprising that
little research into implicit learning has been carried out in the field of education. As Claxton (1998) points out:

          In many areas of public and even private life, the Cartesian model has led to the assumption that
          explicit, articulate thinking is the most powerful form of cognition -- the one to be trained most
          assiduously in schools, colleges and universities, and the one to be relied upon most heavily in
          formal situations of learning, problem-solving or decision-making. Ways of knowing that are hazy
          or metaphorical   have   consequently     tended    to be  skimped,   rushed,  concealed     or denigrated.
          (Claxton, 1998)

          Mathews (1997) explains that it is the narrow focus of research on implicit learning that is to blame for its
lack of penetration into areas such as education:

          Scientific debates tend to focus our attention on narrower and (hopefully) clearer issues, as authors
          try to isolate phenomena and prove a point. [...] Our research methods bias us to look for "it", the
          one true feature that will clearly separate implicit from explicit learning.       As students of human
          knowledge, we should know better. (Mathews, 1997, p39)

          Mathews claims that by concentrating almost exclusively on fine-tuning the distinction between implicit
and explicit learning, researchers are failing to apply what we do know to real-life situations such as education.
Similarly, since the research in this area is strongly rooted within experimental psychology, most studies of implicit
learning   have attempted   to control as  many    parameters    as possible,  thereby   concentrating    on  tasks that are far
removed from the complex learning that takes place in real-world learning situations.           Indeed, whilst rigour should
clearly be maintained, in order to elucidate the issues arising in educational situations, we may need to emphasise
synthesis and studies of complex learning as opposed to critical analysis of pure cases (Mathews, 1997).              This may
mean the development new research methods, or adaptation of techniques such as interviews.                 However, there are
methodological issues with eliciting knowledge that is unconscious via interviews.

                                                               461                                                    ICLS 2006
Interviews as a data source in investigations of implicit knowledge
         There are problems with using interviews in investigations of implicit learning, some of which have been
discussed elsewhere.  In interview studies, we ask participants to give a verbal report of some knowledge.     In such
interviews, subjects are essentially asked to retrieve information from short-term or long-term memory.      However,
verbal reports may   depart from   the actual knowledge    possessed   if not  all information in  memory  is  reported
(Ericsson & Simon, 1980).    Nisbett and Wilson (1977) suggest that what is reported by interviewees depends on
their own perception of their understanding, and that subjects tend to offer explanations that seem plausible to them.
If they are unsure of their knowledge, they may choose to report nothing or give an alternative explanation that
seems more plausible than the real explanation.  These situations could arise in the case of either implicit or explicit
knowledge.

         An additional hurdle when studying unconscious knowledge is that conscious and unconscious knowledge
may co-occur, and probably often do in real-life learning situations.  If a subject has conscious knowledge, he or she
is likely to offer this knowledge when asked a question about it.       However, we cannot imply from this that no
unconscious knowledge is present.     Additionally, the fact that an interviewee is able to offer explicit knowledge
during an interview does not guarantee that this knowledge is operative in a task situation: it could be that in such
situations, implicit knowledge determines behaviour.     It is difficult to demonstrate unconscious knowledge except
when behaviour is not explained by conscious knowledge.        This problem has plagued research in implicit learning
since the beginning.

         However, the situation is not perhaps as desperate as it sounds.  As Baars (1997), points out, experiential or
verbal reports have been extremely important in the development of knowledge in areas such as sensory processes,
imagery and immediate memory, so may also be useful for implicit knowledge.

Empirical study - identifying implicit knowledge from interview data
         In an attempt  to  investigate  whether interview     data can be  used   to gain  information  about implicit
knowledge,  we  devised a   series of interview questions  to  investigate implicit knowledge   in programming.     The
questions specifically addressed decision points in programming, and related to concepts that could be abstracted out
from the regularities seen in examples.  Specifically, students were asked how they went about choosing between
possible language structures, and   as a follow-up question,   whether    they had  thought about  this particular issue
previously. Example questions are included as part of the excerpts in the following subsections of this paper.       In
some cases, we knew that explanations had been taught in lectures whereas for others no explicit teaching had been
given.  For example, students had been given an explicit rule by the programming lecturer to help them choose
between different types of loop.   The rule stated that if the number of loops was known in advance, then a for loop
should be used, and a while should be used otherwise.      On the other hand, students had not been given a simple
explicit rule that would help them make a decision about when to use an array.

         The students who participated in the interviews were first year students studying introductory computer
programming in Ada during 2003-2004.      The interviews were conducted towards the end of the course, some before
and some after the Easter break.   Ethics approval was granted for students to take part in the interviews, and twelve
students were recruited as volunteers via requests in the lectures and by email..      All of the students were male,
although this may simply represent the difference in the number of males and females taking the course.        Twelve
interviews were carried out using a semi-structured procedures, with interviews lasting approximately an hour, and
participants being paid for their time and assistance.

         The interviews were tape-recorded and transcribed in full by the investigators, with attention being paid to
aspects such as hesitation. A grounded theory approach was used to identify statements that seemed to indicate
implicit knowledge, and later to categorise them according to the indicators of the implicit status of that knowledge.
The investigators deliberately excluded any statements that appeared to indicate implicit knowledge but where it was
felt that the form of the response may have been influenced by the interviewer.     The results of the categorisation of
indicators of implicit knowledge are shown below and are accompanied by illustrative excerpts.          The extracts are
taken from interviews with students who performed well in the examinations.        This was done because with students
who perform poorly, it is difficult to know whether apparent lack of knowledge is due to an inability to articulate
implicit knowledge, or rather an underlying lack of knowledge.

                                                           462                                                 ICLS 2006
Little or no knowledge about how skill is utilised
          Perhaps the most obvious sign of implicit knowledge is when an interviewee claims not to know how he or
she achieves success in a particular skill.   It may be that until the question was asked, the learner is not even aware
that he or   she  has  knowledge   in this area.  The excerpt   below concerns    the    use    of semicolons    as `statement
terminators' in Ada (rather like the use of full stops / periods in English).

          Interviewer ­ How do you decide when to use a semicolon?
          Victor - ... I don't, I just do it. Occasionally like ... erm, I just ... it's when, it comes naturally
          when I'm typing something.
          In this extract, Victor  gives the  impression that he does not     explicitly know      how he   goes   about  using
semicolons, or where they should be used.        Quite simply, it `comes naturally', apparently without any conscious
consideration or deliberation.

Claims of difficulty in articulating knowledge
          In the following excerpt, Halsey indicates that he is aware that he has some knowledge, but explicitly states
that this knowledge is difficult to articulate.  The question relates to the situations when an array should be used
when writing a computer program.

          Interviewer ­ How do you decide when to use an array?
          Halsey - ... erm, from, to start you'd say, is there ... lots of the same type of ... variable ... needed,
          [ahuh] so something like ... it's got lots of different ... for ... er values for the same thing. [sure]  ...
          I'm just trying to think. I'm terrible with wording things.
          Halsey  appears  to be  aware  that he possesses some    knowledge    about    this concept,  and   is even   able  to
partially describe the situations when using arrays might be appropriate.        However, his explanation is incomplete
and he also seems aware that it does not fully explain his ability to decide between different data structures.           As a
result, he makes the statement that he finds it difficult to express his ideas. It could be argued that this knowledge is
conscious but that it is represented in a form that is difficult to articulate in words. However, when it was suggested
to Halsey that it might be easier to explain things using a picture or by writing something down, he felt that would
not help. As a consequence it appears that whatever the representation of Halsey's knowledge, it does not translate
well to any of the forms of communication suggested.

Reliance on concrete examples
          During   the interviews,  students  frequently failed to be able    to provide      a high-level   abstraction   of a
computer programming concept, and resorted to use of examples.       The excerpt below is a continuation of the extract
above.

          Interviewer ­ you can write anything down if it's easier for you, or draw pictures, or ... it's up to
          you, I mean ...
          Halsey ­ It's probably easier talking.  No, that's not much help! [laughs] er, ... actually, when you
          use an array it's ... useful for ... erm ... lots ... of the same thing held like, if you're wanting to ....
          hold the number of cups of tea you drink in a day, you would have like you know the numbers
          would be day one to seven would be your day ... and inside each would be your number of cups
          of tea.
          After a few aborted attempts to state generically the conditions under which he might use an array, Halsey
resorts to giving an example.     He seems much more confident when describing his example, and is consequently
more fluent in his description of the concrete example than of the abstract rule.        This particular example was not
considered in lectures, so it may be his own example, invented on-the-fly, although he may have read about it or
seen it at school.  It seems as though, for Halsey, the example embodies the concept.            A similar phenomenon has
been seen in mathematics education where students appear to use concrete examples as prototypes (Tall & Pinto,
2002).  However, this example does not simply exist as an isolated example: Halsey is not entirely incapable of
accessing anything pertinent to an abstraction, but the high-level abstraction is implicit in the sense that it is too

                                                           463                                                       ICLS 2006
imprecise or inaccessible in a form that would allow him to explain his ideas coherently without reference to a
concrete example.

Use of language as an indicator of implicit knowledge
         A further cue to identifying implicit knowledge of high-level abstractions is the language used by students
in their attempts  to describe concepts.  The  following   extract concerns  the use of code    indentation in      Ada  and
specifically the code structures with which indentation is used.

         Interviewer ­ Can you explain how you use indentation, how you indent your code, when you
         write it?
         Elwin ­ ah, yeah, ... ... generally I stick to sort of saving and using the reformat button [laughs] it
         puts it in the proper kind of way erm specially, seems to be that if it's a loop, it'll bring it in a bit,
         [ahuh] ... specialist thing so it's got to come in (sic) [ahuh] just makes it easier to read, sort of
         when you're going down (sic) or like or it almost lets you know that you're, sort of something
         different's coming [yeah], in a way, there's all sorts of things, put lines in (sic)
         Interviewer ­ so, it happens with loops; does it happen with anything else?
         Elwin ­ er, yeah, it happens ... if-then kind of statements, er ... yeah, it happens in ... ... a lot of
         things like that, I think it's mainly the things that are dependent on stuff and <inaudible> [ok],
         those kind of structures.
         Elwin does not simply offer a list of situations when it is conventional to use indentation.   He seems to see
the examples he does give as being representative of some higher-level concept or set, as evidenced by his use of
personal terms such as `specialist thing', or `something different', as well as expressions such as `things like that',
`kind of statements'.  However, none of his explanations would allow us to determine whether a particular case
would be a member of the set.    Set inclusion therefore seems to be implicit in the sense that although Elwin is aware
of some `sameness' of the elements of it, he is not aware of what would constitute a rule for set inclusion.

Surprise
         A final indicator of the existence of a high-level abstraction is surprise expressed when that abstraction is
discovered explicitly. In the following extract, Elwin has been asked to describe what might constitute a condition
of a while loop (for example, the "X<3" in "while      X<3 loop")

         Elwin ­ Oh, it could be say while ... ... technical ones like not  Found, where Found is sort of a
         Boolean value, er ... I suppose it could be any kind of expression sort of to do with ... while E is
         equal to five, or whatever [ahuh] just something that's ... take it there's gonna be a value to come
         back? [aha!]  Perhaps, does it always have to come back with a Boolean value, then?
         Interviewer ­ It does.
         Elwin ­ Yeah, it does, doesn't it! [Sounds surprised]
         Interviewer ­ You'd not thought about that before?
         Elwin ­ No ... no! [laughs]
         In this example, it appears that Elwin's prior knowledge concerning the kind of code segments that can be
used as conditions in a while loop was implicit, but that during the discussion this knowledge becomes explicit.         In
natural language learning literature, this phenomenon is known as `noticing' (Schmidt, 1990; Truscott, 1998).             It
should   perhaps be   noted that the student may  have  been  aware  of this regularity in    the past and subsequently
forgotten it.

Discussion
         The   interview studies  above  indicate that implicit  learning and abstract  structural   knowledge       can be
usefully investigated in real-world situations using research techniques that are adapted to such learning situations.
We have shown that students can possess knowledge of regularities without conscious access to that knowledge.            In
interview studies, implicit learning is not simply evidenced by an inability to report anything pertinent.          A whole
host of subtle clues such as hesitations, the time taken to formulate ideas, language such as `things like that' which

                                                          464                                                   ICLS 2006
indicates a higher-level concept, as well as surprise on noticing structural patterns can be used to gain evidence of
implicit learning.

         Furthermore,    interviews  offer much   richer sources   of information  about the  form  of   implicitly learned
information   than  experimental    studies.  For  example,  this  study   has  highlighted the  fact  that much    implicit
knowledge    seems  to lend  itself to explanation using   examples.   It  also appears  that implicit knowledge    is very
loosely structured, with ideas probably linked associatively as opposed to logically.       However, even in the highly
logical  area of  computer   programming,    the fact that knowledge    is stored  associatively appears  not to render   it
inoperable.

         Another example would be that the use of interviews has allowed us to see that with real-world knowledge,
a strict dichotomy between implicit and explicit knowledge may be inappropriate.         A graduated scale of conscious
status  of knowledge,    as  shown   below,  may  well   be more   useful   as  a framework   for  understanding    implicit
knowledge in educational settings (Mancy, 2006).

         1 - No awareness of any knowledge (subject does not realise that he or she has any knowledge).
         2 - Awareness of knowledge, but no awareness of its content (subject is aware that he or she must
         have some knowledge, but has no idea what that knowledge might be).
         3 - Some awareness of knowledge, but this knowledge is structured in a way that makes it difficult
         to communicated.
         4 - Structured declarative or explicit knowledge.
         Pragmatically, therefore, it appears that interview studies can be useful for investigating implicit knowledge
and learning   in real-world  situations.    However, the  rate of occurrence   of relatively unambiguous     evidence   for
implicit knowledge is fairly low making this mode of investigation somewhat inefficient.           This could perhaps be
improved   by  looking   at the type and   wording of  questions   used  so that  respondents  are  able to give pertinent
answers.   Investigating the type of questions that are likely to elicit useful information would therefore be a valuable
route for further study.

References
Baars, B. (1997). Some essential differences between consciousness and attention, perception, and working memory.
         Conscious Cognition, 6(2-3), 363-371.
Berry, D. C., & Broadbent, D. E. (1984). On the relationship between task performance and associated verbalizable
         knowledge. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 36(A), 209-231.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. MIT Press.
Claxton, G. (1998). Knowing without knowing why. The Psychologist, May, 217-220.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1980). Verbal reports as data. Psychological Review, 87, 215-251.
Kuhn, G., & Dienes, Z. (2005). Implicit learning of non-local musical rules. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
         Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 31, 1417­1432
Mancy, R. (2006) Explicit and implicit learning: the case of computer programming.             PhD Thesis, University of
         Glasgow.
Mathews, R. C. (1997). Is research painting a biased picture of implicit learning?       The dangers of methodological
         purity in scientific debate. Psychological Bulletin & Review, 4(1), 38-42.
McGeorge, P., & Burton, A. M. (1990). Semantic processing in an incidental learning task. The Quarterly Journal of
         Experimental Psychology, 42A(3), 597-609.
Nisbett, R.   E., & Wilson,   T. D.  (1977).  Telling more   than  we  can  know:   Verbal  reports on   mental processes.
         Psychological Review, 84, 231-259.
Nissen,  M.   J., &  Bullemer,   P. T.  (1987).  Attentional requirements    for  learning: Evidence   from   performance
         measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-32.
Pacton,  S.,  Perruchet, P.,  Fayol,   M., &  Cleeremans.   (2001).   Implicit  Learning Out   of  the Lab:  The    Case of
         Orthographic Regularities. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 130(3), 401-426.
Polanyi, M. (1967). The Tacit Dimension. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 6,
         855-863.

                                                            465                                                   ICLS 2006
Schmidt, R. W. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11, 129-158.
Seger, C. A. (1994). Implicit learning. Psychological Bulletin & Review, 115(2), 163-196.
Tall, D., & Pinto, M. (2002). Building formal mathematics on visual imagery: a case study and a theory. For the
       learning of mathematics, 22(1), 2-10.
Truscott, J. (1998). Noticing in second language acquisition: a critical review. Second Language Research, 14(2),
       103-135.

Acknowledgments
We would like to express our appreciation to the students who participated in this study.   We would also like to
thank the Professor Rex Whitehead and the anonymous reviewers for their comments that allowed us to clarify
various aspects of this article.

                                                           466                                                ICLS 2006
