  TEEMSS2: Technology Enhanced Elementary Math and Science -
                                                 Year 1 Report

   Shari Jackson Metcalf, Concord Consortium, 10 Concord Crossing, Suite 300, Concord, MA 01742,
                                                  shari@concord.org

         Abstract: Technology Enhanced Elementary Math and Science (TEEMSS2), has the goal of
         bringing the power of information and communication technology to science education in grades
         3--8, by creating and disseminating valuable, proven, and easily implemented technology-based
         science learning materials      and associated teacher  professional development.   The  project  has
         selected age-appropriate, standards-based content for which technology offers real advantages.
         The learning strategy is based on student investigations of real phenomena using sensors and of
         virtual environments based on computer models. The new materials take advantage of computers,
         sensors, handhelds, and electronic networking to more effectively teach students and give them
         deeper insights into the process of science inquiry. This paper reports on the year 1 formative
         evaluation of TEEMSS2, which showed both quantitative and qualitative evidence of student
         learning when teachers implemented the materials in their classrooms.

Background
         Technology is an essential part of modern science, but it is rarely used in elementary and middle school
science education. Computer and information technologies should be an integral part of elementary and middle
school science teaching, in ways that can greatly improve learning. In recognition of the importance of technology,
the National Science Education Standards (The National Research Council, 1995), the Benchmarks (AAAS, 1993)
and many state standards require the integration of technology into science education to facilitate student inquiry,
starting as early as first grade.

         Not all uses of technology are equally important for learning science. Multimedia documents, drill and
practice, Internet searches, and student-generated reports are increasingly commonplace and do have a role in
teaching and learning,  but       these applications skirt the  periphery of  science.  The  core of  science  is about
investigating, exploring, asking questions, analyzing, and thinking. Technology is uniquely able to support inquiry
in ways that are largely lacking in elementary science teaching: investigations of real events with probes and
investigations using highly interactive models.

         A substantial body       of research   shows  that  probeware can   facilitate student   learning of  complex
relationships (Adams & Shrum, 1990; Beichner, 1990; Friedler, Nachmias, & Linn, 1990; Krajcik & Layman, 1993;
Laws, 1997; Linn, Layman, & Nachmias, 1987). Similarly, models and simulations allow students to understand
through exploration the behavior of systems that are difficult or impossible to understand by other means (Beichner,
1990; Brassell, 1987; Mokros & Tinker, 1987; Thornton, 1997).

         TEEMSS2 (Technology Enhanced Elementary Math and Science) addresses the need for inquiry-based
technology for elementary and middle school science teaching through the production of 15 units keyed to the NSES
standards that take full advantage of probeware, models and simulations. In support of student activities, the project
is producing software, implementation assistance for teachers, and an online course and support for teachers. The
project is designed to work with whatever curriculum, computers, and probeware schools adopt.

Project Goals and Objectives
         The goal of the TEEMSS2 project is to bring the power of inquiry-based technology to science education in
grades 3-8, by creating and disseminating valuable, effective, and easily implemented technology-based science
learning materials and associated       teacher professional development.  The project   has selected age-appropriate,
standards-based content for which technology offers real advantages. The materials are modular so they can be
integrated with existing curricula or used on their own. The learning strategy is based on student investigations of
real phenomena using probes and of virtual environments based on mathematical models.

                                                            474                                                ICLS 2006
          TEEMSS2 is producing 15 units keyed to the National Science Education Standards (NSES) that take full
advantage of computers, sensors, and interactive models. Grade levels 3-4, 5-6, and 7-8 will have five units each,
targeting the   five NSES   standards:   Inquiry, Physical   Science,  Life    Science,  Earth   and Space  Science,  and
Technology and Design. Each unit contains two 1-week investigations, each with a discovery question, several
trials, analysis, and further investigations. There is also a teacher's version of each investigation, which contains
background material and a discussion guide. Table 1 shows the 15 curriculum units, by grade level and NSES
standard.

Table 1: TEEMSS2 curriculum units

    Standard                    Grades 3-4                           Grades 5-6                            Grades 7-8

Inquiry                Sound                               Water and air temperature             Air Pressure
                       Explore sound and vibrations        Mix fluids and measure                Explore soda bottle, balloons and
                       with a computer model               temperature changes with a            lungs with a gas pressure sensor
                                                           temperature sensor
Physical Science       Electricity                         Levers and machines                   Motion
                       Explore light bulbs, batteries,     Design and test your own              Graph, describe, and duplicate
                       and wires using a voltage           compound machine with a force         motion using a motion sensor
                       sensor                              sensor
Life Science           Sensing                             Monitoring a living plant             Adaptation
                       Compare electronic and              Monitor a living plant in a plastic   Explore population, selection
                       human sensing of your               bag with relative humidity and        pressure and adaptation with a
                       environment using temperature       light sensors                         computer model
                       and light sensors
Earth & Space          Weather                             Sun, Earth, Seasons                   Water cycle
Science                Observe and measure                 Connect planetary motion to           Study water phase changes and
                       weather-related changes with        day/night cycles and seasons          relate to terrestrial phenomena
                       temperature and relative            with a light sensor                   with temperature and light
                       humidity sensors                                                          sensors
Technology/            Design a playground                 Design a greenhouse                   Design a measurement
Engineering            Study your playground and           Build a working greenhouse            Choose something to measure
                       build models of several pieces      model and monitor temperature,        and devise a way to do it using
                       of playground equipment using       light, and relative humidity          any or all of the sensors
                       force and motion sensors            sensors

          The TEEMSS2      activities are   embedded    in software  (CCPortfolio)      that allows  students to read the
investigation, answer questions, collect data, analyze their results, and save their work within one application. It also
allows the collection of formative and summative assessment data, which is readily available through online teacher
reports.  CCPortfolio  is not specific   to any manufacturer     or platform.   It is designed    to work with   whatever
curriculum, computers, handhelds, and sensors schools may adopt. Seven different sensor developers are working
with the project to provide sensors to the teachers.

          The present TEEMSS2 project rests on a foundation provided by a prior TEEMSS pilot project. The pilot
project focused on developing just two units and testing them with three groups of teachers, supporting one group of
teachers with a face-to-face workshop and the other groups exclusively with online courses. Units that address the
NSES middle school force and motion and energy transfer standards were developed. Because teachers report that
these standards are difficult to achieve, they represented a challenging test of our approach. Pretests and posttests
aligned to the standards were given to students to measure their learning gains.

          The following are the major findings of the TEEMSS pilot project (Metcalf & Tinker, 2003):
              ·        Handhelds and probes are effective in inquiry learning environments. We observed gains in
                       student scores on standards-based tests in classrooms using TEEMSS materials that made
                       extensive use of handhelds and probes.

                                                            475                                                   ICLS 2006
            ·         Online teacher professional development is effective for preparing teachers to use inquiry-
                      based materials. We measured gains for students of teachers whose only preparation for using
                      these materials was through online teacher professional development.
            ·         Scaffolding    is  feasible with handhelds.   We developed     a   lab notebook technology         for
                      handhelds, CCPortfolio, that provided text support, combining applications, and assessing
                      student work.

Research Design
         The research goals for the TEEMSS2 project are to evaluate student learning of the targeted standards, and
to evaluate the components of the project: the materials, the teacher training, and the classroom implementation. The
TEEMSS2 research evaluation is designed as a two year classroom testing plan. The first year is a formative
evaluation of the first 6 units in the classrooms, during the second semester of the 2004-5 academic year. The second
year is a summative assessment of all 15 units during the 2005-6 academic year. This paper reports the results from
the first year of evaluation.

         Fifty-eight teachers were recruited to participate in the evaluation. Participating teachers were assigned to
one of two groups, 30 in Group 1 and 28 in Group 2. Group 1 teachers use the TEEMSS2 materials in both year 1
and year 2. Group 2 teachers use the TEEMSS2 materials only in year 2, but cover the content area of the units with
their students using their current classroom resources in year 1. Both groups apply pretests and posttests to their
students in both years 1 and 2. Analysis of the year 1 data allows comparison of student scores in the untreated vs.
treated groups. The year      1 and year 2 data   together allows a longitudinal  study   comparing  the effect of      the
TEEMSS2 materials on similar students taught by group 2 teachers before and after treatment, and for the group 1
teachers, the effects of teacher experience in the second year once they are familiar with using computers, sensors,
and interactive models for science education.

         The teachers groups were not matched, nor were teachers assigned to groups randomly, Participants were
assigned to groups based on the computers available at their schools; Group 1 teachers had desktop computers, and
Group 2 had handhelds. The reason for this division was that Group 2 teachers would not use the sensors until year
2, when the sensor interfaces for handhelds would be available for distribution.

         The primary purpose of identifying two groups of teachers was to conduct formative testing with a smaller
group in year 1, and summative evaluation with all of the teachers in year 2. The year 1 goals for Group 1 were to
try out the materials, technology, and software, obtain initial measures of student learning, identify materials that
need revision, and prepare for the summative test. The year 1 goals for Group 2 were to collect baseline data by
administering pretests and posttests in year 1, as they taught the content of the units using their current practices.

         The student pretests and posttests were developed in collaboration with external evaluators at SRI. The
tests consist of both multiple-choice and constructed-response questions. The test questions were drawn from
existing standardized tests, and supplemented by unit-specific questions developed for TEEMSS2. The questions
evaluate student learning of the standards which are targeted by the TEEMSS2 materials. Validity testing of the tests
was conducted in November, 2004 for the first nine tests, and a second round of validity testing was conducted in
September, 2005, for the remaining three tests. Approximately 60 - 100 students answered each test, and their
responses were analyzed in order to select questions that were appropriate for the target grade level, to evaluate
inter-rater reliability for scoring, and to compare student performance on matched pre/post variations of questions.

         In addition to the pretests and posttests, other data being collected includes teacher surveys, student
surveys, embedded assessments within the materials, and classroom observation. The surveys cover background,
experiences with  the materials,    opinions  and  reflections. The software     stores student answers  to embedded
assessment questions as they use the materials, which will supplement the assessment of student learning. Classroom
observations are being conducted by trained observers, using a observation protocol designed with the goals of
learning the range of ways in which the materials are used in the classroom, the effectiveness of the experience on a
particular day, and typical classroom experiences.

                                                           476                                                 ICLS 2006
Classroom Implementation in Year 1
       The 58 participating teachers in Year 1 were in 17 school districts, at 22 schools, with 1 to 8 participating
teachers per school. Teachers were recruited from across the state of Missouri, and 2 additional teachers in Texas.
Teachers were expected to use their classroom       or school      lab computers for  the  project; the project provided
CCPortfolio software and one classroom set of sensors to each school. Each classroom set included seven of each of
seven different probes: temperature, light, voltage, relative humidity, force, motion, and gas pressure. All sensors
were selected to be compatible with the types of computers available at that school.

       The  formative assessment for  Year  1       started     on February 1st  with  the on-line  teacher professional
development course. The course began with an introduction and review of inquiry in the classroom, and a discussion
of the goals of using sensors for science education. In week 3, teachers were given the CCPortfolio software. During
the first week of March, sensor equipment was delivered to all the teachers, and in mid-March teachers were
presented with the first units to try out for themselves. Teachers installed the software on their computers, learned
how to use the sensors, and, from late March to mid-May, tested out the materials with their students.

       Year 1 also served as a formative assessment of the technology. Teachers used the CCPortfolio software on
a variety of platforms, and the project was able to identify and fix software problems, improve the functionality of
the software and release new versions. There were technical issues with some schools having inadequate computers
or less memory than had been required. As the materials were distributed, facilitators spoke with a teacher or
administrator at each school to help them get the software and sensors up and running.

       The original expectation was for Group 1 teacher to try out two units with their students. However, once
delays were accounted for due to spring break, time needed for equipment distribution and technical assistance, and
the Missouri Assessment Program (MAP) standardized testing for two weeks in April, most teachers only had time
to use one unit with their students. These time constraints also meant that some research teachers were unable to
administer posttests to their students at the end of the units.

Quantitative Findings
       Twenty-four of the 30 teachers in Group 1 reported using the materials with their students, and spent an
average of about 6 hours of classroom time on the units. For Group 1, 19 of the 30 teachers gave at least one pretest
and posttest to their students, while in Group 2, 26 of 27 teachers gave the pretests and posttests. This disparity can
be attributed to Group 1's time constraints with learning and getting the technology to work, scheduling their school
computer lab, and other obstacles to implementing the units. In the following analysis, only those teachers who
administered pretests and posttests are presented.

       An analysis of teacher background looks at some of the more pertinent teacher variables that were obtained
from teacher responses to the presurvey, such as educational level, undergraduate major, and years of teaching
experience (see Table 2). There appear to be some differences between the treatment and comparison teachers in
terms of their background and experience in teaching science. These differences suggest that there could be "teacher
effects" that could explain results, above and beyond the impact of the curriculum units.

Table 2: Teacher background data

                                                                                 Group 1    Group 2
                  Educational Backgrounds
                   Undergraduate in science                                      3 (12%)     1 (4%)
                   Undergraduate in education                                    8 (44%)    18 (69%)
                   Other undergraduate degreee                                   7 (39%)    7 (27%)
                   Holds graduate degree                                         7 (39%)    13 (50%)
                  Average number of years spent teaching                           8.6        11.3
                  Average number of years spent teaching science                   8.0        10.5
                  Average number of years spent teaching at grade level            5.9        7.1

                                                          477                                                   ICLS 2006
         Table 3 shows the descriptive statistics for each instructional unit for which pretests and posttests were
given by both Group 1 and Group 2. The data is reported by group, including the number of students in the group,
the mean and standard deviation for both the pretest and posttest, and the mean difference.

Table 3: Comparative statistics for pretests and posttests by unit and group

                                    N      Pretest     Pretest     PosttestMeanStd DevMeanPosttestStd DevDifference

 Unit 1 ­ Sound
 Group 1                            38      12.08       2.67        12.92          2.39        +.84*
 Group 2                       154          11.95       2.37        13.48          2.45      +1.53***
 Unit 3 ­ Sensing
 Group 1                       126          4.77        1.67          5.79         1.7       +1.02***
 Group 2                            35      5.11        1.23          5.89         1.78        +.77*
 Unit 6 ­ Temperature
 Group 1                       252          8.29         4.7          8.44         4.49       +.15**
 Group 2                       140          6.98        4.27          6.86         4.25         -.10
 Unit 11 ­ Pressure
 Group 1                            30      5.33        1.21          6.57         2.00       +1.23**
 Group 2                            42      6.60        1.90          6.05         2.74         -0.55
 Unit 12 ­ Motion
 Group 1                       244          6.57        2.67          8.01         2.69      +1.44***
 Group 2                            44      6.93        2.27          7.84         2.28        +0.91
* p < .05, **p < .01, *** p < .0005

         Group 1 students showed significantly higher gains from the pretest to the posttest than Group 2 students in
two of  the five units: Temperature      and Pressure.  In   each  of these units, Group  1 scores   showed statistically
significant gains, while Group 2's scores decreased slightly. A t-test comparing the gains for each of these units
showed that gains of Group 1 were significantly higher than for Group 2.

         In the other three units, Sound, Sensing, and Motion, the data show that Group 1 students also made
statistically significant gains from pretest to the posttest, and so did Group 2. A t-test comparing the gains showed
that for each of these units, the gains of Group 1 were no different from the gains of Group 2.

         Overall, these analyses suggest that students in both groups showed learning gains on the tests administered
to them for the units. In addition, students who took the Temperature and Pressure tests in Group 1 significantly out-
gained students who took those tests in Group 2. For the Pressure test, the magnitude of the effect was actually quite
large.

Qualitative Findings
         In post-surveys, teachers     indicated  that they  liked the  units very much,  and felt that they were age-
appropriate and neither too easy or too hard. Teachers reported that they themselves felt comfortable with the
science content and the amount of background information provided. They also provided specific feedback about the
units that were used in making revisions. The teachers said that they were looking forward to using the materials
next year, and to having more time to spend on the units with their students.

         All the teachers participated in the on-line professional development course, in which they learned how to
use the materials themselves and then tested them out with their students. Through the on-line course discussion
board, teachers were encouraged to report on their experiences using the materials in their classrooms. The teachers
posted enthusiastic reviews about the units, reporting that the students were eager to use the sensors, and that "this

                                                             478                                                ICLS 2006
high interest contributes to the student learning." Teachers described specific examples of students learning science
concepts, such as learning to interpret motion graphs or sound waves:

        They have never understood any graph's meaning as well as they did when they had to actually
        make their own body motion match the line drawn on the pre-existing graph for them. It was
        incredible to watch even my most cynical students concentrating so hard trying to make their
        bodies behave the way the predrawn graph did.

        My   students are using the sound  grapher and  are    really enjoying   'seeing'  sounds they make
        themselves. It is so neat to see the graphic for sound waves. We've learned a lot.

        Teachers also appreciated the conceptual questions that are part of each unit, noting that "the questions also
caused my students to ask more questions, a true component of inquiry learning."

        An observer for the TEEMSS2 project visited three classrooms during the time period that the teachers
were using the units. The classrooms observed were of 7th grade students using a motion sensor to make graphs for
the Motion unit, 5th grade students measuring changes in humidity for the Monitoring a Living Plant unit, and 3rd
grade students using a light sensor to learn about animal senses and eyesight in the Sensing unit. In each case, the
students were observed to be engaged and interested in the activity, and learning the concepts being taught. The
technology worked and the lesson went smoothly, and the teacher was reportedly pleased with the materials.

Concluding Remarks
        In summary, the evaluation of TEEMSS2 in year 1 showed that the teachers were able to implement the
materials in their classrooms, and when they did so, there was both quantitative and qualitative evidence of student
learning. It was found that overall, students taught by Group 1 teachers, using the materials, showed slightly larger
test gains than students taught by  Group  2 teachers using    traditional teaching methods.    Teacher  surveys and
observations also indicated that both teachers and students were enthusiastic and successful with the materials. Year
1 also allowed the project to test the units, the software, and the sensors and to address any technological issues. The
project is now prepared and looking forward to a successful year of summative evaluation in year 2.

        In year 2, both groups of teachers will participate in the summative evaluation, each teaching three of the
TEEMSS2 units with their students during the school year. For all teachers, student learning will again be assessed
through pretests and posttests. For Group 1 teachers, a comparison with the year 1 data will provide the opportunity
to evaluate the effects of prior exposure to the materials. For Group 2 teachers, student gains in year 1, without the
TEEMSS2 materials, will be compared with student gains in year 2, with the materials.

        TEEMSS2 is funded by the National Science Foundation (Grant No. IMD0352522).

References
AAAS. (1993). Benchmarks for Science Literacy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Adams, D. D., & Shrum, J. W. (1990). The effects of microcomputer-based laboratory exercises on the acquisition
        of line graph construction and interpretation skills by high school biology students. Journal of Research in
        Science Teaching, 27(8), 777-787.
Beichner, R. J. (1990). The effect of simultaneous motion presentation and graph generation in a kinematics lab.
        Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 27(8), 803-815.
Brassell, H. (1987). The effect of real-time laboratory graphing on learning graphic representations of distance and
        velocity. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 24(4), 385-395.
Friedler, Y., Nachmias, R., & Linn, M. C. (1990). Learning scientific reasoning skills in microcomputer-based
        laboratories. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 27(2), 173-191.
Krajcik, J. S., & Layman, J. (1993). Microcomputer-based laboratories in the science classroom. research that
        matters to the science teacher. National Association of Research on Science Teaching (NARST), no. 31.
Laws,  P.  (1997). Millikan Lecture 1996:  Promoting   active   learning   based on physics    education research in
        introductory courses. American Journal of Physics, 65(1).
Linn, M. C., Layman, J. W., & Nachmias, R. (1987). Cognitive consequences of micro-computer-based laboratories:
        Graphing skills development. Comtemporary Educational Psychology, 12(3), 244-253.

                                                         479                                                  ICLS 2006
Metcalf, S. J., & Tinker, R. (2003). TEEMSS: Technology Enhanced Elementary and Middle School Science. Paper
       presented at the  Annual  Meeting  of the National      Association for Research  in Science Teaching,
       Philadelphia, PA.
Mokros, J., & Tinker, R. (1987). The impact of microcomputer-based labs on children's ability to interpret graphs.
       Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 24(4), 369-383.
The National Research Council.  (1995). National Science      Education  Standards. Washington, DC:  National
       Academy of Sciences.
Thornton, R. K. (1997).  Using Large-Scale Classroom        Research to Study  Student Conceptual Learning in
       Mechanics and to Develop New Approaches to Learning. In NATO ASI Series. New York: Springer-
       Verlag.

                                                        480                                                ICLS 2006
