       Examining the fluctuation of strategy use during learning with
                                                    hypermedia

Dan Moos, Roger Azevedo, University of Maryland, Department of Human Development, 3304 Benjamin Building,
                                                 College Park, MD 20742
                                   E-mail: danmoos@msn.com, razevedo@umd.edu

         Abstract: What strategies do students use when given conceptual scaffolds while learning with
         hypermedia and when do students use these strategies during learning? We collected think-aloud,
         pre-test, and  posttest  data  from   37  undergraduates    to  examine    these  two  research    questions.
         Participants were randomly assigned to either the No Scaffolding (NS) or Conceptual Scaffolding
         (CS) condition, and individually completed one 30-minute learning task during which they used
         hypermedia to learn about the circulatory system. Results suggest that students in both conditions
         used   some  strategies  inconsistently    during learning.    Specifically,  the   frequency   with  which
         students  took   notes, re-read,  and   selected  new   informational   sources   significantly    fluctuated
         throughout   the 30  minute    learning  task. Results   also  indicate that  students   in the conceptual
         scaffolding  condition   summarized      significantly   more    during  the   30-minute     learning   task.
         Discussion   of  how    these findings   are related  to previous   literature   examining   learning    with
         hypermedia is provided.

Introduction
         Computer-based learning environments, such as hypermedia, have been used in classrooms to help students
develop conceptual understanding of challenging topics (Azevedo, 2005; Jacobson & Kozma, 2000; Lajoie, 2000;
Lajoie &   Azevedo,   in  press). Hypermedia      allows  students   to  explore units    of information    in different  ways
(Goldshalk, Harvey, & Moller, 2004) and provides multiple representations such as text, audio, and video clips.
Though    these characteristics  should   allow   students  to actively    participate in  the  development     of  conceptual
knowledge (Jonassen & Reeves, 1996; White & Frederiksen, 2005), research has begun to question the effectiveness
of these learning environments (see Azevedo, 2005; Jacobson & Archodidou, 2000; Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006;
Jonassen  & Land,   2000).   Studies   in this line of  research  have   focused  on   three subprocesses    of  learning  with
hypermedia: 1) Students' ability to develop conceptual understanding when using hypermedia, 2) Students' ability
to use specific  aspects  of  hypermedia,   including   multiple   representations,    and   3) Students'   ability to manage
cognitive load   during  learning  with   hypermedia    (see   Figure  1). This  study    extends  this  line  of   research by
examining: 1) What strategies students use when addressing these three subprocesses of learning with hypermedia,
and 2) When students use these strategies during learning with hypermedia.

Conceptual Understanding
         While   some   students  are  able to  effectively  use  hypermedia     to learn    about challenging    topics, other
students have difficulty using this learning environment to develop conceptual understanding. Research from the
field of self-regulated learning (SRL) has examined the role of self-regulatory processes in developing conceptual
knowledge with hypermedia, and has illuminated why some students have difficulty learning with hypermedia (e.g.,
Azevedo & Cromley, 2004). Recent SRL research has found that while the use of specific strategies are integral in
developing conceptual understanding of challenging topics, some students have difficulty effectively using these
strategies (Azevedo, 2005; Hmelo-Silver & Azevedo, 2006; Jacobson, & Archodidou, 2000; Jacobsson & Wilensky,
2006). For example, research has found that there is a positive relationship between the use of high level strategies,
such as summarizing and inferencing, and learning outcomes with hypermedia (e.g., Azevedo, Cromley, Winters,
Moos,  &  Greene,   2005;   Azevedo,   Cromley,    &  Siebert, 2004).    Based on   previous    literature, we  argue  that  the
following  strategies   are  related   to  students'   development     of  conceptual     understanding     with  hypermedia:
Summarizing, making inferences, and re-reading (see Figure 1).

Multiple External Representations
         Research   has  also examined    how   contextual   factors  of  hypermedia    may   affect  learning.  For example,
multiple  external representations   (MERs)    are  a defining  contextual  factor  in  hypermedia     environments.    MERs,
which  can include  text, audio,  and   video  clips, serve  three distinct functions   in   learning with   hypermedia    ­ to
construct, constrain, and complement.      Despite the potential benefit of these functions, research has found mixed

                                                             481                                                      ICLS 2006
results on the effectiveness of MERs. Research in learning with both hypermedia and non-hypermedia environments
has shown    that some  students  do   not effectively  coordinate      MERs   and also   have  difficulty understanding  the
relationship between    MERs    (Ainsworth  &   Loizou,  2003;   Azevedo     &   Cromley,   2004;  Hmelo-Silver,   &  Pfeffer,
2004).  Based on   this line of research,  we   argue that  the following    strategies  are involved  in  the use of MERs:
Coordinating multiple representations and selecting new informational sources (see Figure 1).

Cognitive Load
         Research   has  also examined    the role of  working   memory      in  learning  with hypermedia     (Grace-Martin,
2001). According to the Cognitive Load model, working memory has limited capacity and may be affected by three
types of cognitive load ­ intrinsic cognitive load, extraneous cognitive load, or germane cognitive load (Sweller,
2004; van Merriënboer & Sweller, 2005). Of particular concern to students learning with hypermedia is extraneous
cognitive load, which may be imposed upon a student's working memory when the student is faced with multiple
sources of information in hypermedia (Gerjets & Scheiter, 2003; Kester, Kirschner, & van Merriënboer, 2005). For
example,  extracting information   from    both a  diagram  and  text    may   overload  a  students' visual subprocessor of
his/her working   memory     (Mayer  &   Moreno,   2003;    van  Merriënboer     & Ayres,    2005).   Furthermore,  cognitive
overload may impede learning because it limits available space in working memory (see Gerjets & Scheiter, 2003).
Based on this research, we argue that note-taking, reading notes, and drawing are effective strategies for students to
offload extraneous cognitive load and thus free up some working memory space (see Figure 1).
                                    LEARNING WITH HYPERMEDIA
                                               Involves 3 subprocesses

                             Developing            Coordinating                Managing
                              Conceptual              Multiple               Cognitive Load
                            Understanding         Representations

                          - Summarizing            -Selecting New            - Taking Notes
                          - Making                  Informational            - Reviewing
                              Inferences              Sources                    Notes
                          - Re-reading             -Coordinating             - Drawing
                                                    Informational
                                                      Sources

                  Figure 1. Nine strategies underlying three subprocesses of learning with hypermedia

Current Study
         While previous research has examined what strategies students use for the three subprocesses of learning
with hypermedia, there are three issues that should be addressed. First, this line of research has typically studied
these three subprocesses independently rather than studying all three of these subprocesses concurrently. However,
because these three subprocesses are interrelated and all affect learning with hypermedia, it is important for research
to examine them simultaneously. Second, research has employed methodology to capture what strategies students
use when learning with hypermedia (Azevedo et. al., 2005), but typically has not examined when students use these
strategies during learning with hypermedia. That is, the fluctuation of strategy use during learning has been largely
unaddressed.  For  example,   previous   research  using a  SRL        framework (Pintrich,  2000; Winne,    2001; Winne  &
Hadwin, 1998) found that students who coordinated multiple informational sources during learning with hypermedia
tend to demonstrate higher learning gains than those students who do not deploy this strategy (Azevedo & Cromley,
2004). However, it is presently unclear when students use specific strategies during learning with hypermedia. Third,
in order to  address difficulties some    students face  in deploying      key strategies  when learning   with  hypermedia,
previous research has begun to examine the effectiveness of providing students with conceptual scaffolds. This line
of research generally suggests that the provision of scaffolds in hypermedia creates an instructional context which
fosters students' use of key self-regulatory processes, including strategies (Azevedo & Cromley, 2004; Jacobson, &
Archodidou, 2000; Shapiro, 1999, 2000). However, this line of research has not examined how conceptual scaffolds
affect strategy use related to all three subprocesses of learning with hypermedia.

                                                            482                                                     ICLS 2006
        This study   furthers current research  on learning   with  hypermedia   by  addressing   these three key  issues.
Specifically, this study used process data from think-aloud methodology (Ericsson & Simon, 1993) to examine the
impact of conceptual scaffolds on strategies used to develop conceptual understanding, coordinate multiple external
representations, and manage cognitive load. The two research questions for this study are: 1) Is there a relationship
between conceptual scaffolding and the fluctuation of strategies used during learning with hypermedia? and, 2) Is
there a relationship between   conceptual scaffolding   and   students'  ability to shift to more  sophisticated  mental
models of the circulatory system?

Method
Participants
        The  participants included   thirty-seven  (N=37)  undergraduate    education   majors  from    the University  of
Maryland, College Park. Their average age was 21.51 (SD = 3.59); there were 27 women (73%) and 10 men (27%).

Measures
        The paper-and-pencil forms consisted of a consent form, a participant questionnaire, a pre-test, and a post-
test. The pretest and posttest were modified versions of measurements used in previous studies examining self-
regulated learning of the circulatory system with hypermedia (Azevedo, Cromley, & Seibert, 2004). The pretest and
posttest, which were identical, asked the participants to write an essay based on the instructions, "Please write down
everything you can about the circulatory system. Be sure to include all the parts and their purpose, explain how they
work both individually and together, and also explain how they contribute to the healthy functioning of the body."
The essay was used to assess students' mental model of the circulatory system before and after the learning task.
Lastly, participants' use of self-regulatory processes while learning about the circulatory system was collected via a
think-aloud protocol (Ericsson & Simon, 1993).

Hypermedia Learning Environment
        The participants used Microsoft Encarta Reference SuiteTM (2003) to learn about the circulatory system.
This  hypermedia environment    contains  three relevant   articles to  the circulatory   system, and   these articles are
comprised of 16,900 words, 35 illustrations, 107 hyperlinks, and 18 sections. Participants could freely search all of
Encarta while learning about the circulatory system.

Conceptual Scaffolds
        While all participants had access to a global learning goal (Make sure you lean about the different parts
and their purpose, how they work both individually and together, and how they support the human body) during
learning with hypermedia, participants randomly assigned to the CS condition received the following five guiding
questions during learning with hypermedia: 1) What are the most important things the circulatory system does to
keep us alive? 2) How do the parts of the circulatory system do those important things you just mentioned? 3) When
blood leaves the right side of the heart it goes to one place, and when the blood leaves the left side of the heart it
goes to a different place. What does the blood do when it leaves the right side of the heart? 4) What does the blood
do when it leaves the left side of the heart? and, 5) Imagine you are a blood cell in the right side of the heart. Explain
all the parts you would go through to leave and eventually get back to the right side of the heart. These five
questions were designed in consultation with a veteran science teacher who is familiar with the content provided in
the hypermedia environment. These five guiding questions served as conceptual scaffolds by facilitating the
participants' mental model shift during the learning task.

Procedure
        Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: No Scaffolding (NS; n = 18) and Conceptual
Scaffolding (CS; n = 19), and were all individually tested by the first author. After completing the consent form and
participant questionnaire, the participants were given 15 minutes to complete the pretest on the circulatory system.
Next, the researcher provided instructions for the learning task. For the NS condition, the instructions were: "You
are being presented with an electronic encyclopedia, which contains textual information, static diagrams, and a
digitized video clip of the circulatory system. We are trying to learn more about how students learn from electronic
encyclopedia environments,    like Encarta. Your   task is to  learn all you  can   about  the circulatory  system in   30
minutes. Make sure you learn about the different parts and their purpose, how they work both individually and
together, and how they support the human body. In order for us to understand how you learn about the circulatory
system, we ask you   to "think aloud"  continuously  while    you   read and search   Encarta.  Say everything   you   are

                                                           483                                                   ICLS 2006
thinking and doing. I'll be here in case anything goes wrong with the computer and the equipment. Please remember
that it is very important to say everything that you are thinking and doing while you are working on this task." The
instructions for the CS condition also included a statement indicating that five guiding questions would be given to
the participant  during the  30 minute learning   task. Participants were   then given 30  minutes   to learn about   the
circulatory system with the hypermedia learning environment. While participants in both conditions had access to
the overall learning goal during these 30 minutes (Make sure you learn about the different parts and their purpose,
how   they work  both individually and  together,   and  how   they support  the human  body), participants   in  the CS
condition also had access to the five guiding questions. In both conditions, the researcher remained nearby to remind
participants to  keep verbalizing  when they    were  silent for more   then three seconds  (e.g., "Say  what    you  are
thinking"). Immediately following the 30-minute learning task, participants were given 15 minutes to complete the
posttest.  They  independently  completed    the posttest without   their notes, other instructional materials,   or  the
hypermedia environment.

Coding and Scoring
          In order to analyze the frequency of strategies each participant verbalized during the 30 minute learning
task, the first author individually transcribed and then coded all transcripts. Then, in order to analyze when students
used specific strategies, the coded strategies were tallied according to the time in which they occurred during the 30
minute learning task: Time 1 (0 to 8 minutes), Time 2 (8 to 16 minutes), Time 3 (16 to 24 minutes), and Time 4 (24
minutes to 30 minutes). This method of dividing the 30-minute learning task into different time episodes is a novel
methodological approach in capturing the fluctuation of strategies. As such, it is exploratory in nature, with the goal
of creating time episodes that simultaneously allowed for a fine grained analysis and provided substantial data. Inter-
rater reliability was established for the coding of the participants' strategy use by comparing the individual coding of
the first author, who was trained to use an adapted version of Azevedo et. al's (2004) coding scheme, with that of
the second author (for complete details of coding scheme, see Azevedo & Cromley, 2004). Thirty-five percent of the
transcripts (n = 13) were used for inter-rater reliability, and there was agreement on 1,496 out of 1,527 coded SRL
segments, yielding a reliability coefficient of .98. In order to score the participants' pretest and posttest essays, we
used  previously  established methods  for  scoring  the  students' mental  models on  the pretest and   posttest essays
(Azevedo & Cromley, 2004; Azevedo, Cromley, & Seibert, 2004), which is based on Chi and colleagues' research
(Chi, 2000; 2005; Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994). The first author coded all of the participants' mental
models from the pretest and posttest, and a science teacher familiar with the mental model coding scheme recoded
33% of the participants' pretest and posttest mental models (n = 28). There was agreement on 27 out of 28 scored
essays, yielding an inter-rater reliability of .96. Disagreements   on  the mental model   scoring and  coding   of SRL
processes were resolved through discussion.

Results
Question 1: Is there a relationship between conceptual scaffolding and the fluctuation of
strategies used during learning with hypermedia? The participants' use of strategies was analyzed
using repeated measures ANOVA with the frequencies of coded strategies at four different time periods during the
30-minute learning task (Time 1: 0 to 8 minutes, Time 2: 8 minutes to 16 minutes, Time 3: 16 to 24 minutes, and
Time 4: 24 to 30 minutes) as a within-subjects factor, and scaffolding conditions (No Scaffolding and Conceptual
Scaffolding) as a between-subjects factor. Nine separate analyses were conducted for each of the nine strategies. The
sphericity was not met for all analyses, so the Huynh-Feldt correction was applied.

Multiple Representations
          The main effect of time on the participants' selecting new informational sources was significant, F(2.37,
83.86) = 5.90, p < .01, ²   = .14, the interaction between time on selecting new informational sources and condition
was not significant, and the main effect of conditions was not significant. A pairwise comparison indicates that
participants across both conditions selected new informational sources more frequently at Times 1 and 3 than at
Times 2 and 4 (p < .01). The main effect of time on the participants' coordinating multiple representations was not
significant, the interaction between time    on  coordinating  multiple informational  sources and   condition   was  not
significant, and the main effect of conditions was not significant. More interesting, however, is    that the frequency
data also indicates the participants rarely coordinated multiple informational sources during the 30 minute learning
task.

                                                           484                                                 ICLS 2006
Cognitive Load
          The main effect of time on the participants' note-taking was significant, F(2.66, 93.01) = 11.99, p < .01, ²
=  .26, the  interaction between  time   on note-taking   and  condition  was   not significant,   and the  main  effect of
conditions was not significant. A pairwise comparison indicates that participants significantly decreased their note-
taking as they progressed from Time 1 to Time 4 of the learning session (p <.01).        However, the main effect of time
on the  participants'  reviewing  notes  was  not significant,  the interaction between    time  on  reviewing   notes   and
condition   was not  significant, and  the  main  effect  of  conditions  was  not  significant.   Furthermore,  while   the
participants in both conditions frequently took notes in the beginning of the learning session, the frequency data
indicates that they rarely, if ever, reviewed their notes during learning. The main effect of time on the participants'
drawing was not significant, the interaction between time on drawing and condition was not significant, and the
main effect of conditions was not significant. Furthermore, the frequency in which students used drawing to manage
extraneous cognitive load during the 30-minute learning task suggests that they rarely used this strategy.

Conceptual Understanding
          The main effect of time on the participants' re-reading was significant, F(2.49, 87.02) = 2.83, p < .05, ²      =
.08, the interaction between time on re-reading and condition was not significant, and the main effect of conditions
was not significant. A pairwise comparison indicates that participants across both conditions more frequently re-read
at Times 2 and 4 than at Times 1 and 3 (p < .01). The main effect of time on the participants' summarizing was not
significant, the interaction between time on summarizing and condition was not significant, but the main effect of
conditions was significant, F(1, 35) = 3.96, p = .05, ²   = .10). A comparison of each condition's mean frequency for
summarizing suggests that students in the NS condition summarized less frequently          (MNS    = 4.01) than students in
the CS condition (MCS = 7.58) during the 30-minute learning task. Lastly, the main effect of time on the participants'
inferences was not significant, the interaction between time on inferences and condition was not significant, and the
main effect of conditions was not significant. Furthermore, the frequency in which the students made inferences
during the learning sessions suggest that they used this high-level strategy infrequently during learning.

Question 2: Is there a relationship between conceptual scaffolding and students' ability
to shift to more sophisticated mental models of the circulatory system? We used two 3 X 2
(mental  model  by   condition) chi-square  test to analyze   changes in  students' conceptual     understanding.  We   first
examined the students' mental models on the pretest. The chi-square test revealed a non- significant difference in the
frequency distribution of the students' mental model by condition (2 [2, N = 37] = 1.35, p > .05). This result
indicates that the distribution of pretest mental model scores was not statistically significantly different between the
NS and CS condition. We then examined the students' mental models on the posttest. The chi-square test revealed a
significant difference in the frequency distribution of learners' mental model by condition (2 [2, N = 37] = 10.714,
p < .01). The results of this test indicate that the distribution of students in the NS condition and CS condition
significantly differ on their mental model scores for the posttest. Of the 19 students in the conceptual scaffolding
condition,  12  (63%)    had a  high mental   model    of the circulatory  system   on   their  posttest, 5  (26%)   had an
intermediate mental model on their posttest, and only 2 (11%) had a low mental model on their posttest score. On
the other hand, of the 18 students in the NS condition, only 3 (18%) had a high mental model of the circulatory
system on their posttest and 5 (28%) had an intermediate mental model on their posttest, while 10 (56%) had a low
mental model on their posttest score.

Conclusions
          By examining strategies that are related to different subprocesses of learning with hypermedia, this study
offers  both theoretical  and  methodological    contributions  to  existing literature. First, this study   highlights  the
potential of measuring    students' use  of strategies during   learning. The  empirical-based   and   theoretically driven
analyses of this study provide trace data on the strategies students used during learning. The statistically significant
main effect of time on three strategies suggest that students' note-taking, re-reading, and selecting new information
sources fluctuated during the learning task, regardless of scaffolding condition. While the main effect for the other
four strategies  (coordinating    information sources,    reading  notes,  drawing,  and    making   inferences)   was   not
significant, and thus indicate that the use of these strategies did not fluctuate during learning, the mean frequencies
of these  strategies present  informative   findings. The  mean   frequencies,  which  range    from .07  to 1.89  for both
conditions, suggest that students are rarely deploying these strategies, which have been identified as key strategies in
learning  with  hypermedia   (Azevedo    &  Cromley,   2004). Lastly, the  results  suggest that   providing students  with
conceptual   scaffolds during   learning affects  both  the  process  and  product  of   learning. Students  that  received

                                                            485                                                   ICLS 2006
conceptual scaffolds  summarized  more   frequently, on  average, and demonstrated    a higher  mental   model    of the
circulatory system on the posttest, on average, than students who did not receive conceptual scaffolding.

References
Ainsworth, S., & Loizou, A. (2003). The effects of self-explaining when learning with text or diagrams. Cognitive
           Science, 27(4), 669-681.
Azevedo (2005). Computer environment as metacogntive tools for enhancing learning. Educational Psychologist,
        40(4), 193-197.
Azevedo, R., Cromley, J.G., & Seibert, D. (2004). Does adaptive scaffolding facilitate students' ability to regulate
        their learning with hypermedia. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 29, 344-370.
Azevedo,  R.,  Cromley, J. G.,  Winters, F. I., Moos,    D. C., Greene, J. A.   (2005). Adaptive  human    scaffolding
        facilitates adolescents' self-regulated learning with hypermedia. Instructional Science, 33, 381-412.
Azevedo, R.,   & Cromley,  J.G. (2004).  Does   training on self-regulated learning facilitate students' learning  with
        hypermedia? Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3), 523-535.
Chi, M.T.H.   (2005). Commonsense    conceptions   of   emergent processes:  Why   some  misconceptions    are   robust.
        Journal of Learning Sciences, 14(2), 161-199.
Chi, M.T.H. (2000). Self-explaining: The dual processes of generating inference and repairing mental models. In R.
        Glaser (Ed.), Advances in instructional psychology: Educational design and cognitive science (Vo. 5, pp.
        161 ­ 238). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M.T.H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., & LaVancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanation improves
        understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439 ­ 477.
Ericsson, K A, & Simon, H.A. (1993).   Protocol Analysis:   Verbal Reports as Data, Cambridge,    MA:    MIT     Press.
Gerjets, P., & Scheiter, K. (2003). Goal configurations and processing strategies as moderators between
        instructional design and cognitive load: Evidence from hypertext-based instruction. Edcuational
        Psychologist, 38(1), 33-41.
Goldshalk, V. M., Harvey, D. M., & Moller, L. (2004). The role of learning tasks on attitude change using cognitive
        flexibility hypertext systems. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(4), 507-526.
Grace-Martin, M. (2001). How to design educational multimedia: A "loaded" question. Journal of Educational
        Multimedia & Hypermedia, 10(4), 397-409.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding complex systems: Some core challenges. Journal of
        the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 53-61.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex
        system from the perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. Cognitive Science, 28(1), 127-318.
Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importance
        and implications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 11-34.
Jacobson, M. J., & Kozma, R. (2000). Innovations in science and mathematics education: Advanced designs for
        technologies of learning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jacobson, M. J., & Archodidou, A. (2000). The design of hypermedia tools for learning: Fostering conceptual
        change and transfer of complex scientific knowledge. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(2), 145 ­ 199.
Jonassen, D., & Land, S. M. (2000). Theoretical foundations of learning environments. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jonassen, D., & Reeves, T. (1996). Learning with Technology: Using computers as cognitive tools. In D. Jonassen
        (Ed.),  Handbook   of   research  for   educational   communications    and  technology   (pp.694-719).    NY:
        Macmillan.
Kester, L., Kirschner, P. A, & van Merriënboer, J.J. G. (2005). The management of cognitive load during complex
        cognitive skill acquisition by means of computer-simulated problem solving. British Journal of
        Educational Psychology, 75(1), 71-85.
Lajoie, P. (2000). Computers as cognitive tools: No more walls, Vol. II. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lajoie, S.P., & Azevedo, R. (in press). Teaching and learning in technology-rich environments. In P. Alexander & P.
        Winne (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mayer, R.  E., &  Moreno,  R.  (2003). Nine   ways   to  reduce cognitive  load in multimedia   learning. Educational
        Psychologist, 38(1), 43-52.
Pintrich, P. (2000). The role of goal orientation in self-regulated learning. In M. Boekaerts, P. Pintrich, & M.
        Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 452-502). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Shapiro, A (2000). The effect of interactive overview on the development of conceptual structure in novices learning
        from hypermedia. Journal of Educational Multimedia & Hypermedia, 9(1), 57-78.

                                                          486                                                ICLS 2006
Shapiro, A   (1999). The relevance  of hierarchies to learning  biology  from   hypertext. Journal of  the Learning
         Sciences, 8(2), 215-243.
Sweller, J. (2004). Instructional design condequences of an analogy between evolution by natural selection and
         human cognitive architecture. Instructional Science, 32(1/2), 9-31.
van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Sweller, J. (2005). Cognitive load theory and complex learning: Recent developments
         and future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 17(2), 147-177.
White,   B., &  Frederiksen,  J.  (2005). A  theoretical framework    and    approach for   fostering metacognitive
         development. Educational Psychologist, 40(4), 211-223.
Winne, P.H. (2001). Self-regulated learning viewed from models of information processing. In B. Zimmerman & D.
         Schunk. (Eds.), Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 153-189).
         Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Winne, P. H., & Hadwin, A. F. (1998). Studying self-regulated learning. In D. J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, &
         A.  Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition  in educational   theory and practice  (pp. 277  ­ 304).  Hillsdale, NJ:
         Erlbaum
Zimmerman, B., & Schunk D. (2001). Self-regulated learning and academic achievement. Mahwah, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Zimmerman, B., & Tsikalas, K.E. (in press). Can computer-based learning environments (CBLEs) be
         used as self-regulatory tools to enhance learning? Educational Psychologist

                                                         487                                                ICLS 2006
