    Learning with Laptops: The Impact of One-to-One Computing on
                     Student Attitudes and Classroom Perceptions
                                                     Chrystalla Mouza
                             University of Delaware, 132 E Willard Hall, Newark, DE 9716
                                                  Email: cmouza@udel.edu

         Abstract:   This    study examined    the  ways   in   which  two    urban  elementary    school teachers
         integrated  laptops  in   their instructional practices.   It also   investigated  the impact    of laptop
         integration on   students'  attitudes and   perceptions   of the  classroom    environment  compared     to
         control  classrooms.    Issues   under   student  perceptions   included:   a)  perceived importance    of
         technology;  b)  computer   enjoyment;    c) student-teacher  and  student-student   interactions;  and d)
         motivation  toward   school  and  learning.   The study used both quantitative and qualitative data.
         Although some evidence indicated that fourth grade laptop students had more positive attitudes
         toward school than fourth grade non-laptop students, quantitative data did not reveal significant
         differences among    laptop  and   control   students.  Qualitative  data,  however,   painted a positive
         picture of experiences in laptop classrooms.      Laptop students perceived computers as important
         learning tools and consistently used educational applications to perform academic activities.          Such
         activities influenced classroom interactions and created a sense of pride and empowerment among
         laptop students. These behaviors were not evident among control students.

Introduction and Purpose of the Study
         Since  the  mid-1990s,    schools have   been implementing      programs    to bring portable  technology   into the
classroom,  primarily    through    the   use  of   laptop  computers.       With    Microsoft   and   Toshiba's     Anytime
Anywhere/Notebooks     for   Schools     project, Apple's  One-to-One,     and  IBM's      Reinventing  Education    Project,
extensive implementation     of laptop   program   initiatives has become   increasingly   more  popular.    It was  recently
estimated that more than 1,000 schools are employing some type of laptop program and that at least one of every six
school-districts in the U.S. has a laptop program in one or more schools (Windschitl & Sahl, 2002; Rockman, 2004).
Many   of these  initiatives have  been   implemented   at the   individual school   level  and often  selected  classrooms,
although  recently  programs    have been  expanded    to include  entire  districts (e.g. Henrico County,   VA)   and even
entire states (State of Maine).  The most successful of these initiatives allow students to carry their laptops home,
thereby offering the possibility of 24/7 access to technology.

         With the rapid increase in the implementation of laptop programs, school boards and policy-makers are
asking about their impact on teaching and student learning.      Most of the research conducted so far is conceptualized
as program evaluation and seeks to investigate the extent to which laptops are utilized in the classroom and their
impact on  student   learning   experiences   (Rockman,    2004;   Silvernail &  Harris,   2003).   Fewer    studies seek  to
investigate changes in the learning environment or identify practices that utilize laptops within specific subject areas
in ways   that promote higher-order      thinking (Windschitl   &  Sahl, 2002;  Garthwait   &   Weller, 2005).    The  major
outcomes of the studies conducted so far indicate that teachers use laptops for lesson development and instruction.
Use of laptops for instruction, however, varies and does not always affect pedagogy.           Several studies indicate that
teachers often fail to take maximum advantage of the affordances of the new tools or move away from teacher-
centered practices (e.g. Windschitl & Sahl, 2002).        With regard to student learning, findings indicate that use of
laptops can foster a) increased comfort level with computers, b) positive attitudes towards technology, c) increased
motivation  and   engagement     with    school-work,  d)  frequent   peer  interactions,  and  e) increased    self-efficacy.
Cognitive outcomes are often inconclusive, though some reports indicate positive gains in student test-scores and
problem-solving skills (Lowther, Ross, & Morrison, 2003; Muir, Knezek, & Christensen, 2004).

         The study reported here was designed to provide further insights into the degree to which implementation
of laptop computers can influence students' educational experiences.        Specifically, the purpose of the study was to
examine the ways in which two urban, elementary school teachers integrated laptops in their instructional practices
and the impact of such integration on student attitudes and perceptions of the classroom environment.                The two
primary research questions were:
1.  In what ways did teachers integrate laptops in their classrooms to achieve instructional goals?

                                                             488                                                    ICLS 2006
2.  How   did constant   access to   laptop  computers   for instructional   purposes  influence students'  attitudes and
    perceptions  of  the  classroom   environment     compared   to  students   in control  classrooms?   Under    student
    perceptions  the study considered    the following   issues: a) perceived   importance  of technology;  b)  computer
    enjoyment; c) student-teacher and student-student interactions; and d) motivation toward school and learning.

Context of the Study
        The   laptop program    employed     in this  study  was part of   the  Microsoft/Toshiba  Anytime,    Anywhere
Learning program.    Schools and     parents in this  program   typically lease their notebooks  from Toshiba   resellers.
Hardware and software are discounted, as are service and insurance contracts.         The school described in this study
was 1 of 52 other pilot schools located in an under-served area in New York City.             At the time the study was
conducted, the school was serving about 1,300 students in grades K-5.        Almost all of the students were from low-
income families who have recently moved to the U.S. from Spanish-speaking countries.             A total of 3 classrooms
participated in the school's pilot laptop program ­ 1 third grade, 1 fourth grade, and 1 fifth grade.    The technology
coordinator selected those classrooms based on two criteria: a) the classroom teacher participated in professional
development on the use of technology, and b) the classroom teacher demonstrated an enthusiasm and prior evidence
of integrating technology in the classroom.     Participating students leased their notebooks and were required to pay
$100 for insurance costs.  Compared to other initiatives in which students received state of the art equipment (e.g.
Maine initiative), students participating in this study received older, refurbished laptops that often varied in their
capabilities and installed software. Further, laptops were not networked or connected to printers because the school
lacked the appropriate infrastructure.   Students had Internet access through two desktop computers located in their
classroom. These are important considerations when trying to assess the impact and viability of laptop programs.

Methods
Participants
        The study included 2 of the laptop classrooms ­ the third grade class and the fourth grade class.       For each
laptop class a comparable control class at the same grade level in the same school was also selected.        Laptop and
control classrooms were similar in the following two measures: a) they had students with similar characteristics ­
they were all monolingual classes in which students achieved at grade-level based on reading and mathematics test
scores prior  to the implementation      of  laptops; b)  their  teachers  had  previously  participated in  a  year-long
professional development   program    (2000-2001)     on the use of  technology    offered by the Institute for Learning
Technologies (ILT) at Columbia University.

        Laptop and control classrooms, however, were different in two measures: a) access to technology ­ the
control classrooms only had access to 2 desktop computers which was typical in the school; and b) teacher pedagogy
and beliefs towards technology.    The latter difference was unintended.     The purpose of the study was to control for
differential access to technology. Observation and interview data, however, revealed differences in control teachers'
instructional practices and attitudes towards technology.    Despite that, those were the only two classrooms that could
serve as control classrooms. Other potential classrooms were bilingual or had a substantial number of students not
meeting  grade-level standards  or   the teachers had  not   participated in any technology   professional  development.
Both laptop and control teachers had similar attitudes and beliefs towards technology when they entered the ILT
program.   Professional  development,    however,    had  different impact   on teachers'  practices and  beliefs.  After
participation in professional development, for example, the two laptops teachers significantly altered their practices
to incorporate technology (Mouza, 2002).      This was the primary reason they received laptops in 2002 in the first
place.  The other teachers, however, made minimal efforts to alter their practices despite the acquisition of new
technological knowledge    and  skills.   Since   laptop  teachers  received  laptops  because  they "differed"  in   their
pedagogical use of technology it would have been impossible to find control classrooms that merely varied in access
to technology but not in other measures.    Therefore, the study placed more emphasis on selecting classrooms with a
comparable student population.

Data Collection and Analysis
        The research design for the study was based on the collection of both quantitative and qualitative data from
students and teachers associated with the laptop and control classrooms.        Data were collected during the course of
one academic year (2002-2003).     The data set included classroom observations, teacher interviews, student surveys,
and student focus groups.  Each laptop classroom was observed on 6 different occasions.        Control classrooms were
observed twice.  Observations focused on both pedagogy and laptop usage.           Both laptop and non-laptop teachers

                                                            489                                                 ICLS 2006
were interviewed once in May.      Interviews elicited information on teacher practices and beliefs with regard to the
use of technology in teaching and learning.

          Quantitative data were collected through the Young Children's Computer Inventory (YCCI) questionnaire
(Knezek,  Christensen,     Miyashita  &  Ropp,   2000).    The   YCCI   is a  52-item   Likert instrument    for measuring
elementary   school   children's  attitudes on   seven    major  indices:  computer    importance,   computer    enjoyment,
motivation/persistence, study habits, empathy, creative tendencies (1), and attitudes toward school.         The YCCI was
implemented     in multiple studies   over  a  10-year period    (1991-2001).   In  all studies   individual scale internal
consistency reliabilities (Cronbach's Alpha) typically ranged from .66 to .85 for elementary/middle school students
(Christensen, Knezek, & Overall, 2005).       Data for this study were gathered using a 3-point rating scale: 1=Agree,
2=Sometimes, 3=Disagree.

          A total of 100 laptop and control students completed the instrument during the months of April/May, 2003.
To ensure the collection of usable surveys, all data were gathered in a small group setting.      Each group consisted of
5 students.  Each student was given a sheet listing only the response choices.         The author and a research assistant
read the survey items to the students and provided necessary explanations, thereby ensuring student understanding.
The person not reading monitored students closely to make sure they were marking their answer to the appropriate
location without skipping items.   Each group of students took approximately 30-40 minutes to complete the survey.

          The collection of qualitative data was based on 8 focus groups conducted with 32 students.         Two groups of
students from each class were selected to participate ­ one low-ability and one high-ability group.      Focusing on both
low and high ability students enabled the researcher to get a more accurate view of classroom reality whereby the
perspectives  of   individuals with  different  abilities were  captured.   Low-ability   and  high-ability  students were
identified by their teacher based on classroom performance and personal judgment.         Each group included 4 students.
Focus group questions were targeted toward five major areas: a) computer importance; b) computer enjoyment; c)
laptop usage at home; d) student-teacher and student-student interactions; and e) motivation towards school and
learning. All focus groups were video-taped.      Because there were no time constraints, the researcher ensured that
the voices of all students' were heard.       Examination   of  focus  group  transcripts reveals that almost  all students
responded in all focus group questions and multiple perspectives were generated.

          Survey   results were   analyzed    using statistical  techniques   (see Findings    from  Survey   Data).   All
observation, interview, and focus group data were transcribed.      Subsequently, they were analyzed using a grounded
theory  approach   to look  for  commonalities   and differences    across student responses.    The overall goal was to
determine differences in student attitudes and perceptions of the classroom environment in laptop versus control
classrooms.  Three doctoral students who have not been part of conceptualizing the study or collecting the data were
asked to independently code student responses.      A consistent inter-rater coding was evident.

Findings
Technology Integration
          Results from observations and interviews indicated that laptop teachers integrated technology habitually in
their classrooms for a wide range of instructional tasks.       Although the first few weeks of the year were difficult,
laptop teachers gradually found solutions to common challenges.           Some of the challenges faced included: a) re-
arranging classroom    furniture to  allow  for laptop access   to electrical outlets; b) establishing  routines for taking
laptops  out of backpacks   and  storing them   away   into locked  cabinets;  c) taking  good  care of the  equipment;  d)
learning  basic  computer   and  file management     skills;  and   e) figuring   out  ways  for  collecting student  work
electronically, since there was no access to a local area network.

          After identifying  strategies for   addressing  these  challenges,  students  used their laptops   extensively to
accomplish a host of learning tasks.     Besides word-processing software, students consistently used multimedia to
report findings from research projects in social studies and science, to develop electronic storybooks in language
arts, and to record sound from readings their own poetry.       Concept mapping software, such as Inspiration, was also
used extensively to brainstorm or organize ideas prior to the beginning of a writing task.         Timeliner, was another
software used extensively.     Students routinely used Timeliner to prepare biographical or historical timelines related
to topics studied in class.  Further, students frequently used spreadsheets to graph and analyze data collected from
classroom   surveys   or science experiments.    Finally,  students used   desktop publishing  software  like Publisher  to

                                                             490                                                  ICLS 2006
prepare newsletters related to class topics.                                                 Contrary to laptop teachers, interview data revealed that control teachers
made minimal use of technology in their classrooms.                                                              Students typically used computers for word-processing or
conducting limited research using the Internet.                                                     In addition, computers were often used as a reward for students
finishing their work.

Results from Surveys
         Reliability                       analyses were                         performed       to       determine    whether                            each of the seven   subscales                                          of YCCI   were
internally  consistent                      and  could  be                       used       in a MANOVA.               Unfortunately,                           results revealed                   that                    only     two   of the
subscales achieved alpha levels exceeding .70 (Creative Tendencies alpha = .71 and Attitudes toward School alpha =
.75).  In order to determine how technology in the classroom influenced Creative Tendencies and Attitudes toward
School, a 2 (Technology in classroom) x 2 (Grade level) MANOVA was performed on the two reliable subscales.
Creative Tendencies and School subscales were used as dependent variables.                                                                                       Box's Test of Equality was performed
to test the null                       hypothesis  that the                       observed       covariance        matrices                             of the dependent   variables                                     were       equal across
groups.    Results                       indicated that the                       null      hypothesis      was    retained                             (Box's M=   13.01, p= ns),                                      suggesting     that  the
covariance matrices for the groups were equal to one another.

         Results from MANOVA suggested that technology alone or whether students were given a laptop did not
influence  their                     attitudes   toward  learning                            (Wilk's           =  .99, F (2,                            95) =  .37, p =  ns).  The                                       significant      overall
multivariate effect for grade level, however, suggested that grade level alone influenced students' attitudes toward
learning (Wilk's  = .90, F (2, 95) = 5.27, p < .01, Partial 2 = .100).                                                                                     Separate Univariate ANOVAs demonstrated
that grade level had a significant influence on Creative Tendencies (F (1, 96) = 5.71, p < .05, Partial 2 = .056) and
Attitudes toward School (F (1, 96) = 8.86, p < .01, Partial 2 = .085).                                                                                     When a Bonferroni adjustment was made to
deter the inflation of Type I error, a more stringent, family-wise alpha level (.025) resulted.                                                                                                                         The adjusted results
showed that third graders (M = 2.65) were significantly more likely than fourth graders (M = 2.51) to report having
Creative Tendencies.                         Additionally, the corrected results reflected that third graders (M = 2.19) were significantly
more likely to have positive Attitudes toward School than fourth graders (M = 1.85).

         In order to determine whether the unique combination of technology in the classroom and grade level had
an  influence                       on   student behavior                        and attitudes,           results from   the                            MANOVA      were analyzed.                                        Results     yielded  a
marginally significant multivariate effect for the interaction (Wilk's  = .94, F (2, 95) = 2.88, p = .06, Partial 2 =
.057).  Although separate Univariate analyses revealed no significant interaction between technology and grade on
Creative Tendencies (F (1, 96) = .283, p = ns), they did reveal the significant interaction between grade level and
technology in the classroom on Attitudes toward School displayed in Figure 1 (F (1, 96) = 3.84, p = .05).                                                                                                                                 After a
Bonferroni adjustment was made to deter the inflation of Type I error, a more stringent alpha level (.025) prevented
the interaction                      involving    Attitudes                       toward       School       from     being significant.                             Although  this                                      interaction    was   not
significant, the means demonstrated that third graders who had laptops (M = 2.12) did not differ considerably from
third graders who did not have laptops (M = 2.26) on Attitudes toward School, but fourth graders who did have
laptops (M = 2.00) had more positive attitudes toward school than fourth graders who did not (M = 1.68).

                                    2.30                                                                                                                                                     Grade      Level
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3rd    Grade
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4th    Grade
                                    2.20

                                    2.10

                                    2.00

                                    1.90

                                    1.80

                                    1.70

                                    1.60

                                                                              No    Laptop                                                       Laptop
                                                                     Technology                        in  the    Classroom

                                                                                 Figure 1: Students' Attitudes toward School

                                                                                                                 491                                                                                                                   ICLS 2006
            Attitudes Toward School
Results from Focus Groups
         Computer importance. Findings from focus groups demonstrated that most students perceived computers as
important tools for four primary reasons: a) they serve as an information resource; b) they are useful for future
employment; c) they assist in the learning process; and d) they can be used to perform various tasks faster, easier
and   neater.  Both   control and  laptop  students  viewed  the computer as  a  tool that  could provide   information,
particularly through the use of the Internet.   They also commented on the importance of acquiring computer skills
for future employment.      A    fourth grade laptop student explained:  "In the future  if you  would   like to become
something in your life, you really need to know how to use the computer; you will need to have computer skills in
order to do your job".     Most students also reported that computers can facilitate learning by providing assistance
with spelling and grammar, giving out correct answers (e.g. through the use of math games), providing access to
information, facilitating the development of better looking and professional products, and allowing users to perform
various tasks faster and easier.  Students also appreciated the fact that they were learning new computer skills.   The
following excerpt from a group of third grade laptop students demonstrates their perceptions of the importance of
computers in the learning process:
         S1: Laptops help you learn more.
         Researcher: How do they [laptops] help you learn more?
         S2. If you do not know how to spell a word you can find out using spell checker.
         S3. And when you forget to capitalize letters the computer does it by itself.
         S1. I also like the way you can explore and learn new stuff on the computer.
         Researcher: What kinds of new stuff can you learn on the computer?
         S1. Like different programs, Inspiration, PowerPoint and Word. When I have free time I like to
         check out stuff I have never looked up before and find out new things.
It is interesting to  note  that while  control students emphasized  the importance   of computers   as  an   information
resource and for future employment, laptop students placed more emphasis on the advantages of using technology
for learning.  In fact, a group of fourth grade control students exhibited some ambivalence about the importance of
computer in learning.   One student noted:
         "I   do not  think computers    can help you learn. That is what teachers are   for. If you need   any
         information you can go to the library or ask the teacher.  I think computers are just for fun".
Another student agreed with the above comment and added: "Computers might tell you something or show you how
to do something but they will not help you understand it. Only the teacher will do that".

         Computer enjoyment. Results from focus groups also indicated that all students enjoyed working on the
computer.     Students reported an enthusiasm in using computers to play games, go to different websites using the
Internet, or listen to music. Further, all students preferred word-processing on the computer rather than hand-writing
documents.    Laptop students, however, were also enthusiastic about using educational programs on their laptops,
such as Inspiration, PowerPoint, and Timeliner.      When students were asked to describe their favorite things on the
computer the following conversation transpired among the high-ability fourth grade laptop students:
         S1: My favorite thing on the laptop is using Timeliner.
         Researcher: Why is Timeliner your favorite program?
         S1: Because you can create timelines with all the things you did in the past and the things you will
         do in the future. We did a timeline on ourselves about our past and future.
         S2:   I like using   laptops to create slideshows   and multimedia  presentations.   You can  use  the
         Internet to download pictures and insert them in your presentation. It's really fun, because the
         slideshows pop out of nowhere.
         S3: And when you show it [slideshow] to someone they ask you: "How did you do that?"
         S4: I also like Publisher.
         S3: You can make news articles using Publisher. And there's Front Page, too.
         S4: That's where we develop websites with our articles.
         When asked to report their least favorite thing about computers, students indicated that they are often slow
to respond, they freeze and crash.      Also, laptop students indicated that sometimes they experience difficulties with
saving documents and need to repeat their work.      Finally, some of the laptop students indicated that sometimes they
are concerned about the safety of their laptop.   They are concerned about having it stolen or accidentally damaging it
and getting into trouble.

                                                            492                                                 ICLS 2006
         Student-teacher and student-student interactions: Student focus groups demonstrated that laptop students
frequently   traded skills  with other students,   shared   technology  related tips, and  served as  peer tutors for both
technology and non-technology related topics.       Such interactions were not evident in control students' responses.
While  laptop   students,  for example,  reported   assisting their peers   and  their teacher on  a  number   of different
instances, a third grade control student said:
         I have never taught my teacher anything. When we try to tell him something he does not really pay
         attention to us. When the whole class tries to tell him something he ignores us because he says that
         he is too smart and does not need any of our help.
In contrast, a fourth grade laptop teacher said:
         We often teach the teacher technical skills.     She often asks us about various skills. If she doesn't
         know something she asks: "How did you do that"? Like the other time I highlighted and deleted a
         lot of items at once and she did not know how to do that and I taught her. I really thought she
         knew how to do it but she did not.
Trading with the teacher as well as their peers provided students with a sense of pride and empowerment.          A fourth
grade laptop   student  noted  characteristically: "I  feel proud when    I teach  the teacher something.  The  teacher is
always teaching us, so now I feel, okay, "it is my turn to teach you"".

         Motivation toward school and learning. Results from focus groups indicated that laptop students were very
motivated to complete school work and homework using their laptops.          Even though they reported enjoying playing
games on their laptop, their responses did not reveal use of laptops for games at home.         In fact, when asked what
kinds of games they like playing on their laptops, most students provided examples of educational applications such
as Inspiration or PowerPoint.     Most students reported using educational programs at home to revisit and improve
their homework, practice typing or learn new computers skills and figure out shortcuts.      Control students in contrast,
reported using   home   computers  for   games or   to chat  with others   online.  Overall, results indicated that laptop
students were excited about doing school work on the computer and even initiated their own classroom projects that
made use of technology.      The fourth grade students, for example, suggested an activity to the teacher where they
researched different topics of interest and presented their results in multimedia presentations at the end of each week
by acting as reporters.    Further, use of laptops provided a sense of empowerment.        When asked about how does it
feel to be a laptop student, a fourth grader said: "I feel really smart because laptop classes are for smart kids.      It
makes me feel like I am a genius or that I know more than others".

Discussion and Conclusion
         Although quantitative data did not reveal significant differences in behavior between laptop and control
students they provided important insights.    First, it appeared that grade level made a difference in student responses.
Third graders exhibited higher creative tendencies than fourth graders and more positive attitudes toward school.
This finding might be due to differences in the third and fourth grade curricula.          As students progress to higher
grades, curriculum becomes more complex and teachers' expectations become higher.              Further, fourth graders are
under increased pressure because they are expected to take and perform well at the language arts and mathematics
state tests. As a matter of fact, during the year that the study was conducted school administrators conducted several
test preparation sessions with fourth graders.   These events limited the amount of time that students could spend on
solving problems in different ways and might have also influenced their overall attitude toward school due to testing
anxiety or frustration with time spent on test preparation.      Studies on academic intrinsic motivation, that includes
creative tendencies    such persistence, and  the  learning  of  challenging  tasks,  lend support to this finding.   They
indicate that academic intrinsic motivation in school declines over the years (Gottfried, Fleming, & Gottfried, 2001).

         Quantitative data, however, indicated that fourth grade laptop students had more positive attitudes toward
school than control students.    This finding was evident in student qualitative responses as well.   Students appeared to
be enthusiastic about having laptops and reported enjoying school more because it allowed them to learn things in
different ways.    Third grade laptop students, however, did not appear to enjoy school more than control students.     It
is possible   that the anxiety   over learning new    computer   skills or  damaging   the  equipment  influenced   student
responses.   Third grade laptop students did indicate that they initially felt nervous about having laptops because they
did not have technical skills.

         Overall,   results from  qualitative  data painted   a  positive  picture of  experiences in  laptop  classrooms.
Students not only perceived computers as important learning tools but also took advantage of the resources available

                                                             493                                                  ICLS 2006
to them  by  consistently using educational  applications to   perform   academic  activities.   These activities, in turn,
influenced classroom interactions and created a sense of pride and empowerment among laptop students.              These
behaviors were not evident among control students.

         This study investigated the implementation and impact of laptop computers on student perceptions of the
classroom environment compared to students in control classrooms.          The study focused on a limited number of
classrooms in a single school.  Neither teachers nor students were randomly selected which presents a limitation.
Further, the lack  of pre-post  experimental    data inhibits the  study from  establishing    a strong cause  and effect
relationship between laptops and student perceptions.    Despite these limitations, the study is unique in the following
ways: 1) No other study has been conducted with students in lower elementary grades; 2) No other study has been
conducted exclusively with inner city, minority students coming from low-income families.          With the exception of
the evaluation reports completed by Rockman that included a range of schools, the other studies were conducted in
sub-urban, affluent schools; 3) The great majority of existing studies rely on survey data that are often supplemented
by classroom observations or some anecdotal data.       Rarely do studies include interview data that help illuminate
student "thinking" on the issues under investigation.  Results of the study are consistent with prior empirical studies
but they help extend our understanding of the ways in which urban, elementary school students (in both laptop and
non-laptop classrooms) think and talk about the role and importance of technology in school.

Endnotes
(1) Creative tendencies refer to students' inclinations to explore the unknown, take individual initiative or find unique solutions.

References
Christensen, R., Knezek, G., & Overall, T. (2005). Transition points for the gender gap in computer enjoyment.
         Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 38(1), 23-38.
Garthwait, A. & Weller, H. (2005). A year in the life: Two seventh grade teachers implement one-to-one computing.
         Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 37(4), 361-377.
Gottfried, A., Fleming, J.S., & Gottfried, A.W. (2001). Continuity of academic intrinsic motivation from childhood
         through late adolescence: A longitudinal study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 3-13.
Knezek,  G., Christensen,  R., Miyashita,   K., & Ropp,   M.   (2000). Instruments    for assessing educator  progress   in
         technology   integration. Denton,   TX:  Institute   for the  Integration of   Technology   into Teaching   and
         Learning.
Lowther, D., Ross, S., & Morrison, G. (2003). When each one has one: The influences on teaching strategies and
         student  achievement   of   using   laptops  in  the   classroom.   Educational    Technology    Research   and
         Development, 51(3), 23-44.
Mouza, C. (2002). Understanding teacher change: A study of professional development in technology integration.
         Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Teachers College, Columbia University.
Muir, M., Knezek, G., & Christensen, R. (2004). The Maine learning technology initiative: An exploratory study of
         the impact of ubiquitous technology on student achievement. Research Brief MLLS0401, Retrieved from,
         http://www.mcmel.org/MLLS/briefs/MLLS0401.pdf.
Rockman,      S.    (2004).     Getting      results    with      laptops.    Tech      Learning,     Retrieved     from
         http://www.techlearning.com/story/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=49901145
Silvernail, D.L. & Harris, W.J. (2003, March). The Maine Learning Technology Initiative: Teacher, Student, and
         School  Perspectives   Mid-Year    Evaluation   Report.   Portland, ME:   Maine    Education   Policy Research
         Institute. Retrieved from, http://www.usm.maine.edu/cpeare/mlti.htm.
Windschitl,  M.  & Sahl,  K. (2002).    Tracing Teachers'   Use   of Technology    in a   Laptop  Computer  School: The
         Interplay of Teacher Beliefs, Social Dynamics, and Institutional Culture. American Educational Research
         Journal, 39 (1), 165-205.

Acknowledgements
The work reported here was partly supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Educational Testing Service
(ETS) and a General University Research Grant from the University of Delaware.            All opinions are the author's.             I
want to thank Carl Turner, Nancy O'Laughlin, Darlene Winnington, Rick Kralevich, and Michael Gutierrez for their
assistance in the analysis of the data.

                                                           494                                                   ICLS 2006
