                      The Role-Goal-Activity Framework Revisited:
                                     Examining Student Buy-In
                        in a Project-Based Learning Environment

      Virginia M. Pitts, Daniel C. Edelson, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
                            Email: v-pitts@northwestern.edu, d-edelson@northwestern.edu

         Abstract:   At ICLS    2004 we  presented a  framework      for the  study  of  student participation  and
         engagement in project-based curricula. This framework was specifically designed for the analysis
         of  project-based  learning environments  in  that it  explicitly    considered the  influence  of student
         "buy-in" to an overall scenario on participation and engagement in project-based activities, and
         identified factors  we  hypothesized influenced    the nature   of   role- and  goal-adoption   (including
         students' scenario-related understandings, attitudes, and beliefs, as well as their perception of the
         degree of "fit" or alignment between the role and goal and project activities).         In this paper, we
         present  the findings  of a  mixed-methods    study   we designed,     based    upon   this framework,  to
         examine student role- and goal- adoption in two seventh-grade science classrooms where students
         participated in the "What Will Survive" life sciences curriculum, and discuss ways in which we
         plan to revise our framework based on the study results.

Introduction
         In project-based curricula, in which students develop content understanding through the pursuit of authentic
problems (Blumenfeld et al., 1991), learners are expected to take on a particular goal and role.          The goal involves
solving a   problem   (such  as predicting temperature  on   a  newly    discovered     planet, building  a   playground,  or
developing   a Global   Warming    recommendation).    The   role    embodies    a  particular  way   of interacting, and  is
sometimes explicit (scientific researcher, urban planner, or Global Warming Advisor) and sometimes implicit (i.e.,
"inquirer").   An underlying design assumption behind these curricula is that the goal and role will motivate the
learning of content, and that learning the content in pursuit of the goal (which serves to "contextualize" instruction)
will in turn lead to  better content understanding (Blumenfeld       et  al., 1991, Edelson,    2001,  Krajcik, 2001, Rivet,
2000).  However, while the goal and role are intended to play a central part in motivating activities, and are in turn
one of the reasons project-based learning environments potentially lead to deeper content understanding than do
more traditional, non-project-based learning environments, research to date has not explored the extent to which the
project role and goal actually motivate student participation in practice.      Our current line of research is intended to
address that gap, through examining the extent to which students adopt or "buy into" a project role and goal in
project-based  curricula, and   through exploring  the individual    and   contextual   influences   on  such role and  goal
adoption.

         In 2003, we designed a theoretical framework to guide our investigation and analysis of participation and
engagement in project-based learning environments.     In the following section, we will briefly review the elements of
that framework.   Then, we will describe a study we designed, based upon that framework, to examine student role-
and goal- adoption in two seventh-grade science classrooms where students participated in the "What Will Survive"
life sciences curriculum.  Finally, we will discuss the implications of these study results for our work going forward,
specifically in regards to design of our theoretical framework.

Theoretical Framework
         We designed our theoretical framework to represent our "working hypotheses" regarding the factors that
influence student "buy-in"   to an overall project scenario    (that is, their  adoption  of  a project  role and  goal).  In
considering the potential influences on such buy-in, this framework focused primarily on students' understandings
of the role and goal, their attitudes and beliefs toward that role and goal, and their perceptions of the perceived "fit"
or alignment of the role and goal with the activity in which they were engaged.       In particular, we hypothesized that:

                                                          544                                                       ICLS 2006
       ·    Students develop an understanding of the overall scenario (that is, the role they are to play and the goal
            they are to take on) based on their previous scenario-related knowledge and beliefs and the way in
            which the role and goal are represented in artifacts, teacher talk/interaction, and peer talk/interactions.
       ·    Based   on  this understanding,    students  form  scenario-related  attitudes and  beliefs, including  the
            subjective value of taking on the role and goal (where subjective value includes intrinsic value, utility
            value, attainment value, and cost) and their expectation of success at that role and goal.     "Subjective
            value"  and  "expectation   of success"  come   from Eccles'   Expectancy-Value    Model   (Eccles,  1983),
            which describes factors that determine a student's choices in achievement-related situations.
       ·    The  extent  to  which students   adopt  or buy-into a particular role and    goal is determined   by these
            scenario-related attitudes and beliefs, in conjunction with the extent to which students perceive that the
            activity they are engaged in "fits" or aligns with the overall role and goal.
       ·    When students are bought in to the overall project scenario (that is, when they have adopted the overall
            project role and goal), then the scenario contributes to student motivation to participate in the activities
            and serves to "contextualize" instruction.

Methods
        Data collection  for this study  was  completed   in  Spring 2004,  and  took place  in   two 7th-grade science
classrooms (of about  20 students  each)   in a suburban  middle   school.  Students  participated in  the "What   Will
Survive" life sciences curriculum, which consisted of two phases:
       ·    In the first phase (which spanned approximately six weeks), students were to play the role of special
            task force members pursuing the goal of developing a plan to rid the Great Lakes of the sea lamprey.
            Students were introduced to their role and goal at the beginning of the curriculum, then participated in
            a series of activities introducing them to concepts required to solve the sea lamprey problem; at the end
            of this series of activities they were asked to draft a final solution to the sea lamprey problem.
       ·    In the second phase (which spanned approximately three weeks), students played the role of scientists
            who were pursuing the goal of finding out why, on one of the Galapagos Islands, so many Finches died
            while others survived during a particular time period in the 1970's.      Students conducted their entire
            investigation using the Galapagos Finches software, which gave them access to actual scientific data
            on the Finches populations, environmental conditions, etc. for the island they were studying.

        According  to  our  theoretical framework,   the important   elements to consider   in examining   the  ways in
which students come to "buy-in" to a project scenario include students' understandings of the role and goal they are
being asked to take  on  (based in part  upon   the way  in  which the role and  goal are   represented  "in context"),
students' attitudes and beliefs toward that role and goal, and their perceptions of the perceived "fit" of the activity in
which they are engaged with the overall goal and role.    Therefore, we selected data collection methods that would
allow us to gather data on these elements. Methods included:
       ·    In-depth student interviews (conducted with a subset of students at the end of each phase) to gather
            data on students' understandings of the scenario, their scenario-related attitudes and beliefs, and their
            perceived "fit" of the activity with the scenario
       ·    Daily mini-surveys     (given at the end of most class periods) to gather data on the extent to which
            students were actively bought in to the overall scenario as they participated in activities, as well as data
            regarding their attitudes toward the activities
       ·    Classroom observations to gather data on the curriculum "as implemented" (focusing in particular on
            the ways in which the role and goal were represented "in context").

Findings
        In this section we share a subset of the results of the data analysis, focusing primarily on the first phase of
the curriculum (or, as we call it throughout the rest of this paper, "the Sea Lamprey phase").      At the end of this
section we briefly discuss findings from the second phase of the curriculum ("the Finches phase") as well.

                                                          545                                                  ICLS 2006
Understanding of the Sea Lamprey Scenario
         For the first phase of the project, students were introduced to the project scenario when teachers read them
a "made up" letter from the Great Lakes Fishery Commission.       When interviewed, all students understood that they
were being asked to come up with a plan to rid the Great Lakes of the sea lamprey.        However, surprisingly, not all
students seemed to realize that the letter was "made up".   Of the 12 students interviewed:
        ·    Three students talked as if they were really being asked to help.   For example, Leisha, when first asked
             what she thought about the letter, said, "I was really very excited to help, because we were going to
             start helping people to find out what was doing this to our fish and to our food."
        ·    Three students indicated it was implausible or unbelievable that they would be asked to help.           For
             example, Michael, when asked what he thought of the letter, said, "I thought it was kind of phony ­
             special task force and we're just kids.  How can you be on a special task force?     Sounds like something
             the CIA should do or something."
        ·    Three students indicated that they did not think/care about whether the letter was real or not; rather,
             they indicated that they thought of the project as "just an assignment" or just something they had to do
             for school.    For example, Diana said of the project, "It's just something we have to do.    I don't really
             care if it's real of not. It's just something that we're going to have to do for science."
        ·    Finally, one student indicated that, though she did not think the letter was real, she chose to pretend
             that it was.  As Kendra explained, "I pretended I was more like a scientist.   It seemed like easier to take
             it on from that point of view."
        ·    Two   students   gave   no indication of their thoughts  regarding  whether   or  not the  project  was real
             (because we had not initially anticipated students would be confused as to the "reality" of the project,
             not all students were explicitly asked about this).

         These differences in the ways students viewed the overall project are perhaps not surprising, given that
neither of the teachers    in the study  made explicit, clear   mention of the fact  that this was  a   "made-up"  letter.
Certainly it seems that the apparent confusion or misunderstanding on the part of several of the students might have
been avoided had the teachers simply been more explicit with the students as to the source of the letter or given the
students more guidance as to what to make of it.    However, there is something additional we can learn from the fact
that some students indicated that they believed they were really working on a project to help real scientists solve the
real sea lamprey problem, while other students saw this as just a project for school.       This apparent difference in
students' interpretations of, or reactions to, what it was they were being asked to participate in seems to indicate that
(a) students differ in their view of what is plausible or realistic regarding their role in society and their participation
in real world problems, and/or (b) students differ in the extent to which they are willing to "pretend" or "act as if" a
made-up scenario is real.

         In addition to the separate influences of the desire to pretend that the project is real and the perceived
plausibility of the scenario, there may be an interaction between the two.     A large "plausibility gap" (that is, a gap
between the scenario and what students believe to be plausible or realistic) may inhibit students' ability to take on
particular roles or pretend to participate in a particular scenario, whereas a small plausibility gap may make it easier
for students to pretend.      At the same  time, a strong desire  to pretend   that something  is  real may,  in essence,
overcome   a large "plausibility   gap"  such that students basically   ignore the  "unrealistic"  aspects of a  problem
(paradoxically, for some students, a scenario that is especially unrealistic may for that very reason be especially
desirable to take on, in that it allows students to take on a role they might never get a chance to play "in real life").
In fact, it is indeed possible that some or all of the students who talked about the project as if were real were, to
some extent, ignoring the "unrealistic" aspects and, in essence, pretending the project was real due to a strong desire
that it actually was real.

Scenario-Related Attitudes and Beliefs for the Sea Lamprey Phase
         Five of the twelve students interviewed indicated that they cared about the project goal (of solving the sea
lamprey problem), and two (of those same five students) indicated that they were excited about the opportunity to
play a role different than that they normally play.   None of the other seven students interviewed indicated that they
found the scenario role or goal itself to be motivating, though several of them indicated that they were initially
curious about aspects of the project content (such as how the sea lamprey got into the lake in the first place) or that
they thought the project-activities themselves would be fun.     It seems, then, that there are multiple ways in which

                                                            546                                                 ICLS 2006
this particular scenario can potentially act as a motivational "hook" for students (we will discuss the extent to which
such potential was actually realized later in this paper).

         We did find a potential correlation between students' understanding of the scenario, expectation of success
at the project scenario, and attitude towards the project scenario, such that it was the students who thought it was
real or pretended it was real who thought they could do the project and who cared about the project goal or role.
Given   our small  sample   size, this is not  a  statistically significant finding.  However, we have several possible
hypotheses to explain such a potential correlation.      One hypothesis is that students cared when they believed (or
pretended) that their work potentially mattered ­ specifically, when they felt that their work would actually address
a condition they were concerned about (seeing one's work matter requires not only that one cares about the problem
itself, but requires that one believes one can succeed at doing something about it).       Another possible explanation for
the pattern we see here is that caring about the problem, in conjunction with expectation of success, influenced the
extent to which students approached the project as if it were real.         In other words, if students found the problem
itself compelling, and believed they could be successful at solving it, they chose to imagine that it really was real
(this would assume that even the students who said they thought it was real were, in essence, pretending as well).         A
similar hypothesis would be that caring about the problem influenced the extent to which students approached the
project as  if it were  real,  which   in turn influenced   expectation   of success.    We  will further   investigate these
hypotheses in future work.

A Tale of Two Activities - Did Students Buy-In, and Did Buy-In Matter?
         Regarding the extent to which students were actively "bought in" to the project scenario while participating
in the Sea Lamprey activities, the two activities we discussed in-depth in the interviews were the computer activity
(where  students   worked   with  a computer   simulation   of  grass, rabbits, and  foxes to better   understand ecosystem
relationships and the effect of adding an invasive species) and the dissecting activity (where students dissected a sea
lamprey and a perch in order to learn about how different features of these species allowed them to survive).             On
both the computer days and the dissecting days, about half of the students said that they at least thought about the
overall scenario while participating in the activity.     However, with a few possible (and problematic) exceptions,
there is no evidence that the students we interviewed were actively "bought in" to the project role and goal; that is,
they did not   see themselves    as  special task force members      working    to solve the sea  lamprey   problem as   they
engaged in these project activities (regardless of whether or not they thought the project was real, thought they could
solve it, or felt positively toward the overall project scenario).

         Not   surprisingly,  perhaps  (given  that students    were not  actively  bought in to  the  role and goal),  while
students almost unanimously reported being "into" both the computer activity and the dissecting activity, none of
their reasons for being into it had anything to do with the project role and goal (rather, they focused on aspects of the
activity itself, such as the game-like nature of the computer activity or the fact they got to "cut things open" for the
dissecting activity).  However, there is evidence that, even when students did not "buy in", the scenario may still
have influenced    the way   students  thought   about  the activities in   which  they  participated.  For example, in the
computer activity, there is evidence that the scenario may have:

     -   Provided an opportunity for students to make an analogy between what they were doing in the computer
         activity and the sea lamprey problem.      For example, consider Charla, who explained, "It was just like, as
         the invasive species got introduced (into the grass-rabbits-foxed ecosystem on the third day of the computer
         activity), I was like, "Dang!    The sea lamprey was an invasive species and they're endangering all the fish,
         and so, that's what happened with the invasive species on the computers."
     -   Provided students with the opportunity to apply what they learned in the computer activity to reasoning
         about the sea lamprey problem.       For example, Raemon explained that, in the computer activity, "If you get
         rid of the prey, then the predators will die out.      So like, if you get rid of the animals that the sea lamprey
         eat, so don't kill `em, but like, move `em to somewhere, then the sea lamprey will have nothing to eat and
         they will die."

     While  the   potential is there for  the  scenario to  influence   student thinking,  some   students  may   need  more
scaffolding than others to make connections such as those just described.          In examples such as those above, though
some students perhaps made the connections between the computer activity and the overall scenario at the time of
the activity, others did not make them until the interviews.     There were also students who were not able to make this
connection even at the time of the interview; as one student put it (in regards to the computer activity), "I really

                                                             547                                                    ICLS 2006
didn't see what that had to do with the sea lamprey.      I really didn't get it, `cause it was on maintaining the foxes and
the rabbits."

Looking Across Activities and Across Projects ­ The Scenario and Motivation
    While it seems that for the computer days and the dissecting days the scenario did not play a role in motivating
participation and   engagement   in activities, the story  may   be  different  on  those days   we did  not   discuss in the
interviews (given time constraints, we could not talk about every activity in the interviews, but rather focused on a
couple of activities). The days we focused on in the interviews were among the more active/hands-on of all the
project activities. Quantitative analysis of the mini-survey data indicates that on days categorized as "non-active",
buy-in to the role and goal may have played a bigger part in influencing engagement than on days categorized as
"active". We will continue to explore this in future research, as given our small sample size, we cannot be certain
that the differences in the influence of buy-in on engagement are due to the "activeness" of the days.            However,
potential hypotheses   to explain   this phenomenon     include  (a)  On   days  when   no other  source   of  motivation  is
"dominant", the scenario may act as a source of motivation for students who are even mildly "bought in", and (b)
On very "active" days, sources of motivation that are "local" to the activity (such as the hands-on nature of the task
itself) may, in essence, "drown out" or overcome the motivation that comes from the scenario itself.

    We also applied our framework to the examination of buy-in in the Finches phase of the curriculum. In that
phase, the scenario seems to have played a much more prominent role in motivating activities than it did for the Sea
Lamprey phase of the project, for in the Finches phase 7 out of 11 students interviewed indicated that cared about
solving, or were interested in, the overall problem scenario, and that they were "into" project in part because of their
interest in solving the overall problem.   At the same time, however, 4 of the 11 students interviewed indicated that
they were not into the project activities and did not care about solving the overall problem; rather, they indicated that
all they cared about was getting a grade.

Implications of These Findings Regarding the Framework
          In sum, our framework proved useful for examining student participation and engagement in this particular
implementation.     With the framework as our guide, we were able to identify differences in buy-in among students
and across activities.  We also identified ways in which buy-in to the project scenario (or lack thereof) seemingly
influenced student motivation to participate in activities.      For  this particular  curriculum,  then,  it seems  that the
overall project scenario does indeed have the potential to influence student participation and engagement.

          However,   while   our findings  indicate   that the   potential exists  for the   scenario to   influence   student
participation, engagement, and learning, this potential was not fully realized for all students or in all activities.     The
question now becomes that of "why?" While we cannot answer that question definitively with this particular study,
the framework     does offer explanations  for  these differences  in buy-in   that are consistent  with   the evidence.   In
particular, we found instances where it seems that:
          ·   Understanding of the scenario influenced scenario-related attitudes and beliefs; these understandings
              included the plausibility of the scenario (Sea Lamprey phase) and the extent to which the problem had
              already been solved (Finches phase).
          ·   Scenario-related attitudes and beliefs influenced buy-in.          This was especially true for the Finches
              phase, where students who were especially curious about what happened or who wanted to prove to
              themselves   that  they could   solve the   problem were     the ones who   indicated   that they were   really
              working toward coming up with a solution, rather than just doing what they needed to do for the grade.
          ·   Perceived "fit" or alignment of activity with the overall scenario influenced buy-in (we see this with
              the computer activity during the Sea Lamprey phase, where some students did not understand how the
              activity fit in with the overall scenario).

          At  the same  time,   evidence  indicates that   there are  other influences    on scenario  buy-in   that are  not
adequately represented in the original version of our theoretical framework; these include:
          ·   "Emergent"     role and    goal - There  is  some  evidence   that  role was   at times emergent   rather  than
              consciously adopted.    In particular, during both the dissecting activity (in the Sea Lamprey phase of the
              project) and the Finches phase of the project, some students indicated that they felt like scientists, even
              though they were never explicitly asked to play that role.         This indicates that students came to see

                                                             548                                                    ICLS 2006
            themselves in a particular way as a result of their participation (the original framework focused more
            on how seeing oneself in a particular way influences participation).         It is plausible that students can
            come to take on a goal in the same way.
         ·  Competing goals/roles ­ When students do not buy in to a project scenario, it may not always be the
            case that they do not understand the goal/role, or that they have no desire to take on the goal/role, or
            that they cannot see what they are doing as "fitting in" with what the goal and role entail.        Rather, it
            may be that other goals/roles were simply more "salient" or "dominant".         This may have been the case
            with    students  who indicated that they only cared   about    the grade  when   they  were working   on  the
            Finches   project, and  may  also  have been the   case with    some   of the  students who,  during the  Sea
            Lamprey    phase   of the project, seemed  more    focused   on the  immediate    goals of  the computer  and
            dissecting activities than they did on the overall scenario.    For future work, this raises the question of
            why certain goals and roles might be more "salient" than others for particular students in particular
            contexts.
         ·  Influence of nature of participation on scenario-related understandings, attitudes, and beliefs - While
            the original framework did indicate that one's scenario-related understandings, attitudes and beliefs are
            influenced by participation in project activities, this relationship was not emphasized, nor were the
            dynamics of this relationship made explicit.       This relationship may require more emphasis in future
            research on buy-in, for there were several instances where ongoing participation in activity influenced
            students'  scenario-related understandings   and   attitudes (and,  in turn,  the extent to which  they   were
            "bought in").     This was particularly true during the Finches phase, where some students indicated that
            the more they learned through participating, the more interested they became, or that the closer they
            got to figuring out the answer, the more they wanted to find the answer, or that the more they "put into
            it" over time, the more they cared about seeing their effort "pay off".

         We  will   revise our theoretical  framework  based    on  the  results of   this study,   and believe  that this
framework, as we continue to refine it, will prove useful in guiding future research that will allow us to "design for
buy-in".

References
Blumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991).       Motivating
         project-based learning:  Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning.   Educational Psychologist, 26(3&4),
         369 ­ 398.
Eccles, Jacquelynne S. (1983). Expectancies, values, and academic behavior. In Janet T. Spence (Ed.), Achievement
         and achievement motives (75-146). San Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman and Company.
Edelson, D. C. (2001). Learning-For-Use: A framework for the design of technology-supported inquiry activities.
         Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(3), 355-385.
Krajcik, J. (2001). Learning science content in a project-based environment.     In Tinker, R., & Krajcik, J.S. (Eds.),
         Portable technologies:   Science learning in context. Netherlands:   Kluwer Publishers.
Rivet, A. Singer, J., Schneider, R., Krajick, J., Marx, R. (2000) The evolution of water:      Designing and developing
         effective curricula. Paper presented at the annual conference of the National Association for Research in
         Science Teaching, New Orleans, USA

                                                          549                                                    ICLS 2006
