                        Students' Difficulties in Learning Physics
                     from Dynamic and Interactive Visualizations
                        Rolf Ploetzner, Stefan Lippitsch, University of Education, Freiburg, Germany
                              rolf.ploetzner@ph-freiburg.de, stefan.lippitsch@ph-freiburg.de
                 Matthias Galmbacher, Dieter Heuer, University of Würzburg, Dep. of Physics, Germany
                           galmbach@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de, heuer@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de

        Abstract:    In two   experimental  studies    we  investigated   whether     students' difficulties in
        understanding line graphs in kinematics can be improved by means of dynamic representations.
        These representations were designed to help students in mentally bridging the gap between motion
        phenomena and abstract line graphs. In the first study, contrary to our expectations, the employed
        representations  did  not  only not improve    learning  - but   even   impeded  it. This  finding  was
        underpinned   by  the second    study, in  which  almost   no   sign  was   found of  students  having
        internalized the  relevant aspects  of the dynamic    representations.   Because  similar  results have
        recently been   found  in  other studies,  we   propose    that research  on  learning   with dynamic
        representations  should   not only  focus  on   developing   guidelines   for the external    design of
        representations but also on conceptualising learning strategies which can be taught to students and
        which help them to successfully process the information presented in the external representations.

Introduction
        Physics education aims at helping students to view physics as a consistent system of concepts, principles,
models, and techniques related to the physical world. For the past two decades, research on physics education has
demonstrated that many students face severe difficulties in learning physics. Various factors may contribute to these
difficulties. While some factors are considered to be intrinsic to the students, such as the students' preconceptions
about physics, other factors are considered to be intrinsic to the way in which physics is taught.

        In teaching physics, educators frequently employ different external representations which make different
aspects of a physical situation or a physics concept salient, describe aspects of a physical situation or a physics
concept which cannot be described by means of other representations, and complement each other in such a way that
more complete representations result. Computers offer the additional opportunity to educators to take advantage of
dynamic and interactive external representations to represent physical situations as well as physics concepts that
change in time and space.

        While the use of different external representations has the potential to improve the learning of physics, it
also places various demands on students (for a collection of papers see Ploetzner & Lowe, 2004). For instance,
students need to understand how information is encoded in each representation, how each representation is related to
the physical world, and how information in one representation can be related to and transformed into information in
another representation (e.g., Ainsworth, 1999). Dynamic representations demand students to process continuously
changing information (e.g., Lowe, 2003) and if external representations are not only dynamic but also interactive,
they require students to carefully prepare, execute, and evaluate their interactions (e.g., de Jong & van Joolingen,
1998).

        One notorious problem in physics education is the students' difficulty in understanding line graphs. In this
paper we describe two experimental studies. The first study aimed at improving students' comprehension of line
graphs in kinematics by means of interactive simulations and dynamic representations. However, in accord with the
findings of many other studies on learning with dynamic representations, the students faced severe difficulties in
taking advantage of the information encoded in the dynamic representations. The second study aimed at identifying
whether students make    use  of  the information  encoded    in dynamic     representations  when  solving   kinematics
problems.

Enriching Interactive Simulations in Physics with Iconic Representations
        Line graphs  such  as time-position    graphs, time-velocity    graphs, and time-acceleration  graphs   visualize
functional relations between time and kinematics concepts. The lower section of Figure 1 shows a time-position (left
hand side), a time-velocity (middle), and a time-acceleration graph (right hand side) representing an object's motion.

                                                          550                                                  ICLS 2006
In physics education, students are expected to acquire (1) the ability to construct a line graph that appropriately
represents an object's motion, provided the description of the object's motion is given, and (2) the ability to interpret
a line graph, i.e., to formulate an appropriate description of the motion underlying a line graph. In physics textbooks,
very often line graphs are "developed" in three steps. In the first step, an object's motion is described by means of a
text as well as by means of a picture. In the second step, values of a kinematics concept at various points in time are
presented in a table. In the third step, the variable values as well as their interpolation are visualized in a coordinate
plane.

          Research on physics education has repeatedly demonstrated that very often students have severe difficulties
in understanding line graphs (e.g., Berg & Smith, 1994; Scanlon, 1998). These difficulties apply to the construction
of line graphs as well as to their interpretation. Even students who successfully construct line graphs in mathematics
are often unable to take advantage of their knowledge in physics (e.g., Leinhardt, Zaslavsky & Stein, 1990). In the
most frequently   observed misinterpretation   of line graphs in  kinematics,  students view  line graphs  as paths  of
motion regardless of which kinematics concepts are taken into account by the graphs (e.g., McDermott, Rosenquist
& van  Zee,  1987). Obviously,  many    students  are hardly able to mentally  bridge the gap between   observable   or
simulated motion phenomena on the one hand and abstract line graphs on the other.

                                                  b)

                     a)

                     c)

                     d)

     Figure 1. Dynamic representations in PAKMA: (a) simulations of motion phenomena, (b) iconic
              representations of kinematics concepts, (c) stamp diagrams, and (d) line graphs.

          Is it possible to improve students' understanding of how motion phenomena and line graphs are related to
each other by means of interactive simulations and dynamic representations? In order to investigate this question, we
took advantage of the simulation program PAKMA (Heuer, 2002). Among other phenomena, PAKMA allows for
the interactive simulation of motion phenomena. In comparison to textbooks, PAKMA offers the opportunity to
visualize how different representations of kinematics concepts dynamically and synchronously change in time.

          To help students   understand how    motion  phenomena    and  line graphs  are related  to each other, four
dynamic   representations  ­ exemplified  in   Figure  1 ­   are employed   in PAKMA:     (a) simulations  of  motion
phenomena (abbreviated S), (b) dynamic and iconic representations of kinematics concepts which are superimposed
on the simulated motion phenomena (abbreviated DIR), (c) dynamic stamp diagrams (abbreviated STAMPS), and
(d) dynamic line graphs. Iconic representations correspond to vector representations of kinematics concepts such as
position, velocity, acceleration, and   force. Stamp   diagrams   result from  stamping   iconic  representations in a
coordinate plane at defined points in time. Line graphs correspond to the interpolation of the iconic representations'

                                                          551                                                 ICLS 2006
heads in the stamp diagrams. In PAKMA, the simulation can be started and stopped interactively at any time, the
simulation can be run continuously or frame by frame, and each representation can be faded in or out interactively.

Study 1
          In an experimental   study  we investigated   whether   students'   understanding  of  line graphs  in kinematics
improves  depending    on the  dynamic   representations    made  available   to the students.   We   hypothesized   that the
availability of iconic representations   of kinematics   concepts  superimposed     on  simulated  motion phenomena       (cf.
Figure 1a and 1b) would make it easier for students to relate motion phenomena and line graphs (cf. Figure 1d) to
each other than the mere availability of simulated motion phenomena and line graphs. We further hypothesized that
the additional  availability of stamp    diagrams  (cf. Figure  1c)  would    help  students even   more  to  relate motion
phenomena and line graphs to each other.

Method
Design
          Three   groups were   formed,  who    made    use of  three different    simulation   environments.    In the   first
environment   (S),  various  motion   phenomena    were   interactively  simulated   and  line   graphs were   dynamically
displayed. In the second environment (S+DIR), dynamic and iconic representations of kinematics concepts were
additionally   superimposed     on   the    simulations  of   the  motion     phenomena.     In   the   third  environment
(S+DIR+STAMPS), dynamic stamp diagrams were also displayed.

Participants
          Overall, 111 volunteer eleventh graders were randomly assigned to the groups: 39 students to group S, 33
students  to group  S+DIR,   and   39 students  to group    S+DIR+STAMPS.        The   students  had  attended introductory
classes on the kinematics concepts of position and velocity. While 54 students were girls, 57 students were boys.
Girls and boys were approximately equally distributed across groups.

Learning Material
          For each group investigated, the learning material comprised eight physics projects progressing from the
two easier concepts position and velocity to the two more difficult concepts acceleration and force (cf. Reif & Allen,
1992). Each concept was addressed by two projects. Every project was made up of a worksheet and a simulation
environment.    The worksheet   aimed    at encouraging   the students   to   make  use of   the corresponding   simulation
environment   in  a structured way.   A  worksheet  always  started  with   a text that described   a motion  phenomenon.
Thereafter, various questions had to be answered by the students while making use of the simulation environment.
For instance, students were asked to describe how a time-position graph changes in the simulation environment
when an object's velocity is interactively altered. The questions were provided with information on how to run the
simulation environment. Students were asked to write down their answers to the questions on the worksheet.

Procedure
          Initially, the students took a pre-test to determine their knowledge in kinematics as well as their visual-
spatial abilities (Raven, 1980).   The   pre-test addressed   the students'   knowledge   about   the kinematics    concepts
position, velocity,  acceleration, and   force. It consisted  of  14  questions,   the  answers  of   which   demanded    the
interpretation of line graphs. Next, the students worked individually on an example physics project in order to learn
how to run the simulation environment. This project addressed an object's changing position in such a way that the
students were able to focus on running the simulation environment. Thereafter, the students worked individually on
the eight physics projects described above. For each student, the learning time was limited to 150 minutes. Finally,
the students worked on a kinematics post-test which consisted of 30 questions, the answers of which demanded the
interpretation of line graphs, as well as of 12 questions, the answers of which demanded the construction of line
graphs.

Results
          The students'  performances    in the pre-test are  shown   in Table   1.  There are   no  significant differences
between the groups. However, on average the students had significantly more success with test items concerning the
easier concepts position and velocity than with test items concerning the more difficult concepts acceleration and
force (F = 794.1, df = 1,110, p < .001).

                                                            552                                                     ICLS 2006
Table 1. The means (M) and standard deviations (SD) of the relative solution frequencies in the pre-test.

                                                             Simulation environment
 Kinematics concepts                      S                            S+DIR                    S+DIR+STAMPS
 Position and velocity       M = 67.9% (SD = 21.2%)          M = 66.3% (SD = 22.2%)        M = 69.2% (SD = 19.0%)
 Acceleration and force      M = 26.6% (SD = 22.4%)          M = 26.5% (SD = 23.7%)        M = 31.1% (SD = 22.9%)
 Overall                     M = 47.3% (SD = 17.9%)          M = 46.4% (SD = 18.8%)        M = 50.2% (SD = 17.5%)

         To  analyze the students' learning   performance,   we  computed    the students' relative learning gain g (cf.
Hake, 1998): g = (%Correctpost-test - %Correctpre-test)/(100 - %Correctpre-test) x 100. By means of a median split, each
group of students was divided into two subgroups: a group with low visual-spatial abilities and a group with high
visual-spatial abilities. Figure 2 shows the relative learning gains with respect to the different kinematics concepts.

         A  multivariate analysis  of variance   did not  reveal any   significant  differences between  the  groups    of
students across all kinematics concepts. While a univariate analysis of variance did not reveal significant differences
between the groups of students with respect to the concepts position and velocity, it revealed significant differences
with respect to the concepts acceleration and force (F = 4.19, df = 2,105, p < .05). Concerning the factor "simulation
environment", however, these differences are diametrically opposed to our predictions: on average, those students
who only had the simulated motion phenomena and the line graphs available received higher learning gains than
those students who additionally had iconic representations and stamp diagrams available.

         Students with low visual-spatial abilities accomplished significantly smaller learning gains with respect to
the concepts acceleration and force than students with high visual-spatial abilities (F = 4.78, df = 1,105, p < .05).
Although the interaction between the factors "simulation environment" and "visual-spatial ability" is statistically not
significant, this is especially true for those students who had the iconic representations available without having the
stamp diagrams available: these students performed even better in the pre-test than they did in the post-test.

Study 2
         Contrary to all our expectations, dynamic iconic representations and stamp diagrams did not help students
to better understand line graphs. With respect to the easier kinematics concepts position and velocity, the availability
of these representations made   no significant  difference.  With  respect   to the more  difficult kinematics concepts
acceleration  and force, the availability  of iconic  representations   and  stamp  diagrams    even hindered  learning.
Although   stamp   diagrams    partially compensated     for the   difficulties  which   were   associated  with  iconic
representations, they nevertheless did not improve learning beyond the learning gains which were achieved without
iconic representations and stamp diagrams. Although these findings contradict our expectations, they are in accord
with the findings of many other studies which demonstrate students' difficulties in learning from and making use of
dynamic  representations  (for an overview    see Bétrancourt    & Tversky,   2000).  In a second   study, we  aimed    at
identifying whether students make use of the information encoded in dynamic iconic representations during problem
solving.

Method
Design
         Two  groups   were  formed   who   made     use of  two   different simulation  environments.   While   in one
environment   (S) various  motion  phenomena      were   interactively simulated    and  line graphs  were  dynamically
displayed, in the other  environment     (S+DIR)  dynamic    and iconic representations   of  kinematics concepts   were
superimposed on the simulations of the motion phenomena.

Participants
         Overall, 18 volunteering eleventh graders were randomly assigned to each group. The students had attended
introductory classes on the kinematics concepts position and velocity. While 19 students were girls, 17 students
were boys. Girls and boys were approximately equally distributed across groups.

                                                          553                                                   ICLS 2006
                        Relative learning gainRelative learning gain
                                               35

                                               30

                                               25

                                               20                                                    Low visual-spatial abilities
                                               15                                                    High visual-spatial abilities

                                               10

                                                5

                                                0
                                                          S            S+DIR         S+DIR+
                                                                                    STAMPS
                                                30

                                                25

                                                20

                                                15
                                                                                                     Low visual-spatial abilities
                                                10
                                                                                                     High visual-spatial abilities
                                                 5

                                                 0
                                                          S            S+DIR         S+DIR+
                                                -5                                  STAMPS

                                               -10

      Figure 2. The relative learning gains with respect to the concepts position and velocity (above)
                                                              and acceleration and force (below).

Learning Material
         For  each  group                       investigated, the  learning  material comprised   14  physics  projects progressing         from   the
easier concepts to the more difficult concepts. Two projects were on position and time-position graphs, four on
velocity and time-velocity graphs, four on acceleration and time-acceleration graphs, and four on force and time-
force graphs. Again,    every                      project  was  made  up of  a worksheet   and a simulation   environment          which   had to be
processed by the students.

Procedure
         Initially, the students                       took  the same  pre-test used   in the  first study to  determine          their knowledge  in
kinematics.  Thereafter,                       the students  worked  individually   on the  14  physics projects   described        above.  For  each
student, the learning   time                       was limited  to 180 minutes.  Next,  the students   worked   individually        on   6 kinematics
problems without having access to the simulation environment. During problem-solving, the students were asked to
think aloud (cf. Chi, 1997) and to write down their problem-solving attempts. The students' verbalizations as well as
their problem-solving   attempts                       were  recorded  on the   computer.  For each   student, the problem-solving          time was
limited to 120 minutes. Before problem-solving took place, the students first watched a video demonstrating the
verbalizations of a person solving a puzzle on the computer. Thereafter, the students exercised thinking aloud while
solving a variation of the puzzle.

                                                                                554                                                          ICLS 2006
Results
          There were no significant differences between groups in the pre-test: the students in both groups gave on
average 36% correct answers to the questions. There were also no significant differences between groups in problem
solving performance: while the students in group S solved on average 51% of the problems, the students in group
S+DIR solved on average 53% of the problems. To assess whether students make use of the information encoded in
dynamic iconic representations during problem solving, it was identified how frequently kinematics concepts which
change over time were explicitly mentioned in the students' verbalizations and depicted or drawn in their written
problem-solving attempts. The frequencies are shown in Table 2. There were no significant differences between
groups. In group S+DIR, only two verbalizations and four depictions/drawings of only three students gave rise to the
interpretation  that these   students  had   developed mental    representations which   did   not only  comprise   dynamic
aspects of kinematics concepts but also iconic aspects.

Table 2. The means (M) and standard deviations (SD) of how frequently the students referred to
kinematics concepts that change over time.

                                                                       Simulation environment
                 Source of information                                S                      S+DIR
                 Verbalizations                            M = 17.8 (SD = 9.2)       M = 13.7 (SD = 8.4)
                 Written problem-solving attempts          M = 4.8 (SD = 7.1)        M = 5.8 (SD = 5.9)

Conclusion
          In two experimental studies we investigated whether students' understanding of line graphs in kinematics
can be improved by means of dynamic iconic representations. These representations were designed to help students
in mentally bridging the gap between motion phenomena and abstract line graphs. In the first study, however, the
students had severe difficulties in comprehending the information encoded in dynamic iconic representations. This
finding was underpinned by the second study, in which almost no sign was found of students having internalized the
dynamic and iconic aspects of the employed representations.

          It is well possible that learning with the dynamic iconic representations placed too many cognitive demands
on  the students  within     too short a   period  of time.  However,    because  difficulties  in learning   from  dynamic
representations  have   been  observed    in many  recent  studies   which  investigated the acquisition   of knowledge    in
different application   domains,   it  is rather  implausible   that limited learning  time  is the  only  reason   for these
difficulties. In various  studies  it  has   been observed   that  many  students   process dynamic   representations    only
superficially (e.g., Lowe, 2003; Ploetzner, Bodemer, & Neudert, in press; Yeo et al., 2004). A growing body of
research indicates that the students may have no means at hand to adequately process dynamic representations. The
principled design of external representations (e.g., Clark & Mayer, 2003) seems to be only one side of the coin. The
other side of the coin seems to consist of the external and internal learning activities which the students actually
apply to  the  external  representations.    One  example    in which   the  design of external    representations  has been
successfully complemented with the design of learning strategies is learning from text. A second example is learning
from hypertext.

          What makes us assume that students do not need to learn how to learn from dynamic representations? For
instance, in order to improve learning from dynamic representations, students possibly need to learn how to identify
and analyse    relevant components     of  these  representations. Students  might  also need   to learn   how to  relate the
information   presented  in  dynamic      representations to other   sources of  information    such as  instructional  texts.
Possibly, in the years to come, we may not only need to develop guidelines for the external design of dynamic
representations,  but   also to  conceptualise   learning strategies  made   up  of external as  well   as internal learning
activities, which we can teach to students and which help them to successfully process the information presented in
the external representations.

                                                              555                                                  ICLS 2006
References
Ainsworth, S. (1999). The functions of multiple representations. Computers and Education, 33, 131-152.
Berg, C.  A., &  Smith,  P. (1994).  Assessing students' abilities to  construct and interpret   line graphs: Disparities
         between multiple-choice and free-response instruments. Science Education, 78, 527-554.
Bétrancourt, M., & Tversky, B. (2000). Effect of computer animation on users' performance: A review. Le Travail
         Humain, 63(4), 311-329.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 6(3), 271-315.
Clark, R. C., & Mayer, R. (2003). E-learning and the science of instruction. San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer.
de Jong, T., & van Joolingen, W. R. (1998). Scientific discovery learning with computer simulations of conceptual
         domains. Review of Educational Research, 68(2), 179-201.
Hake,  R. R.    (1998). Interactive  engagement  versus   traditional  methods:   A  six-thousand-students-survey     of
         mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics, 66, 67-74.
Heuer, D. (2002). PAKMA 2002 ­ Physik interaktiv simulieren, messen, reproduzieren, modellieren und analysieren
         [PAKMA 2002 ­ Interactive simulation, measurement, reproduction, modelling and analysis in physics;
         CD-ROM]. Hannover: Schroedel Verlag.
Leinhardt, G., Zaslavsky, O., & Stein, M. K. (1990). Functions, graphs, and graphing: Tasks, learning, and teaching.
         Review of Educational Research, 60, 1-64.
Lowe, R. K. (2003). Animation and learning: Selective processing of information in dynamic graphics. Learning
         and Instruction, 13(2), 157-176.
McDermott,    L. C., Rosenquist,  M.  L., & van  Zee, E.  H.   (1987). Student   difficulties in connecting   graphs and
         physics: Examples from kinematics. American Journal of Physics, 55, 503-513.
Ploetzner, R., Bodemer, D., & Neudert, S. (in press). Successful and less successful use of dynamic visualisations in
         instructional  texts. In R. K.   Lowe &  W.  Schnotz     (Eds.), Learning   with animation     - Research   and
         implications for design. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Ploetzner, R., & Lowe, R. K. (Eds.). (2004). Special issue on dynamic visualisations and learning. Learning and
         Instruction, 14(3), 235-240.
Raven, J. C. (1980). RAVEN-Matrizen-Test ­ Advanced progressive matrices. Weinheim: Beltz Verlag.
Reif, F., & Allen, S. (1992). Cognition for interpreting scientific concepts: A study of acceleration. Cognition and
         Instruction, 9(1), 1-44.
Scanlon, E. (1998). How beginning students use graphs of motion. In M. W. van Someren, P. Reimann, H. P. A.
         Boshuizen & T. de Jong (Eds.), Learning with multiple representations (pp. 67-86). Amsterdam: Pergamon
         Press.
Yeo, S., Loss, R., Zadnik, M., Harrsion, A., & Treagust, D. (2004). What do students really learn from interactive
         multimedia? A physics case study. American Journal of Physics, 72(10), 1351-1358.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this paper was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under contracts
HE 2550/3-1 and PL 224/10-1.

                                                           556                                                  ICLS 2006
