True Stories, Storied Truth: Stitching Narrative and Logico-Scientific
                      Discourse Together in an Age of "Spin"

                                                 Joseph L. Polman
                              University of Missouri-St. Louis College of Education
                                              One University Blvd.
                                             Saint Louis, MO 63121
                                               polman@umsl.edu

        Abstract: This paper includes a framework for combining narrative and logico-scientific thinking
        in the  consumption  and  production  of  stories about   the real world,  such as journalistic  and
        historical accounts. The framework involves graphical representation, at an intermediate level of
        abstraction, in "storygrams" showing sequences of actions involving agents, using cultural tools,
        to serve goals, within contexts of interpreted scenes. The framework also involves four elements
        of "narrative metacognition", including monitoring of perspectives, precedents, symbolism and
        narrative  frames. Utilizing this framework   may    help learners  better develop their  facility at
        moving back and forth between assessments of "narrative truth" and "logico-scientific truth".

A "true" story, twice told
        Consider the following two tellings of the story of the Great Plains of North America, paraphrased from
descriptions of historian William Cronon (1992):

        The Great Plains of North America was a virtual wasteland when the white settlers moved in.
        Unlike the eastern U.S., the Plains were not easily suited to settlement. Farmers could not simply
        move in and make the soil consistently productive to farming and building, because the plains
        were semi-arid and largely treeless. But gradually, the settlers' ingenuity led to successful farming
        using   a combination  of irrigation  for groundwater     and  windmills   to access   aquifers, and
        successful ranching using barbed wire to contain livestock. This led to rapid expansion, which
        could not be sustained in natural drought periods like that which led to the "dustbowl" of the
        1930s. Government bureaucrats tried to use this tragedy as an excuse to force farmers off the
        land, but the people stayed, and grew closer to the land, eventually living in harmony with its
        cycles.

        Before  the white  man came,   the  Great Plains  of  North   America  was  a  fragile but beautiful
        ecosystem. But capitalist farmers and settlers did not respect the delicate balance of the land,
        moving in with their technology and social systems of exploitation. By the 1930s, world capitalism
        was in decline and crisis, and that crisis manifested itself in massive dust storms on the plains. The
        former natural wonder of adaptation to the cycles of rain and drought literally blew away on the
        winds of capitalism's greed.

        These story sketches summarize two accounts of the Dust Bowl by professional historians Paul Bonnifield
and Donald Worster, respectively. Utilizing Kenneth Burke's grammar of stories, Cronon (1992) detailed a total of
five very different accounts of Great Plains settlement published by historians over the years. The interesting thing
is, the tellers of these tales seldom disagreed on what "the facts" were--there was a dry landscape with certain
things in it, farmers moved in, they struggled at first, they did better after utilizing new technologies, and they had
trouble again in the drought of the 1930s. Instead, the historians highlight some events and downplay or just leave
out others, and frame their accounts with different descriptions of the scenes on which the action took place, as well
as motives by the actors, and outcomes or ends of the tales. Thus, the perspective and agenda of the storyteller
makes all the difference in the world (Cronon, 1992; Novick, 1988).

        This state of affairs should be familiar to watchers of the media at the turn of the twenty-first century. In the
United States, conservatives who  criticize "liberal media"  like the  New  York   Times, and  liberals  who   criticize

                                                         557                                                 ICLS 2006
"conservative media" like Fox News have been lamenting how elusive the truth is amid the spin. When it comes to
both past and contemporary events, how is a reader or listener to decide what is true, or at least closer to the truth?

The Problem
          The tension described above is the result of the fact that non-fiction or "empirical" stories (e.g., historical
and journalistic accounts, Scholes & Kellogg, 1966) relate to two different kinds of thinking or making meaning--
narrative and "logico-scientific". Like many journalistic and historical accounts, the empirical stories described
above gain   their credence   from both    narrative  and   logico-scientific coherence.    Citizens voting   in democratic
societies must combine narrative and logico-scientific reasoning when deciding on the believability of candidates'
positions. As Bruner (1986, 2002) has pointed out, however, narrative and logico-scientific ways of thinking are not
only different but also difficult to combine.

          Barton   &  Levstik (2004),  among  others,    have shown    how narrative    can lead to  oversimplifications   in
learning  history; they thus  recommend    caution   in  teachers' use of  narrative as  a  tool for teaching    history. But
narrative cannot   be  banished  altogether   from   our  discourses.  For instance,    research has  shown    how   physics
professors may ignore their formal knowledge of insulators and choose aluminum foil to keep a soda can cool,
because it relates to their narrative memories from childhood (Lewis & Linn, 1994). Relatedly, even well informed
U.S. history  teachers  sometimes   promulgate       the dominant  narrative  that  all western   Native   Americans   were
nomadic, when they know that some tribes were in fact settled farmers (Wills, 1994). In both these cases, educated
people are capable of having their logical reasoning "overcome" the compelling--and erroneous--narratives when
prompted to use their formal knowledge (Wertsch & Polman, 2001). That tends to be what we do in school: teach
students to erase their narrative thinking, lest they be fooled. When prompted, students dutifully refer to what the
evidence shows or not. But like their teachers, those students are likely to walk through the "everyday" world with
narrative "erasing" their logical, critical stance when confronting stories that just sound right.

          In both  the example  of the  physics   of  soda  cans   and nomadic   Native  Americans,    the light  of logico-
scientific reasoning reveals falsity in the narrative, but such clarity in determining veracity is not always possible. As
Cronon's (1992) analysis referenced above shows, for example, many of the same "facts" can be assembled to tell
very different stories--in this case, some of progress, and some of tragedy. But many of these stories cannot be
debunked by pointing out flaws in their elements: each part appears logically and scientifically true. Instead, the
hearer must decide on a preferred version of environmental history based on overall "narrative truth", which is
"judged   by its verisimilitude rather than   its verifiability" (Bruner,  2003,  p. 51).   Within  political and  historical
realms, judgments of verisimilitude are too often based solely on what is most comfortable given one's own personal
background and biases.

          In today's atmosphere of increasingly sophisticated "spin" in political and historical discourse, citizens have
a need to stitch together the narrative and logico-scientific. In this paper, I present a set of principles for approaching
empirical stories, grounded in the sociocultural approach (e.g., Wertsch, 1998, 2002). I will then briefly describe
some practices based on these principles and research on learning.

Towards more sophisticated consumption of true stories
          In his analysis of collective remembering of national narratives, James Wertsch (2002) has pointed out that
empirical stories serve both a referential and a dialogic function. The referential function of empirical narratives
relates to how accurately the story represents the events that actually occurred in the world. The dialogic function of
narrative relates  to how narratives   are told   in response  to  a particular set  of circumstances,  and   for particular
purposes; in addition, they are often contested accounts that serve both to describe the events, and position the
identities of both creator and the hearer. In order to educate more sophisticated consumers, I propose two main
strategies: the development of a representational system for narratives I call "storygrams", and the development of
"narrative metacognition."

"Storygrams"
          Numerous structural accounts have been developed in narrative theory representing the form and meaning
of stories. One of the most extensive was Vladimir Propp's (1968) framework for describing Russian folktales. This
framework consists of 7 types of characters or spheres of action, such as the villain, and 31 plot functions, such as
"the villain receives information about his victim" and "the villain is defeated." Although it would be possible to

                                                             558                                                   ICLS 2006
adapt a detailed structural account of narratives such as this or others that grow out of the psychological tradition of
describing narrative schemas (e.g., Bartlett, 1995), there are reasons to seek out a simpler system for learners to use
in representing stories. First, inscriptional forms such as scientific diagrams gain part of their credence through
making their content extremely compact and communicable to others (e.g., Latour, 1988). An inscriptional system
incorporating a large but limited set of functions and types to choose from, such as an adaptation of Propp's or that
developed by Chatman (1978) for film and fiction would be too cumbersome for any but the very committed to
utilize well. Second, inscriptional forms at an intermediate level of abstraction have a greater hope of being useful
scaffolds for learners that may  be   taken up as frames   for thinking (White,  1993). An example  is Bell's (2002)
argument maps, which allow learners to describe a scientific argument using a basic set of primitive categories
appropriate to the discipline--in the case of science, elements such as "my theory", "evidence for", and "evidence
against" (see also Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003).

          As a starting point for "storygrams", I have chosen Kenneth Burke's (1979) pentad, which Jerome Bruner
(2005) has referred to as the "universal arguments of action". In particular, I propose creating a modified concept
mapping system with symbols representing Wertsch's (1998) terms for the five elements of the pentad (see Figure
1), and hypermedia links to details and source text elements.

          Figure 1: Storygram node with Wertsch's (1998) interpretation of K. Burke's (1979) pentad

          The basic unit of the storygram is the action, which according to Burke's analysis always consists of an
agent, utilizing cultural tools to take the action, in order to serve a goal or goals, all within the context of some
scene. The story is driven forward because of tensions between elements of the pentad, and each major action would
be represented on the storygram, with time shown by aligning action nodes from left to right. To make a storygram
representing an existing story, a learner would replace the labels of the five elements with descriptors of the scene,
agent, cultural tools, action, and goals. The major action sequences that move the story plot forward would be
represented,  with possibility for further  description in notes attached to the base storygram representation, and
hyperlinks to source text if desired.

          To further clarify, storygrams of the two Dust Bowl in the Great Plains accounts from the beginning of this
paper appear in Figures 2 and 3. Figure 2 is a storygram of Paul Bonnifield's narrative, which opened in a scene of a
semiarid, treeless, resistant environment. Settlers in this environment could not contain their livestock by building
wooden fences as they had done in the lush woodlands of the east, but they adapted by building barbed wire fences.
In order to have enough water for their crops, farmers in this environment had to go beyond simple wells, instead
building more complex irrigation systems, and using windmills to pump water out of deeper aquifers. Thus, the
scene becomes transformed into one of thriving farms within the resistant but changeable environment, and the
mood rises. But then conflict arises, when government bureaucrats take advantage of the Dust Bowl droughts to try
and force farmers out, with a covert goal of controlling wheat production. The farmers who stayed, however, found
ways to re-adapt to this context of government regulation and a changeable environment, coming to thrive and gain
more harmony with the land.

                                                           559                                               ICLS 2006
                 Figure 2: Storygram of Paul Bonnifield's narrative of Great Plains struggle
                           and progress through human adaptation despite government

       Donald Worster began with a much different contextual description of the same territory, as depicted in
Figure 3. Rather than beginning with merely the physical features of the land, he stressed the decline of world
capitalism, within which the unique but delicate ecosystem of the plains existed. As elsewhere, the corrupt capitalist
systems exploited the land to expand and grow, using its technology and social systems. Once the ecosystem was
knocked out of balance, as exemplified by the droughts, capitalist planners stretched their capabilities in order to
prop up their systems of exploitation. Eventually, though, they wasted the landscape, as seen in the Dust Bowl
windstorms topsoil blown away.

                  Figure 3: Storygram of Donald Worster's tale of Great Plains declension

       As I have conceived of them, Storygrams such as those above could be part of a comprehensive approach
to improving the discourse around empirical narratives. Another element of this approach is a focus on developing
narrative metacognition.

Narrative metacognition
       Educators and researchers have come to recognize metacognition as an important form of thinking across
and within disciplines (e.g., Bruer, 1993; White & Frederiksen, 1998). Sophisticated readers use metacognition
when they monitor their understandings, while expert problem solvers use metacognition to make predictions on
where their work will take them. In order to foster more sophisticated consumption and production of empirical

                                                        560                                                ICLS 2006
narratives, I propose educating learners to be more effective at some metacognitive practices particularly important
to narrative. These include being aware of perspectives, precedents, and symbolism, as well as monitoring the "story
frames" within which an account is cast.

        In history and social studies education, there is an existing practice of encouraging learners to focus on the
perspectives and biases of those who created the artifacts and accounts used as sources, especially in initiatives
involving youth in the "doing of history" research utilizing primary sources (e.g., Britt & Aglinskas, 2002; Holt,
1990; Levstik & Barton, 1997).

        In addition to this old standby, however, light can be shed on how narrative impacts understanding by
considering the "precedents" or existing accounts with which the hearer is familiar, and which the hearer takes as
credible. This is similar to law, where previous legal decisions shape the reactions of the courts to new cases which
are in effect narratives  crafted to  link most   strongly to  case  precedents that will provide  the   most beneficial
interpretation--and thus legal decision. As in the law, all tellers of "true tales" appeal to precedents (Bruner, 2002).

        In   the literature and   language  arts  classrooms   of North America,     students have   long   analyzed   the
symbolism that helps constitute the meaning and message of fictional stories, but such considerations are rarely
explored in the context of journalism or history. But compelling metaphors that are inserted either explicitly or
implicitly in empirical narrative texts, as well as imagery or music that creates unconscious cues in multimedia
artifacts such as documentary films and television shows, are just as important as in fictional worlds. One interesting
approach to textual and multimedia accounts of "social worlds" that concern youth has been proposed and explored
by Beach and Myers (2002). In their approach, youth attempt to make sense of, critique, and even transform social
worlds, in part by better understanding how symbolism operates within those worlds.

        Another aspect of narrative metacognition is appreciating how "spin" operates. Although accusing one's
political opponents of spin has become commonplace, it is first important to recognize that all sides in political
arguments utilize spin, and they may utilize it in both honest and deceitful ways. When cast as an accusation against
one's opponent, "spin" is usually an allegation of deceit, involving deliberate misinformation, dropping of relevant
information, or innuendo. In addition to such practices, it is worth noting that narrators in political and social realms
are sometimes not so much trying to distort the truth so much as create a reality that is possible, but not yet decided.
As an example, consider some comments of David Makovsky about the pullout of Israelis from the Gaza Strip in
August 2005:

        There    could be   two narratives  that  emerge   from this disengagement   story.   One is, it is the
        revitalization of a center in Israeli politics and Palestinian politics that was decimated with the
        Intifada ... Basically, both sides acting because they want a better future for their kids, working
        together to establish a two state solution. If that is the narrative, in my view--and I think it's the
        correct narrative--[then] this process has a future. If it's going to be that Hamas basically won ...
        if [this event] will be interpreted as a victory for terror and violence, it will be short-lived. If it is
        interpreted as the re-emergence of a sane center in both Israeli and Palestinian societies, I think
        this is a first step towards a very important future.

        A refreshing aspect of Makovsky's comments is that he is straightforward about the competing narratives,
their basis in fact, and goals each might serve. At the end, he also intimates how the interpretation of one narrative
or another not only reflects current reality, but helps to create the future reality. This is an important aspect of any
human interpretation.

        Finally, I propose "frame monitoring" as an essential aspect of a critical stance toward empirical narratives.
George  Lakoff   (2004)  has recently  popularized  the notion  that overarching  narrative   frames  influence    political
storytelling and message    creation. He   argues that successful  conservative  politicians consistently appeal    to the
notion that citizens need a government which acts as a strict father who lays down inflexible rules and imbues the
"family"--the nation's citizenry--with a strong moral order. In contrast, liberal politicians generally frame their
account of government as a nurturant parent who teaches the children to pursue personal happiness and care for
others. I would argue that these are not the only frames that matter, but critical consumers of supposedly true stories
would benefit by attending to how the frame an account is put into often conveniently excludes some "facts", or
minimizes them by allowing that although they may be true, they may not be particularly relevant to the main

                                                           561                                                 ICLS 2006
storyline. In addition, the frame chosen for a story includes or emphasizes some apparent "facts", which on closer
inspection are revealed as assumptions not supported by evidence but instead a merely coherent storyline.

Learning Environment Design
          The above framework, combined with previous cognitive studies of educational practice, could be used as
the basis for learning environment design. For instance, a participation structure with narrative metacognition roles
(as in Palincsar & Brown's (1984) "Reciprocal Teaching") could be used to externalize the practices of monitoring
perspectives, precedents, symbolism, and narrative frames. In such an application of Vygotsky's general genetic law
of development, the hope is that the implementation of the roles on the social plane would lead to appropriation by
the   individual    learners.    In    addition,    a  computer     application    for     "storygrams"     is    in  prototype
(http://www.umsl.edu/~edujpolm/truestories.html) --essentially a specialized concept mapping program that would
allow  learners  to   create the narrative   diagrams   like  those  in Figures  1-3,   with the  possibility     of embedding
hypermedia links to extended notes or commentary on any one element, as well as links to source texts if desired. If
groups of learners used this utility to storygram competing empirical narratives, these "cognitive tools" could be
used both to support individual understanding, and as props that could drive learning conversations among peers
forward. They would thus serve some of the same purposes that "external representations" have been shown to serve
in the course   of science   inquiry,  both  by  children and  practicing   scientists. As  Blumenfeld    et   al (1991)  put  it,
representational   artifacts can become     "shared,  critiquable  externalizations"  of knowledge     that become      useful in
learning conversations.

          In addition, learners could move from critical consumption such as that described above to production, by
involving  them    in the  production   of  stories about the  social   or political world.  One   medium      such  stories   are
increasingly   utilizing  is digital   video (e.g.,   Lambert, 2002).   Challenging     learners who   create     public service
announcements and short documentaries to take into account the above issues involving the intersection of narrative
and logico-scientific thinking could be quite fruitful. This could be encouraged by requiring such projects to adapt
the "director's commentary"      one   sees  on commercial    DVDs   to  metacognitive     purposes. Specifically,    one   could
interview learners who'd produced media narratives about the decisions made and the motivations for them, or ask
learners to write a short paper on this topic. I will be exploring these possibilities for learning environment design
over the coming years.

Conclusion
          In this paper, I have outlined a framework for understanding the issues involved in narrative representations
that are based in empirical reality. I believe exploring the use of this framework, and refining it, may improve
democratic participation in discourse about contemporary and historical events. Specifically, learners might be able
to  improve  in both   the   critical consumption   of and   production  of  "true stories." I   argue that  research    on such
practices could  enable    teachers   and learners  to better  develop  their facility  at moving    back   and   forth  between
assessments of "narrative truth" and "logico-scientific" truth, so that each way of thinking informs the other, rather
than erasing the other.

References
Bartlett, F. C. (1995). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press (originally published in 1932).
Barton, K. C., & Levstik, L. S. (2004). Teaching history for the common good. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Beach, R., & Myers, J. (2001). Inquiry-based English instruction: Engaging students in life and literature. New
          York: Teachers College Press.
Bell, P. (2002). Using argument map representations to make thinking visible for individuals and groups. In T.
          Koschmann, R. Hall & N. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL 2: Carrying Forward the Conversation (pp. 449-485).
          Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., and Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivating
          project-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26(3), 369-
          398.
Britt, M. A., & Aglinskas, C. (2002). Improving students' ability to identify and use source information. Cognition
          and Instruction, 20(4), 485-522.
Bruer, J. (1993). Schools for thought: A science of learning in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

                                                               562                                                      ICLS 2006
Bruner, J. (2002). Making stories: Law, literature, life. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Bruner, J. (2003). The narrative construction of reality. In M. Mateas & P. Sengers (Eds.) Narrative intelligence.
       Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing.
Bruner, J. (2005). Keynote presentation. First Congress of the International Society of Cultural and Activity
       Research (ISCAR), Seville, Spain, September, 2005.
Burke, K. (1969). A grammar of motives. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Chatman, S. (1978). Story and discourse: Narrative structure in fiction and film. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Cronon, W. (1992). A place for stories: Nature, history, narrative. J of American History 78(4), 1347-76.
Holt, T. (1990). Thinking historically: Narrative, imagination and understanding. New York: College Entrance
       Examination Board.
Lakoff, G. (2004). Don't think of an elephant!. Vermont: Chelsea Green.
Lambert, J. (2002). Digital storytelling: Capturing lives, creating community. Berkeley: Digital Diner.
Latour, B. (1988). Drawing things together. In M. Lynch & S. Woolgar (Eds.), Representation in scientific practice.
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levstik, L., & Barton, K. (1997). Doing history: Investigating with children in elementary and middle schools.
       Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lewis, E. L., and Linn, M. C. (1994). Heat energy and temperature concepts of adolescents, adults, and experts:
       Implications for curricular improvements. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31(6), 657-677.
Novick, P. (1988). That noble dream: The 'objectivity question' in the American historical profession. New York:
       Cambridge University Press.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension
       monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.
Propp, V. (1968). Morphology of the folktale. Austin: University of Texas Press (trans. Laurence Scott).
Scholes, R., and Kellogg, R. (l966) The nature of narratives. New York: Oxford University Press.
Suthers, D., and Hundhausen, C. (2003). An empirical study of the effects of representational guidance on
       collaborative learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-219.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (2002). Voices of collective remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wertsch, J.V., & Polman, J.L. (2001). The intuitive mind and knowledge about history. In B. Torff & R.J. Sternberg,
       (Eds.), Understanding & teaching the intuitive mind (57-72). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
White, B. Y. (1993). Intermediate abstractions and causal models: A microworld-based approach to science
       education. In Proceedings of the world conference on artificial intelligence in education (pp. 26-33).
       Charlottesville, VA: Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education.
White, B., & Frederiksen, J. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible to all
       students. Cognition and Instruction, 16(1), 3-117.
Wills, J. (1994). Popular culture, curriculum, and historical representation: The situation of Native Americans in
       American history and the perpetuation of stereotypes. Journal of Narrative and Life History, 4 (4), 277-
       294.

                                                        563                                                 ICLS 2006
