    Estimation as a Catalyst for Numeracy: Micro-Interventions that
     Increase the Use of Numerical Information in Decision-Making
                                           Luke F. Rinne, Michael A. Ranney
 Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley, 4533 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA, 94720-1670
                                                    Nicholas H. Lurie
 College of Management, Georgia Institute of Technology, 800 West Peachtree St. NW, Atlanta, GA, 30308-0520
                        Email: lrinne@berkeley.edu, ranney@berkeley.edu, lurie@gatech.edu

         Abstract:   The  utilization of  available numerical    information   represents an   important aspect  of
         numeracy.   Accordingly,     we  seek   to  develop     decision-making     scaffolds that  increase   the
         incorporation of numerical information into preferences. Two experiments contrast five techniques
         for presenting students with numerical information and prompting them to make decisions related
         to that information.    The  techniques    are based    on   a method   called  EPIC   (Estimate,  Prefer,
         Incorporate feedback,    and Change   preference)    from   the Numerically-Driven    Inferencing  (NDI)
         paradigm.   Results   regarding  post-feedback  preferences    indicate that  having  students estimate a
         quantity's value beforehand increases the impact on preferences when the quantity's true value is
         presented. However, having students state initial preferences does not yield an analogous effect.
         An  attractive explanation   for the  estimation   effect is that estimating  diminishes  hindsight  bias,
         making information that diverges from expectations more surprising. Variants of the EPIC method
         may serve as "micro-interventions" that increase the impact of numerical data on preferences.

Introduction
         People  often  fail to fully utilize available    numerical    information  when making    decisions (e.g.,  Bartol,
Koehl, & Martin, 1987). The utilization of numerical information may be seen as an aspect of "numeracy," an idea
that has been advanced most famously by Paulos (1990) as a parallel in the quantitative realm for what is termed
literacy in the verbal realm. Paulos shows how innumeracy often leads to poor decisions by consumers, employees,
and citizens. He believes the main cause of innumeracy to be a general lack of mathematical ability, and indeed, in
the cases he   describes,  the best  remedy   may   be  to improve    people's   understanding  of mathematical    concepts.
However,  Viswanathan     (1993)  argues  that the  notion   of numeracy    should   include not only   one's ability to use
numerical   information,  but  also one's proclivity toward   using   numerical   information.  That is, he  holds  that two
individuals with comparable mathematical abilities may often differ in the extent to which they use the numbers they
have learned to help them make decisions. Viswanathan supported this claim with several studies demonstrating the
validity of a measure he developed called "Preference for Numerical Information" (PNI), which is meant to capture
individual differences regarding that aspect of numeracy that is not subsumed by mathematical ability.

         We embrace Viswanathan's (1993) broader notion of numeracy--according to which the use of numerical
information is thought to depend on more than mathematical competence. Consequently, we believe that it may be
possible to increase students' use of numerical information in decision-making by means other than improving their
mathematics  skills. In   this paper, we  argue  that   this can   be   achieved through  "micro-interventions"    based  on
methods   from  the  Numerically-Driven    Inferencing     (NDI)   paradigm   (e.g., Munnich,    Ranney,   &  Appel,  2004;
Munnich, Ranney, Nelson, Garcia de Osuna, & Brazil, 2003; Ranney, Cheng, Garcia de Osuna, & Nelson, 2001).
By "micro-interventions," we mean brief activities conducted by teachers in which the presentation of numerical
information is preceded and/or followed by particular exercises that scaffold students' decision-making procedures.

         Work    on  preference   formation   in behavioral     decision   research  supports  the  promise   of a   "micro-
intervention" approach. Several decision theorists have argued that preferences--which are taken to be what cause
individuals to choose   in particular ways--should      not  necessarily  be seen   as previously-existing, stable  features.
Rather, in novel situations, preferences are better conceived of as "constructed" in the process of elicitation based on
the accessibility of various pieces of information and the ease with which information may be evaluated (Hoeffler &
Ariely, 1999; Hsee, 1996; Payne, Bettman, & Johnson, 1992; Slovic, 1995). This contradicts neoclassical economic
theory, which  assumes    that  decisions do   not  depend   on  the  processes  through  which    they are made    and  that
individuals' preferences are simply "revealed" by their decisions (Rabin, 1998). On the constructed preference view,
however, prompts for novel decisions do more than simply tap existing preferences; rather, the need to make a novel

                                                             571                                                   ICLS 2006
decision often leads to preferences being formed in the first place. Further, because the prompt itself serves as an
additional source of information for the decision-maker, its format may significantly influence the preference that is
constructed. This   has important   consequences,     because   once  preferences  in  particular domains     have  been
constructed, they may be retained in memory and influence subsequent decisions in the same--or related--domains.

         Following the constructed preferences view, it seems likely that when one receives numerical information
in a domain with which one has little experience, that information's influence on preferences will be heightened if
one is prompted to make a relevant decision right after receiving the information. One will construct a preference in
order to reach a decision, and at this stage the numerical information provided will still be highly salient, increasing
its incorporation into the preference formation process relative to what would have occurred had much time (e.g.,
months or years) elapsed between the receipt of information and the first instance in which one was prompted to
make a decision for which the information would be relevant. Thus, given that our goal is to increase the impact of
numerical  information  on   preferences, it seems   clear that our  micro-interventions   should include   prompts  for
decisions given soon after numerical information is presented. But how else might it be possible to increase the
impact of presenting numbers to students? In this study, we investigate whether certain NDI methods--specifically,
those that include prompts for estimates and/or initial preferences before numerical data are presented--may further
increase the influence of numerical information. For this purpose, post-feedback decisions, in addition to being part
of the intervention, provide a measure of such potential effects.

         It will be helpful to review prior research in the NDI paradigm at this point. An initial goal of NDI research
was to assess how views on social issues (e.g., abortion or immigration policy) are influenced by relevant pieces of
numerical information (e.g., rates of abortion or immigration). To this end, a method called EPIC was developed,
which  involves prompting    people to:  1)  Estimate the  value  of a quantity,  2) state a Preference  related to  that
quantity, 3) Incorporate feedback in the form of the estimated quantity's true value, and 4) Change their preference
(if they wish) in response to this feedback. The EPIC method allows for assessments both of prior beliefs and of the
influence of numerical feedback on preferences. Early NDI experiments showed that offering a single, surprising
numerical datum can indeed greatly influence preferences, and that changes between initial and final preferences
increase with estimate inaccuracy (Garcia de Osuna et al., 2004; Munnich et al., 2003; Ranney et al., 2001).

         Recently, Lurie and Ranney (submitted) conducted NDI experiments to study the impact of estimation on
preferences and preference change. Preferences elicited using the EPIC method were compared to those obtained
using  two variants--called  PEIC   and  IC--in   which, respectively, the first two steps,  Estimate   and Prefer, were
either reversed in order or left out altogether. (Although no initial preferences were elicited in the IC condition, "C"
for "Change preference" is retained for simplicity.) Each group used one of the three procedures--EPIC, PEIC, or
IC--throughout, so that the preferences produced by each could be contrasted. In one experiment, estimates and
feedback were for the number of mortalities per 100,000 deaths for each of a pair of diseases: either (a) lung cancer
and skin cancer, or (b) heart disease and breast cancer (among women only for the latter pair). Preferences were
elicited by asking students how they would divide $100 in research funding between prevention efforts for the two
diseases in each pair (funds were dedicated to women only for both heart disease and breast cancer). By estimating
mortality rates for each disease in a pair, students implicitly estimated the ratio of mortalities from one disease to
mortalities from the other disease. It was thought that prior beliefs about these ratios would affect preferences for
$100 splits, and that in some cases, but not others, these beliefs would deviate considerably from the true values
later provided  as feedback.  The   true  values--based   on  Centers  for Disease   Control and  Prevention   ("CDC")
statistics from 2001--are 8.2:1 and 20.9:1, respectively, for heart disease/breast cancer and lung cancer/skin cancer.
While the true ratio for the heart disease/breast cancer pair is 3.2 times higher than the average estimate of 2.6:1, the
true ratio for the lung cancer/skin cancer pair is only 1.3 times higher than the average estimate of 15.6:1.

         When   participants decided on   initial allocations before performing   any other  activities (as in the  PEIC
condition), they allocated an average of $44.92 for heart disease (vs. breast cancer) and $48.04 for lung cancer (vs.
skin cancer). However, when participants estimated mortality rates before stating initial preferences (as in the EPIC
condition), average allocations for heart disease were lower--$38.40--while average lung cancer allocations were
higher--$57.34. The conclusion was that estimating mortality rates increased the extent to which participants based
their decisions on their prior beliefs about mortality ratios, instead of on other reasons (e.g., family members having
a disease, concerns about personal responsibility for getting a disease) that would have motivated higher allocations
for heart disease and skin cancer. Because estimates of mortality ratios for the lung cancer/skin cancer pair were
relatively accurate, EPIC participants' initial preferences (M = $57.34) were closer than PEIC participants' initial

                                                           572                                                 ICLS 2006
preferences (M = $48.04) to IC participants' preferences (M = $59.93), which were elicited after simply giving
participants the true mortality rate data. Because mortality ratio estimates for the heart disease/breast cancer pair
were relatively inaccurate, in this case the effect was reversed; EPIC participants' initial preferences (M = $38.40)
were further away from IC participants' preferences (M = $55.14) than were PEIC initial preferences (M = $44.92).

        As for final allocations, Lurie and Ranney (submitted) found that in both the EPIC and PEIC conditions,
change between initial and final preferences was greater when estimates were inaccurate; the conclusion here was
that preference   change   was  driven    by  how   "shocking"   the information   received   was.  Interestingly, although
differences  between     groups regarding    post-feedback allocations   were not   predicted,  such  differences  emerged
nonetheless. Mean post-feedback allocations for the bigger killer in each pair were higher in both the EPIC and
PEIC conditions than in the IC condition (lung cancer: MEPIC/PEIC = $67.54 vs. MIC = $57.08; heart disease: MEPIC/PEIC
= $64.62 vs. MIC = $54.68). Because their study was rather tangential to issues of information utilization, Lurie and
Ranney did not scrutinize this result. However, such results are critical in the context of our current investigation; it
seems that estimating and/or stating initial preferences before receiving feedback may have increased the influence
of mortality rates after students learned the true values. We hypothesized that one of these activities (or perhaps the
combination of the two) increased the influence of the actual values on final allocations. This spawned the idea that
we   might   develop   instructional  techniques    involving these   activities  with   the aim   of increasing   students'
incorporation of newly received numerical information into their preferences--beyond what can be achieved by
prompting for decisions after information is presented. The present study represents the fruition of this idea.

        The remainder of this paper will proceed as follows: First, we present our hypotheses. Second, we present
new analyses of data from the aforementioned experiment by Lurie and Ranney (submitted), including some data
they collected but did not use--students' written reasons explaining their preferences. Third, we present the results
of a new experiment we conducted in order to 1) replicate Lurie and Ranney's results, and 2) tease apart estimation
and initial preference effects. The fourth section offers a general discussion, including a proposed explanation of our
findings. Finally, we suggest educational implications and directions for future research.

Hypotheses
        Hypothesis 1 is that post-feedback allocations to the disease in each pair that kills more people will be
significantly higher for EPIC and PEIC students than for IC students. Hypothesis 2 is that such results are due to the
increased utilization of numerical information. This can be expressed in terms of two sub-hypotheses, such that
support for both would demonstrate support for Hypothesis 2: The first (2a) is that written rationales provided by
students in the EPIC and PEIC conditions will cite the mortality rate information provided as explaining their final
allocations more frequently than will students in the IC condition. The second sub-hypothesis (2b) is that students
who cite mortality rate information as explaining their final allocations will allocate more money to the bigger killer
in each pair than will students who do not cite mortality rate information as explaining their allocations. In short, if
both of these sub-hypotheses were supported, this would indicate that effects of estimation and/or initial allocation
on final allocations are linked to the presence of written rationales that cite the numerical information provided as a
reason for the final allocation decision. Hypotheses 1 and 2 are addressed in Experiment 1.

        The next three hypotheses correspond to alternative explanations for why post-feedback preferences for the
disease in each pair that kills more people might be higher in the EPIC and PEIC conditions than in the IC condition.
The first possibility is that (a) there is an independent effect of estimation that increases final allocations, but no
similar effect for stating initial preferences. The second possibility is the reverse: (b) there is an independent effect
of stating initial preferences that increases final allocations, but no similar effect for estimation. Finally, the third
possibility  is that (c) increases  in  final allocations arise  due  to a joint  effect of  estimating and stating  initial
preferences, which means that one or both of the following are true: 1) there are independent, additive, estimation
and  initial preference   effects, both   of  which increase  final  allocations, or 2)  there  is an  interaction between
estimating and stating initial preferences that increases final allocations. Although these hypotheses do not exhaust
all possibilities (e.g., there  could  be effects of the  length of  the procedure,    the order of   estimation and initial
preference, etc.), each of these options is mutually exclusive of the others, and each, if manifested, seems unlikely to
be confounded with other possible effects. These hypotheses, which will be referred to as the "estimate effect,"
"initial preference effect," and "joint effect" hypotheses, are addressed in Experiment 2.
Experiment 1
Method

                                                             573                                                   ICLS 2006
         Undergraduates     (N  = 208)    were randomly    assigned  to one of  three   groups: EPIC,  PEIC,    or IC. EPIC
participants first estimated the annual number of mortalities, per 100,000 deaths, for each of a pair of diseases, either
a) lung cancer and skin cancer, or b) heart disease and breast cancer. After estimating, participants were asked to
state how they would prefer that $100 be divided between respective efforts for prevention of the two diseases, and
to provide a written reason explaining their preferred allocation. Participants were instructed that estimates for the
heart disease/breast cancer pair were to be restricted to the female population, and that all funds allocated for heart
disease or breast cancer would be devoted exclusively to prevention among women. Lung cancer and skin cancer
prompts were not gender specific. Next, participants received true mortality rates from the CDC for each disease in
the pair, also per 100,000 deaths (nb. female deaths for the heart disease/breast cancer pair). After learning the true
rates, participants were again asked to divide $100 between respective prevention efforts and to provide a written
reason explaining their allocation. This procedure was then repeated for the second disease pair. Both the order in
which  the  pairs were presented    and   the  order of the diseases within   each pair  were   counterbalanced.   For PEIC
participants, the first two steps of the EPIC procedure were reversed in order, and for IC participants, they were left
out altogether. Apart from these changes, the procedures for the PEIC and IC groups were the same as for the EPIC
group. The experiment also involved data collection and another manipulation that are not relevant here (see Lurie
& Ranney, submitted, for details). There is no indication that these affected the data analyzed in this study.

         Written  reasons   for final  preferences   were  coded  to identify instances   in which  students  indicated that
mortality  rates for either disease    in a given  pair helped  to explain  their final allocations.  These  were  coded   as
"numerical" (NUM), although they may have been attended by reasons of other types as well. Responses of other
types were coded "non-numerical" (NON). Cases in which no rationale was given (< 10%) were excluded.

Results
         Preferences for $100 splits are given in terms of the disease in each pair that kills more people. EPIC and
PEIC students were pooled together to increase statistical power. Planned comparisons assessed Hypothesis 1; final
allocations from the pooled group of EPIC and PEIC students were significantly higher than those from the IC group
for lung cancer (MEPIC = $69.72 & MPEIC = $63.98, vs. MIC = $57.08), t(183) = 2.617, p < .01 and heart disease
(MEPIC = $67.93 & MPEIC = $60.66 vs. MIC = $54.68), t(195) = 2.979, p < .01.

         To analyze the effect of both estimating and stating initial preferences on the use of numerical reasons for
final allocations (Hypothesis     2a), EPIC    and   PEIC  responses were   again  pooled    together and   compared   to  IC
responses (see Table 1). Note that because of this pooling, the null hypothesis predicts that within each column, the
EPIC/PEIC cell count will be roughly twice the IC cell count. NUM/NON percentages are given only to aid the
reader. Chi-Square tests indicate significant positive associations between membership in the EPIC/PEIC group (vs.
the IC group) and the use of numerical reasons (vs. non-numerical reasons) for both disease pairs: lung cancer/skin
cancer, 2(1) = 3.96, p < .05, and heart disease/breast cancer, 2(1) = 5.67, p < .05.

Table 1. Counts of Reason-Types for Final Allocations (C)--by Group, Disease Pair, and Rationale Type

                             Lung Cancer/Skin Cancer                              Heart Disease/Breast Cancer
                            NUM                       NON                         NUM                       NON
   EPIC/PEIC               79 (64%)                  44 (36%)                   85 (71%)                35 (29%)
   IC                      32 (49%)                  33 (51%)                   37 (54%)                32 (46%)

         But  did  participants   who     gave numerical    reasons  ultimately   allocate more   money     during the  final
preference  phase  for research   on   diseases that  kill more   people (Hypothesis    2b)?  Since   different groups  gave
numerical reasons at different rates, within-group analyses were conducted to control for effects of experimental
group that may not have been captured by the mere presence or absence of a particular type of written reason (see
Table  2).  Within   each  disease  pair/condition,   stating a   numerical reason  was    indeed   significantly  related to
allocating more money to the bigger killer (lung cancer: EPIC--MNUM = $76.86, MNON = $59.14, t(70) = 3.979, p <
.01, PEIC--MNUM = $77.76, MNON = $43.68, t(46) = 6.684, p < .01, and IC--MNUM = $69.70, MNON = $44.06, t(63)
= 4.146,  p < .01;   heart disease: EPIC--MNUM       =$75.04,  MNON  =  $49.21,   t(67) =  5.904, p <  .01, PEIC--MNUM      =
$68.14, MNON = $50.00, t(57) = 3.682, p < .01, IC--MNUM = $68.69, MNON = $38.91, t(66) = 6.406, p < .01).
Table 2. Mean Final Allocations (C), by Group, Disease Pair, and Rationale Type

                                                              574                                                  ICLS 2006
                             Lung Cancer (vs. Skin Cancer)                     Heart Disease (vs. Breast Cancer)
                              NUM                    NON                         NUM                      NON
     EPIC                    $76.86                  $59.14                      $75.04                   $49.21
     PEIC                    $77.76                  $43.68                      $68.14                   $50.00
     IC                      $69.70                  $44.06                      $68.69                   $38.91

           Note that average lung cancer and heart disease final allocations for students giving non-numerical reasons
were   sometimes   strikingly   low, particularly considering that these   diseases kill   many  more   people than   do  the
diseases they were paired with. Written rationales indicate that lower final preferences for the bigger killer often
stem from concerns about tragedy (e.g., breast cancer) or culpability for contracting the disease (e.g., lung cancer).

Discussion
           Results from  Experiment     1 indicate: 1) the  robustness  of the effect that    estimating and stating  initial
preferences has on final allocations for the bigger killer in each pair (Hypothesis 1), and 2) that this effect appears to
occur due to an increased emphasis on the numerical information provided (Hypothesis 2). However, the results of
this experiment    offer little help in explaining  why  estimating and    stating initial preferences   increased students'
utilization of the numerical information they received. Because both estimates and initial preferences were elicited
in both the EPIC and PEIC conditions, it is unclear whether estimating, stating initial preferences, or some joint
effect  of doing   both  produced   the differences that were observed.    Our next  experiment   was    designed  to clarify
matters by separating the effects of estimating and stating initial preferences from one another, as well as from
potential joint effects. Experiment 2 also served to replicate some of the effects that had been observed to date.

Experiment 2
Method
           In order to   discriminate   among  the  "estimate effect,"  "initial   preference  effect,"  and "joint   effect"
hypotheses, we created two new NDI methods, EIC and PIC, which exclude the initial preference and estimation
phases, respectively. Thus, we may separate estimation and initial preference effects from one another and from
effects of combining the two. Undergraduates (N = 153) were randomly assigned to one of five groups: EPIC, PEIC,
EIC, PIC, or IC. Apart from the addition of the EIC and PIC groups, the design, materials, and prompts at each stage
(Estimate, Prefer, Incorporate feedback, and Change preference) were the same as in Experiment 1.

Results
           If the "estimation effect" hypothesis were true, then one would expect EPIC, PEIC, and EIC students' final
allocations for the bigger killer in each pair to be higher than those of PIC and IC students. Alternatively, if the
"initial preference effect" hypothesis were true, one would expect EPIC, PEIC, and PIC students' final allocations
for the bigger killers to be higher than those of EIC and IC students. Finally, if the "joint effect" hypothesis were
true, one would expect EPIC and PEIC students' final allocations for the bigger killer in each pair to be higher than
those of EIC, PIC, and IC students. Note that these three alternatives are mutually exclusive.

           Generally, this experiment produced significant results that adjudicate among the alternative hypotheses for
the heart disease/breast cancer pair, but not for the lung cancer/skin cancer pair. Likely reasons for this are given in
the discussion below. Consequently, due to space limitations, only results for the heart disease/breast cancer pair are
discussed  here.   For  this pair, however, we see   strong evidence   for the presence    of an estimation  effect,  and no
evidence for other effects (see Table 3 below). Planned comparisons were conducted to test each of the alternative
hypotheses. One-tailed tests of the contrasts corresponding to the joint effect and initial preference effect hypotheses
were not significant (joint effect: t(148) = -1.264, n.s.; initial preference effect: t(148) = -.014, n.s.), while a one-
tailed test of the contrast corresponding to the estimation effect hypothesis was significant, t(148) = -2.378, p < .01.

Table 3. Mean Final Allocations (C) to Heart Disease, by Group

                        EPIC                PEIC                 EIC                  PIC                    IC
     Mean              $65.48               $63.28               $66.45              $56.17               $56.94
Discussion

                                                             575                                                   ICLS 2006
         The results for the heart disease/breast cancer pair provide strong evidence of an estimation effect, while no
evidence was found for either an initial preference effect or a joint effect. Although no significant results were
observed  for  the  lung  cancer/skin  cancer   pair,  we  believe   that  this may   have  been   due to   insufficient statistical
power; effect size calculations showed that in Experiment 1, the effect of estimation on final allocations for the lung
cancer/skin cancer pair, while still significant, was somewhat smaller than that for the heart disease/breast cancer
pair--exacerbating the fact that the number of participants per condition in Experiment 2 was less than half of that
in Experiment 1. The effect for the lung cancer/skin cancer pair might be smaller for multiple reasons. First, final
allocations for the lung cancer/skin cancer pair appear to have been more variable, perhaps because concerns about
responsibility were more influential. Second, as discussed in the next section when we present our explanation for
the estimation effect, the size of the effect may well depend on the "surprisingness" of the numerical information
presented. Recall   that   we  mentioned    earlier that  students'   estimates   for the   lung cancer/skin   cancer    pair were
considerably more accurate than their estimates for the heart disease/breast cancer pair. It could be that estimates of
the lung cancer/skin cancer mortality ratio were too accurate for an effect to be observed with the sample size used.

General Discussion
         This paper's main experimental finding is that estimating the values of quantities before learning their true
values  increases   the influence   of the  true  values   on preferences.      Why   might   this be  the   case?  An   attractive
explanation  involves   a  form of  overconfidence     called "hindsight     bias,"  which   is "the  tendency   for people    with
outcome  knowledge      to  believe falsely that  they would    have   predicted   the outcome     of the   event"  (Hawkins   and
Hastie,  1990,  p.311).  It seems   likely that  hindsight   bias would    manifest   itself when   people   are simply     given a
quantity's value; they will likely tend to believe that, had they estimated the value of the quantity beforehand, their
estimate would have been more accurate than would really have been the case. But if one estimates before learning
the true value, the potential for hindsight bias becomes greatly diminished or fully eliminated, since one's "cards are
on  the table," so  to  speak. This  means   that,  to the extent    that  estimates  of  a quantity's value   would,    if elicited,
diverge from the quantity's true value, the act of estimating will make the true value of the quantity more surprising.

         It seems likely that more surprising information (assuming it is seen as reliable) will have greater influence
during preference formation than more mundane information--perhaps for no other reason than that people attend
more to surprising information, making it more salient. If inaccurately estimating a quantity's value makes learning
the true value  more    surprising, this may    explain  why  the    final allocations   of  students  in groups   who   estimated
mortality rates (EPIC, PEIC, and EIC) were higher than those of students in groups who did not (IC and PIC);
students who estimated were more surprised when they learned the true mortality rates, likely causing them to place
more weight on mortality ratios. This explanation coheres with and helps account for past NDI findings showing
larger  differences between    estimates   and  true  values to   be  linked to  larger   differences  between   initial and   final
preferences (Garcia de Osuna et al., 2004; Lurie & Ranney, submitted; Munnich et al., 2003; Ranney et al., 2001).

Educational Implications and Future Directions
         If one's goal is to maximize students' utilization of numerical information (although we realize that this
may not always be appropriate), then "micro-interventions" based on NDI methods as simple as EIC may offer the
best means currently known. One domain in which micro-interventions might be particularly useful is the study of
"current events." Students might estimate the values of socially relevant quantities, receive true statistics, and then
decide which public policies they think ought to be pursued. Similar applications abound elsewhere, as well.

         Although    it  does  not   appear  that    stating initial  preferences     increases  the   utilization  of   numerical
information,  more  research   involving    NDI   methods    like EPIC     and  PEIC   is required.   First of all, there   may be
pedagogical,   motivation-related,   reasons   to include    initial preferences,   such  as to  increase   student  engagement.
Second, results from pilot experiments show that when people rate NDI procedures in terms of the quality of the
decisions they would expect them to yield, procedures that include both estimating and stating initial preferences are
generally rated highest. Finally, results from a recent study involving the EPIC method--a study that showed post-
feedback preferences to persist several months later--also showed that students' memories of numerical feedback
seem to be linked to their memories for how their preferences changed in response to feedback (Munnich, Ranney,
& Bachman, 2005). In order for such an effect to occur, it may be that students would need to explicitly state initial
preferences. Thus, micro-interventions that include prompts for initial preferences may yet prove to be quite useful.

                                                               576                                                       ICLS 2006
        The   research   presented   herein shows  that  merely  providing  statistics to students  without engaging    their
expectations--or offering potential applications--is metaphorically like dropping seeds onto unplowed earth. This is
reminiscent   of science   education   research on Predict-Observe-Explain    activities  (White   & Gunstone,   1992).  In
practice, our micro-interventions for increasing the impact of numerical information may be seen as analogous to
Ausubel's (1960) "advance organizers" for learning verbal material. Ultimately, we hope that the techniques we
suggest will help people incorporate numerical information into their preferences, leading to better decisions.

References
Ausubel, D. P. (1960). The use of advance organizers in the learning and retention of meaningful verbal material.
        Journal of Educational Psychology, 51, 267-272.
Bartol, K., Koehl, D., & Martin, D. (1987). Quantitative versus qualitative information utilization among college
       business students. Educational and Psychological Research, 7(1), 61-74.
Garcia  de  Osuna,   J.,   Ranney,   M.,    & Nelson,    J.  (2004). Qualitative  and   quantitative  effects of    surprise:
       (Mis)estimates,   rationales,   and  feedback-induced   preference   changes    while considering   abortion. In  K.
       Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.). Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
       Science Society (pp. 422-427). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hawkins,   S. &    Hastie, R.  (1990).  Hindsight:  biased   judgments  of  past events   after the outcomes    are known.
        Psychological Bulletin, 107(3), 311-327.
Hoeffler, S. & Ariely, D. (1999). Constructing stable preferences: A look into dimensions of experience and their
        impact on preference stability. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 8(2), 113-139.
Hsee, C. K. (1996). The evaluability hypothesis: An explanation for preference reversals between joint and separate
        evaluations of alternatives. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 67(3), 247-257.
Lurie, N., &   Ranney,   M.    (submitted). The  Effects of  Estimates  and Base  Rates   on Preferences   and   Preference
        Change: How Thinking About What Is Can Change What One Wants. University of North Carolina, Chapel
        Hill, and University of California, Berkeley.
Munnich,   E.  L., Ranney,     M.  A., & Appel,    D. M.    (2004). Numerically-Driven    Inferencing in   instruction: The
        relatively broad transfer of estimation skills. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.). Proceedings of
        the   Twenty-sixth     Annual  Conference   of   the Cognitive  Science  Society   (pp.  987-992).  Mahwah,     NJ:
        Erlbaum.
Munnich, E., Ranney, M., & Bachman, M. L. N. (2005). The longevities of policy-shifts and memories due to single
       feedback numbers. In B.G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.) Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh
       Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1553-1558). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Munnich, E., Ranney, M., Nelson, J., Garcia de Osuna, J., & Brazil, N. (2003). Policy shift through Numerically-
       Driven Inferencing: An EPIC experiment about when base rates matter. In R. Alterman & D. Kirsh (Eds.),
       Proceedings   of    the Twenty-Fifth   Annual   Conference    of the Cognitive     Science  Society  (pp. 834-839).
       Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Paulos, J. A. (1988). Innumeracy: Mathematical illiteracy and its consequences. New York: Hill & Wang.
Payne, J.  W.,   Bettman,  J.  R., &   Johnson, E. J. (1992).  Behavioral  decision research:   A  constructive  processing
        perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 87-131.
Rabin, M. (1998). Psychology and economics. Journal of Economic Literature 36(1), 11-46.
Ranney, M., Cheng, F., Garcia de Osuna, J., & Nelson, J. (2001, November). Numerically driven inferencing: A new
        paradigm for examining judgments, decisions, and policies involving base rates. Paper presented at the
        Annual Meeting of the Society for Judgment & Decision-making, Orlando.
Slovic, P. (1995). The construction of preference. American Psychologist, 50, 364­371.
Viswanathan, M. (1993). Measurement of individual differences in preference for numerical information. Journal of
        Applied Psychology, 78(5), 741-752.
White, R. T., & Gunstone, R. F. (1992). Probing Understanding. Great Britain: Falmer Press.

Acknowledgments
We thank Christine Diehl, Patti Schank, and Geoff Saxe for their help and advice. We also thank Ed Munnich,
Sujata Ganpule, Janek Nelson, Michelle Million, Kelvin Chan, Jed Stamas, Sarah Cremer, Sasha Raskin, Myles
Crain, Nelson Bradley, Lauren Barth-Cohen, Andrew Galpern, Tammie Chen, Roxanne Garbez, the rest of the UCB
Reasoning Group, and the ICBS faculty for their comments and suggestions. Comments and suggestions from three
anonymous reviewers were also appreciated. This work was funded by faculty research grants from UCB and the
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and various fellowships from UCB and its GSE.

                                                             577                                                  ICLS 2006
