WWW and multicultural democracy: Evaluating U.S. History websites
Cecil Robinson, Douglas McKnight, The University of Alabama, Campus Box 870231, Department of Educational
                             Studies, College of Education, Tuscaloosa, AL, 35487-0231
                          Email: crobinson@bamaed.ua.edu, dmcknigh@bamaed.ua.edu

         Abstract:   Claims  about   the  potential of  the  Internet  within  social  studies  and   democratic
         education have been somewhat silent on issues of diversity. To address this problem, this study
         employed tenets of liberal and multicultural democratic theory, developed an evaluative coding
         scheme, and examined content of websites that preservice teachers (N = 20) selected as resources
         for U.S. History unit plans. Results indicate selected websites housed a large amount of redundant
         non-diverse information. Website content was available in local media resources, consisted of
         textbook  accounts, and  focused    on traditional historical topics; only   one  of ten  websites  was
         diverse. A  four-cluster model   provides  further support    for a discussion   about the   Internet, as
         currently used and framed, leading to less diversity of ideas and voices within the classroom,
         anathema to the stated democratic purposes of the social studies.

         Although there are an increasing number of claims about the potential of the Internet within social studies
and democratic citizenship education (Glenn, 1990; Mason et al., 2000; Whitson & Berson, 2003), social education
research has been somewhat silent on issues of diversity and technology (Marri, 2003b; Zambon, 2003). This is
problematic because technology, citizenship and diversity have been propelled to the center of the global stage. The
Internet brings people, places and events from around the world into our daily lives, and has led to a complex and
expanded concept of diversity (Ladson-Billings, 2001) that requires global citizens to interrogate the multiple voices
that span class, gender, race and national borders, shape world issues, and provide guidance for one role of the social
studies. As stated in the National Council of the Social Studies (NCSS, 2002) standards, "[t]he primary purpose of
the social studies is to help young people develop the ability to make informed and reasoned decisions for the public
good as citizens of a culturally diverse, democratic society in an interdependent world."

         A small   number of  social education   research   studies have   started to explore  the relationships   between
technology, social education, democracy, and diversity (c.f., Marri, 2003b; Salinas & Robinson, 2002; Zambon,
2003). This paper adds to the literature by presenting liberal and multicultural conceptions of democratic citizenship
as a framework to evaluate the content of Internet websites in relation to the NCSS goals on diversity. The present
study employed the tenets of liberal and multicultural democratic theory to develop a coding scheme to examine the
content of websites that preservice teachers selected for a U.S. History unit plan. The results provided fodder for a
discussion of how the Internet, as currently used and framed within social studies and technology research, may lead
to less diversity of ideas and voices within the classroom, anathema to the stated purposes of the social studies.

Justification
         One of John Dewey's central concerns was "the relationship between the school and the larger life of the
community"   (1915,  p. 20). When    this relationship  was  not congruent,    he  posited that "certain  changes   in the
methods and materials of the school work" were necessary such that school "might be better adapted to present
social needs" (p. 20). These quotes identify the need to adapt both the `methods' and `materials' of education to
meet social needs. On the surface, it is an obvious statement that educational change can stem from the methods
teachers use   to guide students'  experiences.   Less   obvious  may   be   the   agency  attributed to curriculum    and
materials--particularly media--in    creating constraints   and affordances   that  affect whether    learning  occurs and
social needs are met (Dewey, 1958). For Dewey, learning "depends critically on the reflective medium in which
activity takes place. ... The medium must be capable of instantiating the key elements of a domain of inquiry--
broadly construed--in a manner accessible to students" (Schaffer, 2005, p. 14, 15). However, there is a dearth of
social studies and  technology   research  focused  explicitly  on  media--most     research  has  centered  on    methods.
Technology   research in  social  studies is  typically the `application'   (methods)   of technology    in social  studies
classrooms, or the ways teacher educators, teachers and students `use' technology (c.f., Bolick, Berson, Coutts, &
Heinecke, 2003). A similar trend is also present within democratic education research, which focuses on teaching
students to use technology to collect, store, analyze and manipulate data as a means to participate in democratic
society (Glenn, 1990). Focusing solely on methods reifies technological deterministic impulses that a priori assume

                                                           592                                                    ICLS 2006
technology progresses us towards societal and educational ends (McKnight & Robinson, in press). This determinism
situates technology and progress as givens and thereby beyond critique. Discussions are not about inherent tensions
or limitations of technology, but revolve around lack of access, integration and skills to acquire "more information."
Such predilections translate into discussions about the Internet that are not about examination and change, but as an
ideal--the amorphous `potential' of the Internet. This study attempts to resist this potential pitfall by asking the
question: What information did preservice teachers select when using the Internet for a U.S. History unit plan? More
specifically we ask: "Where did they go? What did they access? Was the information accessed not readily available
in other media formats?" Such questions do not assume the inevitability of the Internet as a neutral tool (Bowers,
1988) or necessary societal good (Bromley, 1998). It instead treats the Internet as a historically inscribed cultural
artifact that must be examined and interrogated within its social spheres of use (Feenberg, 1995).

Conceptual Framework
         "The relationship between the school and the larger life of the community" is measured through "present
social needs" (Dewey, 1915, p. 20). Though there are a multitude of claims about the societal justification of social
studies  in education, perhaps    the    most common      is that   social  studies is  the discipline   to   develop a democratic
citizenry. For Dewey, education and its associated materials and methods were means to political democratic ends,
and societal needs were to be evaluated through these political ends. To make claims about the relationship between
schooling, its methods and materials and democracy, one must articulate a democratic framework (Dewey's political
ends) so that one has a lens to evaluate social needs and educational change. And past technology research has
indeed articulated a democratic framework. Consider the following claims by Berson, Lee, and Stuckart (2001)
concerning the usefulness of the Internet in social education to create an informed democratic citizen:

         Today, effective citizenship includes a range of computer technology skills.... Citizenship in a
         democracy    implies  critical    thought, and   critical  thought    requires  information.    Technology    can
         make more information available to students than ever before. The Internet, in particular, has the
         ability to dramatically increase the amount of information available to students. (p. 214)

         This   quote reveals  assumptions       about  relationships   between     the Internet, democracy      and  social studies
education: citizenship in a democracy requires citizens to reason critically, interpreted as the ability to process large
amounts of information; the Internet is a medium that provides access to the information to be processed; and the
social  studies classroom   is a    site to  practice  this  skill, assumed    essential  in a   modern    democratic   state. Each
component is useful and has provided a foundation for social studies educators to think about and employ the
Internet in  their  instruction.  However,       these claims   present    a   narrow   account   of democracy     that creates  an
incomplete picture of the relationship between democracy, the Internet and social studies. This account disregards--
or does not consider necessary--discussion on how diverse information, theoretical perspectives and voices should
stem from democratic principles and the ways that the Internet affords and/or constrains these principles. Liberal
democratic   ideals attempt    to avoid     this critique by  arguing      for `diverse  information,'    and   elaborating  on  the
technology savvy, rational conception that `more information' enables citizens to engage in democratic deliberation.

         A progressive society counts individual variations as precious since it finds in them the means of
         its own    growth. Hence,       a democratic    society    must,   in consistency   with    its ideal, allow   for
         intellectual freedom     and    the play   of  diverse   gifts and    interests in  its educational    measures.
         (Dewey, 1916, p. 305)

         Dewey's    vision  of    a progressive    democratic       society  problematizes   claims      that more   information  is
necessary for democratic citizenry because these claims do not ensure that `more information' is not `more of the
same information.' To sustain its democratic health, society must seek out variation--differing opinions, ideas and
worldviews. This points toward the significance of asking whether information is readily available and replicates the
traditional, authoritative narratives that constitute history textbooks, or whether it provides alternative perspectives.

Multicultural Democracy: From Political Diversity to Sociocultural Diversity
         Dewey's democratic goals were radical in that he acknowledged the importance of diversity of thought.
However, his conception also has the trappings of liberal democratic theory. Dewey only refers to politically diverse
thoughts, and was uncomfortably silent about other dimensions of difference such as class, gender and race. This is
problematic because in his estimation, educational change is a function of social need and social need is evaluated
against democratic ideals. Any democratic ideals that ignore (or discount) issues of diversity will be translated into

                                                                593                                                       ICLS 2006
schooling institutions that do the same. To understand why liberal democracy is silent on issues of socio-economic
and cultural diversity, one must look to its central tenets of unity and neutrality. Unity is anchored in the phrase e
pluribus unum which translates into a process of moving from many to one and creates the goal of "transcending
difference, conquering and overcoming it" (Parker, 1996, p. 111). Neutrality assumes "all men are created equal"
and perpetuates the rugged individualism of "pulling one's self up by the bootstraps." Neutrality creates a path to
unity, but requires the explicit elimination of difference and diversity (Marri, 2003a).

         Multicultural democracy explicitly acknowledges socio-cultural differences and treats diversity as essential
for democracy because it protects liberty and challenges the status quo (Marri, 2003a; Parker, 1996). Within this
multicultural frame, e pluribus unum is not translated `from many, one,' but `with many, one' (Parker, 1996). Such
translation focuses on diversity and unity and allows "larger publics" and "little publics" to coexist. Larger publics
are "the normative grid that binds citizens together in a broad political comradeship" (Parker, 1996, p. 118). Little
publics are "associations based on religion, ethnicity, language, race, hobbies, labor--interests of all sorts, some of
which are incompatible from one group to another" (Parker, p. 118). These publics come together on difficult issues
on creative democratic paths and are a necessary part of the continuing public discussion, not a means to sustain
predetermined democratic ends (Dewey, 1916). Parker argues that multicultural democracy "has no end other than
the path itself. Ends arise on the path" (1996, p. 114). He goes on to continue, "Viewed as a creative, constructive
process, democracy is not already accomplished, in which case citizens today need only to celebrate and protect it,
but a trek that citizens in a pluralist society make together" (p. 114). Multicultural democracy enables national
discussions to remain open to views that conflict with the "dominant" or "mainstream" common sense perspective,
so that democracy does not diminish to the point of irrelevancy. This discussion does not come easy (Gay, 1997),
but it is through this struggle of learning to be comfortable being uncomfortable and by "associating and resolving
issues with people whose views are different from one's own that democracy is learned" (Marri, 2003a, p. 273).

         Acknowledging the importance of diversity within democracy provides grounds for the central questions of
multicultural democracy (Parker, 1996). The first question is: Who is and is not participating in democracy? This
question ensures that the little publics exist alongside   the  larger publics. For if   one finds  that groups  are not
participating, then one can begin to explore why they are not participating. In this study, we evaluate the Internet
within this framework by examining the voices that are present within the websites that preservice teachers accessed
for their U.S. History unit plans. The second question is: How wide is the path to participation? This question
examines  the social structures  and  paths that  affect participation (Marri,  2005).   In this study,  we  address this
question by examining    two structural paths  of the Internet: corporate  (website domain     names)    and disciplinary
(types of information, i.e. textbook accounts, primary documents, historian accounts, teaching accounts, etc.). Each
reveal paths that constrain and afford different voices within the information accessed.

Method

Participants, Materials and Procedures
         20 preservice teachers (PSTs) enrolled in secondary social studies methods at a public university in the
southeastern U.S. participated in this study. PSTs were predominantly white (only one African-American), middle to
upper-middle class, from the home state of the institution, and there were a balanced number of males and females.
All PSTs  were   juniors or  seniors, admitted   into the  secondary   teacher  education   program,    had  a minimum
cumulative GPA of 3.0, and were blind (including the instructor) to the purpose of this study. During the first two
weeks of the course, PSTs participated in six, one-hour technology professional development sessions led by an
educational technology faculty member and a graduate assistant. One session was dedicated to web search and
evaluation. PSTs learned about search engines, search strings, and the identification of "publication" date, author,
and type of domain. Subsequent sessions reviewed these concepts. Early during the semester each PST created a unit
plan on any topic of interest in the social studies, and created a "resource database" consisting of 20-25 websites that
could be used as teaching, research and/or background resources to support their unit plan (personal communication,
Methods Instructor, October 15, 2005).

Analysis
         To consistently analyze websites, we limited the possibilities presented with hypertext. If there were links
on a web page that PSTs selected, then we analyzed two levels of links. All page links to the initial webpage were
analyzed (1st level). If there were any links on 1st level pages, then those additional linked pages were also analyzed

                                                          594                                                   ICLS 2006
(2nd level). We also assumed that specific website addresses were intentional. If the address accessed a specific area
of a larger website, then we analyzed the content within that section, not the content of the larger website.

          Website Availability provided a measure of whether the websites selected represented `more' (i.e., diverse)
or  `more  of  the   same'    information.  Two    graduate research  assistants, blind   to the  purpose    of  this study,
independently answered the following for each website: "Do you think the information on this website would be
available at a local high school or community library?" They were informed to think of average suburban libraries.
Websites  that duplicated     information   easily found  through local resources  (i.e., www.time.com)      were coded    as
Definitely Available (DA). Websites were coded as Could Be Available (CBA) when availability was not certain,
and   Not Available    (NA)   when  websites   provided   access to information   that would  not be    found   locally  (i.e.,
www.loc.gov, on-line documents from the Library of Congress). Two training sessions produced moderate inter-
rater reliabilities of .78 and   .85. There  were   no discrepancies between   DA   and   NA  codes.   Discrepancies     were
resolved conservatively with discrepancies between CBA and NA coded as NA, and CBA and DA coded as CBA.

          Website Diversity was coded using the following categories: Traditional History, Race, Class, Gender, and
Non-Historical Material. Traditional History was "historical accounts typical of high school history textbooks." The
categories Race, Class and Gender were, "historical accounts centered on issues of race, class or gender." If a
diverse website was also traditional, then it was coded conservatively as Race, Class or Gender (i.e., Martin Luther
King Jr.'s I Have a Dream speech is in high school history textbooks, but was coded as Race). Non-Historical
Material focused on teaching methods and lesson plans. Inter-rater reliability was .88 across all categories.

          Website Domains provided a measure of the types of websites that were selected. A commercial website
domain    (.com)    generally  represents   companies  or individual's  using  commercial    products   (i.e.,  hotmail.com
accounts to create websites). Government (.gov), non-profit (.org), and educational (.edu and .k12) domains also
represent different types of organizations and individuals. Each group has different interests and provides different
structural paths for Internet use.

          Website Disciplinary Information Sources provided a measure of the disciplinary paths of the selected
websites. The following information source categories were used: primary sources, textbooks, historian, fictional,
teaching, and other. Because websites can contain multiple sources of information, websites were coded according
to the proportion of information sources within the site with a 1 representing a document type accounting for some
of the website, 2--half of the website, 3--most of the website, and 4--all of the website. The inter-rater reliability
for all websites was .93.

Results
          PSTs created unit plans and Internet resource databases about the Civil War (6), World War II (4), Civil
Rights  Movement      (3), World   War    I (3), 1960s,  Great   Depression, American     Revolution   and   The  American
Presidency. Combined, the resource databases contained 448 website addresses (M = 23.4, SD = 2.1). 425 of the 448
website addresses (94.9%) linked to a working website, and formed the data for this study (N = 425).

Website Availability
          69.4% (n = 295) of selected websites were `definitely available' (DA) within one's community, 19.3% (n =
82) were `could be available' (CBA) and 11.3% (n = 48) were `not available' (NA). There were highly significant
differences between the availability of selected websites, 2 (2, N = 425) = 253.02, p < .001, with almost two-thirds
of all websites selected representing readily available information within one's local community. To further test
website availability, CBA and NA websites were collapsed into a single category, "not and/or could be available"
(NCBA). Differences between NCBA (n = 130, 30.6%) and DA (n = 295, 69.4%) were also significant 2 (1, N =
425) = 64.06, p < .001; even conservative estimates indicate that most of the websites that PSTs selected replicated
information available in magazines, on television and history textbooks.

Website Diversity
          The majority     of websites within    PSTs' resource  databases focused  on    traditional topics found    in high
school history books (n = 256, 60.2%). There were a limited number of websites that focused on diverse historical
topics. For example, only 8.9% of the websites were focused on issues of race (n = 38), 2.5% of the websites were
focused on issues of socioeconomic status (n = 11), and 0.4% of the websites were focused on issues of gender (n =

                                                             595                                                   ICLS 2006
2). Because of the low number of websites focused on issues of diversity, diverse websites were collapsed into a
single category `different voices' (DV) (n = 51, 11.8%). The remaining websites (n = 118, 27.8%) did not focus on
historical topics at all. Rather, these websites focused on lesson plans, or referred to historical texts that were for
sale. After collapsing  diverse  websites  into the   single   category, there              were   still significantly less websites  that
focused on different voices than websites that focused on traditional historical accounts and websites that did not
even focus on historical topics, 2 (2, N = 425) = 154.25, p < .001. Indeed, almost 9 of every 10 websites focused on
topics that did contain    any form  of   diversity,  and  6   of every  10                websites focused   on    topics that replicated
information found in traditional high school history textbooks.

Website Domains
         The different types of websites that students selected as part of their research database are presented in
Table 1. There were significant differences in the distribution of website origin 2 (5, N = 425) = 245.80, p < .001.
Highly significant post-hoc analyses indicate that commercial websites (.com) were selected more than twice as
often as educational (.edu) or organization (.org) websites, 2 (2, N = 334) = 67.44, p < .001. These results indicate
that not only was most information readily available in the local community and focused on traditional historical
topics, but that the greatest proportion of information was selected from commercial websites.

Table 1. Distribution of Website Domains

                   .edu        .com       .org       .gov       .net      othera                    Total
# of Websites       79         182        73          33          24       34                       425
% of Websites      18.6        42.8       17.2        7.8         5.6      8.0                      100.0
a Included .k12 and foreign country websites, and search engine results used as resources.

Website Disciplinary Information Sources
         Textbook accounts were the most prevalent document type, representing 42.1% of the total content within
all websites. Primary   sources  were  the  second    most   prevalent   document               type  (26%).   The   remaining    types of
information  were  as follows:   teaching  material   (17.2%),    other material              (12.6%),    fictional accounts   (1.6%) and
historian accounts (1.5%). A Friedman Test of the proportions of all information sources indicated highly significant
differences 2  (5, N  = 425)   = 508.87,  p <   .001. Post-hoc    comparisons                using  Wilcoxon   Signed   Ranks   Test, and
Bonferroni method to control for Type I error, indicate a highly significant greater proportion of textbook accounts
than primary source documents (the second highest proportion) T (425) = 4.40, p < .001. This result also indicates
there were a significantly greater proportion of textbook accounts than any other source type. Indeed, post-hoc
comparisons   produced   significant  contrasts  across    all pairs    except              Teaching     Resource   Materials   and Other
Materials, and Historian and Fictional Accounts. Thus, not only were most websites readily available, focused on
traditional historical topics and selected from commercial websites, but the greatest proportion of websites also
contained traditional historical content in a textbook-like manner.

Relationships between Availability, Diversity and Disciplinary Sources of Websites
         To develop a better understanding of the relationships between the availability, diversity and disciplinary
content of  these  websites, a   two-step  cluster analysis,   using    log-likelihood              distance measures      and  Schwartz's
Bayesian Criterion, computed the grouping criteria used to identify groups of websites with similar characteristics.
A four-cluster model produced the best fit, and accounted for 100% (N = 425) of the total websites. These clusters
produced  significant distributions across  all categories:    website  availability            2   (3,  N = 425)    = 208.63,  p <  .000,
website diversity 2 (3, N = 425) = 323.60, p < .001, and website domains 2 (3, N = 425) = 11.89, p < .008.

         Cluster 1 can be described as `Textbook Accounts.' This cluster accounted for 32.7% (n = 139) of the total
websites. All websites in this cluster were definitely available, traditional history topics. This cluster contained a
significant proportion  of text  accounts,  and significantly     excluded  primary              sources,   and   historian  and  fictional
accounts. The websites were equally distributed across website domains. Cluster 2 can be described as `Teaching
Resources.'  This  cluster did  not deal  with  historical content,   but was               the most     prevalent, 36.7%   (n  = 156). A
significant number of websites in this cluster were definitely available (n = 129, 82.7%) and did not contain any
history-related information (n = 107, 68.6%). This cluster contained a significant proportion of teaching and other
accounts, and significantly excluded primary sources and fictional accounts. The websites were equally distributed
across website domains. Cluster 3 can be described as `Primary Sources,' 20.5% (n = 87). A significant number of

                                                             596                                                                 ICLS 2006
websites   in this  cluster were   could   be  available,  and  definitely available  websites were    significantly excluded.
Although websites were not readily available, a significant number of websites were focused on traditional historical
content (n = 83, 95.4%). This cluster also contained a significant proportion of primary sources and significantly
excluded text, teaching and other accounts. Further, unlike the first two clusters, a significant number of websites
were  from     education    (.edu)    and  government      (.gov)   website  domains.    Cluster   4   can  be   described   as
`Historian/Fictional Accounts,' 10.1% (n = 43). Websites were evenly distributed between the different levels of
availability. Like    Clusters 1   and  3, this cluster contained   a significant  number     websites that were  focused    on
traditional history content. This cluster contained a significant proportion of historical and fictional accounts, and
significantly excluded all other accounts. The websites were evenly distributed across website domains.

Discussion
         Proponents claim that the Internet is a useful tool in social education to create an informed democratic
citizen because it provides access to `more information,' which equals better democratic citizen decision making. In
this paper we advanced a rationale for examining the Internet within a multicultural democratic framework that
explicitly addressed issues of diversity, rather than a means to access and store more information. Our purpose for
this framework is to create a space for Internet research that could lead to greater diversity in democratic citizenship
education. This framework concentrates on the curricular content of websites, leading to the question, "When using
the Internet, just where do students go to access information and what do they select?"

         Results of this study indicate that the Internet might be more accurately described as providing `more of the
same information' when pre-service teachers are not explicitly directed to use the Internet to foreground diverse
cultures within American democracy. Only one of ten websites contained information that was not readily available
through other local resources, and definitely available websites was a significant grouping criterion for the two most
prevalent clusters, Cluster 1--Textbook Accounts and Cluster 2--Teaching Resources; indicating teacher educators
should not assume the Internet will inherently provide preservice teachers with access to new information. Only
Cluster 3--Primary Sources significantly excluded readily available websites as a cluster-grouping criterion. Given
the tendency    for   the Internet to   provide preservice  teachers  with   otherwise  available    information and  Primary
Sources    as the  only   cluster  that provided   otherwise    unavailable  information,    teacher educators   may  need   to
explicitly direct preservice teachers to search for primary sources on the Internet if their goal is to provide access to
new information. Results also indicate there may be greater success if they are directed to .edu and .gov Internet
domains, as websites within the Primary Sources cluster were most often accessed from these domains.

         To further justify our description of the Internet as `more of the same information,' consider that more than
half of the websites focused on traditional historical narratives that did not contain any voices of under-represented
groups, and over a quarter of the websites contained only teaching resources (that also did not focus on under-
represented groups). Only one of every ten websites focused on issues of diversity. Even when students accessed
primary sources, Cluster 3, almost all were focused on traditional historical content. Indeed, a cluster-grouping
criterion for the Primary Source cluster was the significant exclusion of diverse voices. In other words, the website
content held   little diversity   and  instead  replicated the  homogenous    approach   of   textbooks, even  when   primary
sources  came   into   the  picture.  Simply,   the theme   is  redundancy    ­   the Internet provided    more  of  the  same
information   students    have had  access  to  in textbooks    and other  print, television  and video  media,  shown    to be
thoroughly lacking in the presentation of diverse voices that speak of different ways of knowing and interpreting the
meaning of American history and democracy. This indicates that, from a pedagogical and curricular standpoint, one
cannot assume that the Internet will inherently provide access to more diverse information. Just as teacher educators
may need to direct preservice teachers to primary sources by searching .edu and .gov domains, teacher educators
may also need to be explicit in mandating diversity as a theoretical frame by which to understand what and why
preservice teachers must not approach the Internet as a technical, neutral tool.

         A potential limitation of this study is the notion that preservice teachers in this study did not intend to use
the Internet to support the NCSS goals of developing and maintaining diversity, and that this misuse of the Internet
skewed the dataset that informed our analysis. At best, this limitation should necessitate a discussion that revolves
around ways to better train preservice teachers to use the Internet. We acknowledge that these preservice teachers
were not introduced to the critical, multicultural democratic framework in understanding to what end they were
using the Internet, but argue the issue does not lie in their technical use of the Internet. Each preservice teacher had 6
hours of technology training, demonstrated great facility when searching for and evaluating websites, and had no
difficulty selecting   20-25   reputable   websites for   their research   database.  Rather, we  question  the  Internet as  a

                                                                597                                                  ICLS 2006
democratic   medium    and   instead see  it as  a means  to replicate  dominant  ideologies  not by  strict governance  of
websites, but by the ways in which we approach the Internet as unproblematic and neutral. Unless teachers explicitly
foreground diversity, students will not do it on their own, as they have been long indoctrinated into the traditional,
non-diverse    accounts   as true and   good    and hence   outside  of questioning.  As such    they will   not seek  other
perspectives on curriculum.      If we direct students to use primary sources and historical fiction, our data indicates
that they will not largely reproduce the usual information, which meets Dewey's first criteria. But that is only the
first step. Students    must  have    a multicultural   theoretical  framework   that  addresses  race,   class  and gender
perspectives   that  will direct students away     from the  largely Eurocentric narrative   and toward   those  voices and
perspectives mostly ignored in textbooks except as sideline material. Examining Internet technology in the social
studies with a multicultural democratic framework surpasses the technologically savvy concentration because the
latter emphasizes the access and manipulation of `more information' without interrogating whether the information
is homogenous, redundant and representative of only one form of thought. In other words, our empirical analyses
raise  the  distinct possibility  that  providing   pre-service teachers   with the   multicultural democratic    evaluative
framework to create curriculum could facilitate a pedagogical approach that will actually lead to the increase of
diversity in the creation of democratic citizens.

References
Berson, M. J., Lee, J. & Stuckart, D. (2001). Promise and practice of computer technologies in the social studies: A
         critical analysis. In W. Stanley (Ed.), Critical issues in social studies research for the 21st century, pp. 209-
         230. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Bolick, C. M., Berson, M., Coutts, C., & Heinecke, W. (2003). Technology applications in social studies teacher
         education: A survey of social studies methods faculty, Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher
         Education, 3(3), 300-309.
Bowers,    C.A. (1988).   The  cultural  dimensions   of educational    computing:  Understanding     the non-neutrality of
         technology. New York: Teachers College Press.
Bromley,    H. (1998).    Data-driven  democracy?    In H.  Bromley   &  M.  Apple   (Eds.), Education/technology/power:
         Educational computing as a social practice, pp. 1-28. Albany: SUNY Press.
Dewey, J. D. (1915). School and society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dewey, J. D. (1916). Democracy and education. New York: Macmillan.
Dewey, J. D. (1958). Art as experience. New York: Collier Books.
Feenberg, A. (1995). Subversive rationalization: Technology, power and democracy. In A. Feenberg & A. Hannay
         (Eds.), Technology and the politics of knowledge, pp. 3-22. Bloomington, IL: Indiana University Press
Gay, G. (1997). The relationship between multicultural and democratic education. The Social Studies, 88(1), 5-11.
Glenn, A.D. (1990). Democracy and technology. The Social Studies, 81(5), 215-217.
Marri, A. (2003a). Multicultural Democracy: Toward a better democracy, Intercultural Education, 14(3), 263-277.
Marri, A. (2003b). Social studies, race, and the World Wide Web. In G. Ladson-Billings (Ed.), Critical race theory
         perspectives on the social studies: The profession, policies, and curriculum (pp. 247-269). Greenwich, CT:
         Information Age.
Marri, A. (2005). Building a framework for classroom-based multicultural democratic education: Learning from
         three skilled teachers, Teachers College Record, 107(5), 1036-1059.
Mason, C., Berson, M., Diem, R., Hicks, D., Lee, J., & Dralle, T. (2000). Guidelines for using technology to prepare
         social studies teachers, Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 1(1), 107-116.
McKnight, D., & Robinson, C. (in press). Social education and technological determinism: From technologia to
         technocracy.     JAAACS:    Journal  of the American   Association for the Advancement of Curriculum Studies.
Parker, W. C., (1996). "Advanced" ideas about democracy: Toward a pluralist conception of citizen education,
         Teachers College Record, 98(1), 104-125.
Schlesinger, A. (1991). The disuniting of America. New York: Norton.
Shaffer, D. W. (under review). Multisubculturalism: Computers and the end of progressive education. Retrieved
         October 15, 2005 from http://coweb.wcer.wisc.edu/cgi-bin/cv.cgi?REQUEST=show_embed&CAT=New.
Salinas, C., & Robinson, C. (2002). Finding multiple voices through the Internet. Social Studies and the Young
         Learner, 14(3), 31-32.
Whitworth,     S., &  Berson,    M.  (2003).    Computer   technology   in  the social studies:   An  examination    of  the
         effectiveness literature, Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 2(4), 472-509.
Zambon, M. (2003). Technology, race consciousness and the oppressor. In G. Ladson-Billings (Ed.), Critical race
         theory perspective on social studies: The profession, policies, and curriculum, (pp.271-290). Greenwich,
         CT: Information Age Publishing.

                                                              598                                                  ICLS 2006
