                           Co-Design of Innovations with Teachers:
                                        Definition and Dynamics

 Jeremy Roschelle, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave, Menlo Park CA 94303, Jeremy.Roschelle@SRI.com
                 William R. Penuel, Nicole Shechtman, 333 Ravenswood Ave, Menlo Park CA 94303,
                                William.Penuel@SRI.com, Nicole.Shechtman@SRI.com

           Abstract:    Researchers  in   the learning    sciences have    explored  a  collaborative    approach   to
           developing    innovations  that  fit  into real   classroom  contexts.  Co-design     relies  on teachers'
           ongoing    involvement    with  design  of  educational   innovations.    To    date, investigators   have
           described the application and results of co-design, but have not defined the process nor explored
           how it plays out over time.        In this paper,   we  define  co-design,  suggest   seven   key process
           components, and use data from interviews to illustrate how dynamic tensions in the process can
           unfold over time.

Introduction
     We know from studies of educational innovations that teachers' interpretations of their classroom contexts
strongly influence the level and nature of adoption (Cohen & Hill, 2001; Talbert & McLaughlin, 2002). Likewise,
studies of technology-supported curricula shows that adoption depends on how well teachers' perceive them to "fit"
within their goals for students, teaching strategies, and expectations for student learning (Blumenfeld et al., 2000;
Means et al., 2001).     Researchers in the learning sciences have explored a collaborative approach to developing
innovations that "fit" into real classroom contexts. Co-design relies on teachers' ongoing involvement with design of
educational innovations, which typically involve technology as a critical support for practice. Innovations resulting
from  co-design  processes   include a  wide    range  of  curriculum  materials  in  school  science    (Reiser et al., 2000;
Shrader et al., 2001) and mathematics (Roschelle et al., 1999). In addition, co-design has been used to develop
assessment    materials in science  (Atkin, 2001;     Edelson, 2002)   and   in reading and   mathematics    to  help  teachers
improve instruction (Shepard, 1997).

     The co-design approach to the problem of "fit" differs from top-down approaches in that the process pays close
attention to teachers' everyday work practices. Co-design practitioners pay attention to broad goals for learning and
large-scale systems. In contrast to approaches to reform in which teachers are simply expected to follow scripts for
teaching, teachers are active participants in co-design and are viewed as professional contributors to reforms.

     The co-design approach has close affinities with several other traditions of design. For example, in its attention
to  teachers' goals  for learning,  co-design    parallels the tradition  of  value-sensitive    design, in which   successful
adoption is assumed to depend on whether designs reflect users' core values and needs (Friedman, 1996). Co-design
requires attention to the usability of designs in particular learning contexts, which makes it similar to the focus in
user-centered (Carr, 1997) and scenario-based design processes (Carroll, 1995). In its commitment to the active
participation of teachers in the design process, co-design shares many of the same values of participatory design
(Ehn, 1992; Muller & Kuhn, 1993), a tradition with a rich history in the development of workplace technologies. It
also shares   assumptions   of researchers  who   have  advocated   for  learner-centered   design   (Soloway    et al., 1994),
which emphasizes the need to develop tools that can motivate students in a wide variety of contexts. Finally, it
shares assumptions with researchers who conduct design-based research (Cobb et al., 2003; Design-Based Research
Collective, 2003) into the effects of innovations in education.

Co-Design: A Definition
     We  define   co-design    to be a highly-facilitated,    team-based     process in which    teachers,   researchers,   and
developers work together in defined roles to design an educational innovation, realize the design in one or more
prototypes, and evaluate each prototype's significance for addressing a concrete educational need.. Although there
are  significant roles  for teachers  as  participants    in co-design,   it is not  a  fully democratic     process.  Instead,
accountability   and ultimate  responsibility for quality    and  decision   making  rests with  the project  leaders.   In this
section, we describe seven characteristic features of co-design as a method.

                                                              606                                                    ICLS 2006
    1. Co-design takes on a concrete, tangible innovation challenge. Like participatory design, co-design begins
with a goal of creating a tangible innovation.. At the same time, this aspect of co-design distinguishes it from open-
ended, exploratory research on learning innovations in which the goal is to explore a problem-space or theoretical
construct.

    2. The process begins by taking stock of current practice and classroom contexts. The co-design process begins
with field work to understand how potential adopters (teachers and students) perform tasks that are expected to be
transformed by the innovation. Ideally, this field work also documents key elements of the context--classroom and
student  characteristics,  community     values  and   perspectives,  and   local reform  initiatives. In this aspect, "taking
stock" in co-design has many similarities to rapid ethnographic techniques that are used in the design of workplace
technologies (Millen, 2000).

    3. Co-design has a flexible target. Flexibility is also important because the input of teacher participants in the
design  process    is likely to  alter researchers'    conceptions   of   an educational  resource.    Co-design differs   from
traditional  waterfall  design  in  this respect;  it  is related to  rapid  prototyping  methods    which  gather  user input
iteratively.

    4. Co-design needs a bootstrapping event or process to catalyze the team's work. By "bootstrapping," we refer
to a shared experience--such as a design workshop or retreat--that establishes common understanding of the need
and requirements for a particular resource to be of help to teachers in the classroom.

    5. Co-design is timed to fit the school cycle. Because it involves teachers, the work of design must be timed to
fit the school calendar and teachers' work schedules.

    6.   Strong    facilitation with well-defined     roles is a  hallmark    of  co-design. Both   researchers  and   software
developers actively work to keep everyone involved and excited through what is often perceived by teachers as a
long process. Researchers facilitate by helping keep the team focused on educational goals; software developers help
the team attend to feasibility and the development process. Teachers help construct the key problems co-design must
address, help  frame    the  vision  for what   is to  be   created, test the innovation  in  their  classrooms,   and provide
feedback.

    7.   There  is  central  accountability  for   the quality of  the  products  of co-design. Unlike    some  approaches    to
participatory design, in which there is formal, shared accountability among workers, designers, and managers for
system design, co-design has a central accountability structure for ensuring quality in the co-design of educational
innovations. Often, this accountability rests with the Principal Investigator of the grant that funds the effort.

The Dynamics of Co-Design
    Co-design often elicits strong emotions among participants. The process of coming to terms with one's role
and with the possibilities contained within the scope of a single project often brings alternating feelings of joy and
frustration, excitement and boredom. Past research reveals tensions that occur in co-design. We review these briefly
below and then illustrate how these tensions played out dynamically over time in one case.

Tensions Revealed in Prior Studies
    From studies of participatory design, we can learn about the tensions associated with engaging users in the
process. For example, studies have pointed out that end users and designers often have different criteria for success
(Blomberg & Henderson, 1990). These differences in goals arise because users and designers occupy different social
worlds. Success or failure often turns on whether there is mutual understanding of the unique competencies and
contributions of different team members (Bowers & Pycock, 1994).

    Educational applications of participatory and co-design ascribe similar importance to developing a common
understanding of goals, roles, and contributions of team members (Shrader et al., 2001; Shumar, 2003). At the outset
of the project, teachers' notions about curriculum and about goals of projects often differ from developers' notions
(Shrader  et  al., 2001).  Overly   technical discussions    among    software   developers  exacerbate   barriers (Bowers    &
Pycock,  1994).    Teachers  often   see  researchers'    solutions  as too  theoretical and  not   practical enough   for real
classrooms   (Shrader   et al., 2001).   By contrast,  researchers   often   view teachers'  limited content   knowledge   as a
barrier to contributing effectively to design efforts (Brown & Edelson, 1998).

                                                               607                                                   ICLS 2006
      The fact   that teachers and researchers who   engage  in  co-design    together follow  different workplace    norms
poses a second challenge to the process (Reiser et al., 2000). Through the course of the co-design process, teachers'
concerns  often  focus  on usability  and  on students' capabilities much     more than  on   teaching considerations.  By
contrast, researchers tend to take a more analytical stance and push teachers to justify goals. Teachers can find such
talk unsettling.

      Time and productivity pressures are yet another threat to the success of co-design. A principal complaint about
co-design is that it is very time intensive. In practice, involving users in design is complicated; it takes time, and
users' input is often contradictory (Rheinfrank et al., 1992). Many users find the design process boring (Ehn, 1992).
Designers must sift through the contradictory input and are often the only ones with the expertise to implement a
new program or software design. Attending to these difficulties is a central problematic of co-design.

Dynamic Pattern Over Time: Trajectory of Co-Design in One Project
      In the current study, we sought to investigate teachers' experiences and roles in co-design as they evolved.
Appreciating how the dynamics unfold over time can help researchers and teachers understand how the tensions of
co-design can be addressed in the context of a project.      Further, this knowledge can help participants in the co-
design process   recognize what    kinds of confusions  and  difficulties are possible  and   perhaps  even appropriate  at
different phases of a project.

The Project
      The project that is the focus of this paper was a research and development effort that explored how handheld
computers might support improved classroom assessment in science classrooms at the middle-grades.             The design
products were three distinct handheld software applications students could use during hands-on activities or other
class time  to   compose   questions, review   knowledge,    or collect   data. The    design process,   facilitated by the
researchers and   developers,   had  three  phases over  the course  of   the school   year that evoked   distinct   teacher
involvement and reactions: (1) collecting requirements, (2) rapid prototyping, and (3) software solidification.

Participants
      Teachers of students in grades 4­9 were recruited in a coastal, Southern school district with high ethnic and
economic diversity. 10 teachers applied, and all were accepted. Only 7 were able to attend the week-long design
conference to kick off the project. The teachers who were selected and who were participants in this study were
mostly women (n = 5), and were an experienced group (median years teaching = 21). They were mostly White but
the classrooms they taught were diverse, with some teaching in classrooms where the majority of students were
African American or eligible for free or reduced price lunches.

Sources of Data
      The primary source of data was a collection of interviews, conducted roughly once per month with all of the
team members (including researchers and software developers) throughout the design process by a researcher not
involved in the co-design. Interviews took place from September 2002 to May 2003, covering the full course of the
design process.   The   structured protocol asked  about  the   participants' contacts, participants'  activities, how  the
participant saw her or his role on the team, what decisions or progress had been made, what was going well, and
what was not going well or was a concern. Teachers' answers to questions (a total of 900 responses) were entered
into a database. A team of three investigators made several iterative passes through the data, building categories in
the style of grounded theory. Through this process, we came to see how teachers experiences' progressed through
three distinct phases of co-design. Providing rich description with a seven-page limit is a challenge; the best we can
do is to provide the representative snippets of our data.

The Beginning: "I'm impressed that the team is sticking to it."
      In the collecting requirements phase, teachers participated in several intensive interviews about their practices
and shared information about the different types of lessons they did, the lab activities their classes did, and the
problems they experienced in the classroom. They also provided their opinions about what their needs were and how
tools might be able to help. The researchers had the teachers walk through detailed scenarios of how they imagined
particular activities playing out in their classrooms.

      In this phase, teachers experienced many demands on their time and little that they could directly see or use.
Laura, for example, said in September, "I feel like I'm putting a lot of effort into this, but not getting anything in

                                                            608                                                    ICLS 2006
return. I haven't seen any fruits of my labor. I'm not sure they realize how much work is involved for the teachers."
An  essential  dynamic     of this   phase was  around   building  commitment    to a long-term   design  process   that  was
unfamiliar to teachers. The respect that teachers experienced was core to their continued involvement.

      Many teachers felt good about their contributions. One teacher, Sharon, stated, "They're sincerely interested in
our opinions  on    things. We're    the teachers. We   let them  know   what  works  in the classroom,  what  needs    to be
tweaked, what a 4th or 5th grader is able to do, and how they handle these things." Edward, in December, stated,
"The fact that the researchers could incorporate our ideas into the software is outstanding. Usually in teams like this
they don't take laypeople's opinions seriously. They were concerned about our concerns."

      Teachers also voiced many concerns and frustrations during this phase. A central concern, which came up
month after month for every teacher, was finding time in their already overbooked schedule. As Emily described,
"You're 24 hours, 7 days a week working for and with your students. On my weekend, my personal time, that's the
only time I get to work on this...It's super demanding to do all our responsibilities and serve on all our committees.
It doesn't give us a lot of opportunity to play with technology. As anywhere, everything is due yesterday." The
developers   and researchers    people   also noticed  that  this tension was   occurring.  Several discussed  this  in  their
interviews. One of the developers noted in October,

        I had to clench my teeth...hearing for the 20th time [from a teacher], "It's really simple, if it's a ridiculous
        answer..." Getting teachers to consider the possibility that it's not quite as straightforward as they think it
        is, to see that it has more depth to it...I don't think we're trying to be pedantic researchers...if you are
        going to put it into software, you have to be specific. It's a learning process. We'll get there.

      Another researcher reflected, "I'm impressed that the team is sticking to it. The teachers are finding out that
they got in for more than they bargained for. But they are still engaged."

The Middle: "We're trying it out in the real world."
      As the projects moved forward into rapid prototyping, the teachers' roles shifted. It became more multifaceted:
they participated both as designers and practitioners.

      As designers, they described their role as "giving feedback," "input on what I see as potential for using the
Palm," "tester," and "guinea pig." They were on the front lines trying out prototypes in their classrooms. As Janet
described, "We're trying it out in the real world situation to see if what we think will work in theory will actually
work in practice." They were observed by the researchers and developers, collected data about the students, and
communicated to the team what was going on in their classrooms. They also worked on creating lesson plans to
incorporate  the    tools, offered   informed   opinions  about   the software, and  worked   on    more and  more   refined
articulation  of their  needs.  As    Emily   described,    "One  of  my  contributions  is  that I'm   always looking     for
opportunities and ways to test the program out."

      Teachers reported increased engagement during this creative phase. Many were putting substantial effort into
finding new   ways   to    integrate the prototypes or  actual  software  into upcoming    lessons. Several of the   teachers
described the excitement of their students with participating in the project. Many also discussed their appreciation of
the researchers' openness and ongoing support, as well as their increasing coherence as teams.

      Teachers also expressed several concerns and frustrations throughout this phase. Again, time was the most
prominent    issue. Teachers   had   difficulty finding  the extra  time  to do all the  planning   and  preparation for   the
activities.

      In parallel with their work as designers, the teachers were also shifting and expanding their teaching practices.
Several teachers    reported  growth   over  the year  in how   they  were   approaching teaching.  They  reported   that  the
detailed reflection for both the design work and the issues around formative assessment expanded their awareness of
their practices and increased their ability to reflect. For example, Emily reported in September, "The process is
pretty amazing to us. We are learning so many different ways that our problems can be solved." In February, Emily
said,

                                                              609                                                  ICLS 2006
          The people I'm connecting with are giving me a diversity of opinions to work with about best practices and
          worst practices. It's catalyzing my growth as a teacher and also myself as a person. It gives me a higher
          level of satisfaction and enthusiasm. For going into the classroom and teaching with my students, I know
          that there's something new and better for me to be doing, and a way of doing things more effectively. So it
          yields a more positive outcome in their learning. If you want to teach, that's everything.

The End: "We're where we wanted to be--even if it was a bit slow"
      As rapid prototyping phased into software solidification, the teachers' roles shifted yet again. As Greg put it, "I
see my role as somewhat different.... The first year was development, and we're pretty much done with that. Now
it's implementing." Teachers could shift their focus toward practice; they spent more time thinking about how to
integrate the handhelds into their classrooms.

      Furthermore, the teachers found themselves in roles they described as "liaison," "salesperson," and "mentor."
Emily and Janet found themselves talking with parents in the community about the project and the use of handhelds.
Janet also felt that she  was  now  trying to "sell the benefits of Data   Doers   to new  teachers,   especially the new
members of the team." Kevin also had begun looking ahead to working with the new teachers next year: "It will be a
mentor kind of thing." Sharon also stated, "I'm anxious to see what happens when we add the new people. There are
people on our staff who are excited. We'll build the team larger."

      In the end, the teachers were pleased with the outcomes of the project, and all expressed satisfaction. Kevin,
for example, stated, "I'm very happy about the project; to have had input and really seen come to fruition is really
nice. Good stuff." And Greg, who had often expressed frustration over the course of the year, stated, "What's going
well is that we got to the point at the end of the year that we wanted...I was frustrated it took so long. But I'm
optimistic that we got done what we want to accomplish. We're where we wanted to be--even if it was a bit slow."

Discussion
      The key tensions of co-design persist across phases: teachers never have enough time; software developers and
teachers never share the same workplace norms; a common language is always a work in progress. Yet, within these
tensions, the social dynamic between teachers and researchers evolves over time, particularly with regard to agency
and ownership. In the beginning, teachers did not begin with a strong sense of ownership in the project or a clear
sense  of the  roles that they would   play.  It was  not until handheld   computers   arrived  in  their classrooms  and
classroom testing began that teachers began to feel as if the project was at least partly theirs. As teachers came to see
how excited their students were about the handheld computers and how pilot versions of the software worked in
their classroom,  they began   to adopt more   active roles within  the project.  By  the end  of  the year, teachers had
become strong advocates for the software. They recognized that they would play an important role in introducing
and   encouraging  the use  of the  software  to  teachers  who  would   participate  in  the field trial and the  school
community.

      A key benefit  of   engaging the teachers  in co-design   was professional  development.    The  co-design  process
offered teachers a chance to develop and refine their own ideas about teaching in the framework of exploring how
new software works in the context of their classrooms. Two of our teachers reflected on multiple occasions about
how they benefited from the opportunity to reflect on their teaching as part of the co-design process. One middle
school teacher commented that researchers' perspectives were so different from their own that they gave her a new
way to look at her own classroom teaching. She said that their design team meetings included:

          Phenomenal conversations about what improves learning. The team is making me realize that I have always
          focused on classroom management, not on how the kids are actually learning. This affects my teaching
          tremendously.

      Another elementary teacher observed changes in how her students learned with the software, and these were
changes she had not expected. When she introduced her students to software that collects students' questions, she
noted:

          I was amazed at the impact of using questions as an assessment tool. When I had the kids ask questions,
          even  on information  we  had  covered    and tested  before, it really helped  me   to see  the flaws  in  their
          understanding. We could then go back and discuss them.

                                                           610                                                   ICLS 2006
Conclusion
     By defining co-design and describing key process steps, we have sought to contribute to refining and spreading
this promising  method of  design.   Our account   of teachers' experiences  in co-design, based upon   a systematic
database of interview data,   suggests the  importance of the  process steps in managing   the tensions that arise   as
researchers, developers, and teachers work together over an extended period of time. Our case study suggests that
managing these tensions led to increased agency on the part of the teachers, increased reflection on their practice,
and  increased ownership   of the resulting design. Technology   integration remains an elusive  yet important     goal.
Based upon our experience, the co-design process can    play a role in creating a tighter integration of curriculum and
technology through the involvement of teachers in the design of innovations that they can meaningfully use in their
classrooms.

References
Atkin, J. M. (2001, 2001, April). How science teachers improve their formative assessment practices. Paper
         presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Seattle, WA.
Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, B. J., Krajcik, J., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (2000). Creating usable innovations in
         systemic reform:  Scaling up technology-embedded project-based science in urban schools. Educational
         Psychologist, 35(3), 149-164.
Carr, A. A. (1997). User-design in the creation of human learning systems. Educational Technology Research and
         Development, 45(3), 5-22.
Carroll, J. M. (1995). Scenario-based design. New York: Wiley.
Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A. A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational
         research. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Cohen, D. K., & Hill, H. C. (2001). Learning policy: When state education reform works. New Haven, CT: Yale
         University Press.
Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educational inquiry.
         Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
Edelson, D. C. (2002). Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 11(1), 105-121.
Ehn, P. (1992). Scandinavian design: On participation and skill. In P. S. Adler & T. A. Winograd (Eds.), Usability:
         Turning technologies into tools (pp. 96-132). New York: Oxford University Press.
Friedman, B. (Ed.). (1996). Human values and the design of computer technology. New York: Cambridge
         University Press.
Means, B., Penuel, W. R., & Padilla, C. (2001). The connected school: Technology and learning in high school. San
         Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Millen, D. R. (2000). Rapid ethnography: Time deepening strategies for HCI field research. In Proceedings of the
         conference on designing interactive systems: Processes, practices, methods, and techniques (pp. 280-286).
         New York, NY: ACM Press.
Muller, M. J., & Kuhn, S. (1993). Participatory design. Communications of the ACM, 36(6), 24-28.
Reiser, B. J., Spillane, J. P., Steinmuler, F., Sorsa, D., Carney, K., & Kyza, E. (2000). Investigating the mutual
         adaptation process in teachers' design of technology-infused curricula. In B. Fishman & S. O'Connor-
         Divelbiss (Eds.), Fourth international conference of the learning sciences. (pp. 342-349). Mahwah, NJ:
         Erlbaum.
Roschelle, J., DiGiano, C., Koutlis, M., Repenning, A., Phillips, J., Jackiw, N., et al. (1999). Developing educational
         software components. IEEE Computer, 32(9), 50-58.
Shepard, L. (1997). Insights gained from a classroom-based assessment project. CSE Technical Report 451. Los
         Angeles, CA: National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing.
Shrader, G., Williams, K., Lachance-Whitcomb, J., Finn, L.-E., & Gomez, L. (2001). Participatory design of science
         curricula: The case for research for practice. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
         Educational Research Association, Seattle, WA.
Soloway, E., Guzdial, M., & Hay, K. E. (1994). Learner-centered design: The challenge for HCI in the 21st century.
         Interactions, 1(2), 36-47.
Talbert, J. E., & McLaughlin, M. W. (2002). Assessing the school environment: Embedded contexts and bottom-up
         research strategies. In (pp. 197-227).

                                                          611                                                ICLS 2006
Acknowledgements
This material is based in part on work supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Number
REC-0126197. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommend-ations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.

                                                        612                                                 ICLS 2006
