Learning to Collaborate in a Computer-Mediated Setting: Observing a
                         Model Beats Learning from Being Scripted

                                         Nikol Rummel, Hans Spada & Sabine Hauser
             University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology, Engelbergerstr. 41, 79085 Freiburg, Germany
                                      <firstname.lastname>@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

        Abstract: In an earlier study we had tested if observing a model collaboration or following a
        collaboration    script could  improve  students'   subsequent collaboration   in  a  computer-mediated
        setting and promote their knowledge of what makes good collaboration. Both model and script
        showed positive effects. The current study was designed to further probe the effects of model and
        script by  comparing     them   to  conditions  (model-plus,  script-plus)  in which  the  learning  was
        further   supported   by  providing    elaboration  support  (instructional  prompts  and  guided   self-
        explanation). 40 dyads were tested, 8 in each of the following conditions: model plus elaboration,
        model, script plus elaboration, script, control. Observing a model collaboration with elaboration
        support yielded the best results over all other conditions on several measures of the quality of
        collaborative process and on outcome variables. Model without elaboration was second best. The
        results for the script conditions were mixed; on some variables even below those of the control
        condition.

Introduction
        In the face of a growing specialization of knowledge, collaboration of specialists from different disciplines
is required in many learning and working contexts. And often these people will be spatially distributed, making it
necessary for them to use modern communication technologies to collaborate at the distance. Take the following
example: Some symptoms can indicate both a physical as well as a mental diagnosis, making it difficult for an
individual psychologist   or  physician  to devise  the  correct diagnosis   and, in consequence,   a suitable treatment.
Hence, the collaboration of psychologists and physicians is increasingly regarded to be of importance for the well-
being of patients. Then, a relevant question is how to encourage and support collaboration among locally distributed
medical and psychological practices. In this context video conference systems have been advocated as a particularly
suitable solution (Köhler & Trimpop, 2004). Video-mediated communication systems support complex synchronous
interactions (Finn, Sellen, & Wilbur, 1997). Participants in different locations can communicate via audio-video
connection. In addition, application sharing technologies add the possibility to not only view, but also jointly edit
text or visual material.

        Ample research has demonstrated that collaboration can be effective for improving problem-solving and
learning (Dillenbourg, Baker, Blaye, & O'Malley, 1995, Slavin, 1992). However, this research has also made it
clear that not all collaboration is effective, but that the fruitfulness of collaboration depends on characteristics of the
interaction (Dillenbourg et al., 1995). Effective collaboration must be learned and requires guidance, instruction,
and training  (Slavin,   1992).  And   this is  even   more   so when    the challenges    of a  computer-mediated   and
interdisciplinary interaction are added to those of collaboration as such (Rummel & Spada, 2005).

        Over the past years, numerous research projects in CSCL and CSCW have investigated ways to provide
support for computer-mediated      collaboration.  In  this context, our research    focuses  in particular on pedagogic
support measures, i.e. measures that aim at instructing collaborators in ways that enable them to collaborate well
and with   success subsequently.   In  a first experimental   study  (Rummel   &    Spada, 2005)  we  tested  providing  a
collaboration model  or   a  collaboration  script as  instructional methods  to   promote   graduate students  ability to
collaborate well and with good results in a complex computer-mediated setting and their knowledge of what makes
good collaboration. Compared to two control conditions (one with the possibility to learn from prior unsupported
practice, and one without any prior learning experiences) both model and script showed positive effects on three
levels: (a) the collaborative process (i.e. the way dyads collaborated), (b) the outcomes they obtained, and (c) their
individual knowledge about characteristic features of a good collaboration assessed in a posttest. The current study
was designed   to probe   the learning effect  of  model and  script further by   supporting  elaborative/  meta-cognitive
processing of the relevant, instructional elements.

                                                            634                                                  ICLS 2006
Two Pedagogic Approaches to Instructing Collaboration: Model and Script
         One pedagogic approach to instructing people about how to best collaborate, is to provide them with a
model of a successful computer-mediated collaboration. The idea behind this approach is that, as they observe the
solution steps and   the  behavior  of  the  model partners,    collaborators   may   learn what   aspects  to pay  attention  to
during  their  own  future  collaboration.   Evidence    from   different    strands  of  research   supports  this assumption
(observational learning: Bandura, 1977; learning from worked out examples: Renkl, 1997; learning from exemplary
dialogs: Cox,  McKendree,       Tobin,  Lee, &  Mayes,     1999). We   refer  to   the  model    collaboration as   "worked-out
collaboration example". This indicates that it was specifically designed to exemplify aspects deemed constitutive of
a good   collaboration.  Such   aspects  were identified   by  means   of  a review   of  research  on  collaborative   problem-
solving  and  learning  (Rummel     &  Spada,  2005).   An   "exemplary    collaboration"   was    derived  from   the  literature
review and, consequently, a screenplay was written incorporating the relevant theoretical aspects. When writing the
screenplay for the current study, we also made use of excerpts of collaboration recordings from our earlier study
(Rummel & Spada. 2005). The screenplay was then executed as a dialog by professional actors, and recorded. The
recorded  model    dialog was   integrated   with  text animations     illustrating   the development    of the   joint (model)
solution. A multimedia presentation resulted, similar to a video, however divided in a number of discrete scenes (i.e.
phases of the collaboration). Throughout the scenes, the model presentation illustrated how the model collaborators
went  about   coordinating  their   collaboration, how     they managed      their time,  and    how they   made    use of  their
complementary domain knowledge in the problem-solving process. An important feature of our model collaboration
was the alternation between individual and collaborative work, which had proven to be a determining factor for a
successful collaboration, particularly in the case of complementary expertise of the partners (Rummel & Spada,
2005).

         The   second    pedagogic   approach     we  have    taken  relates    to  a  well-researched   measure    to  support
collaboration:    collaboration scripts  (face-to-face  collaboration:     O'Donnell,     1999;  computer-mediated      settings:
Fischer, Mandl, Haake, & Kollar, in press). The main idea of collaboration scripts is to prompt cognitive and social
processes by   participants that   might otherwise   not   occur, thus  enforcing     a fruitfully structured  interaction,   and
consequently improving the joint problem-solving and knowledge acquisition. However, collaboration scripts have
also been criticized (Dillenbourg, 2002) for dictating interaction in a coercive way. Negative motivational effects
may  be  expected   in   particular if  collaboration   is scripted  over    an extended    period   of time   and  over   many
collaborative sessions (Rummel & Spada, in press). Against this background we have raised the question if the
central elements of a collaboration script could be learned from a scripted session. Such sustainable learning effects
would   make   it unnecessary   to  continue  the  scripting  and risk  motivational      drawbacks,   but collaborators   could
themselves maintain a fruitful collaboration following the internalized script rules. The results of our first study
(Rummel   &    Spada,    2005)   supported    our  hypothesis   that   collaboration     scripts can   trigger  learning   about
collaboration and thus improve subsequent collaboration. Our script was designed to be structurally equivalent to
the model collaboration, that is, it instructed participants to engage in the same activities that were demonstrated by
the model  collaborators.   For  example,    while participants   observing   the  model    collaboration  would    listen to the
model collaborators clarifying questions about the patient case at the beginning of their collaboration, participants in
the script condition were instructed to do this together with their partner.

Promoting Elaboration during Learning from Model and Script
         To   summarize:   we   had  established   that observing    a collaboration      model  or  alternatively  following  a
collaboration  script  during   an  initial collaboration   can   be effective     in improving    a subsequent     unsupported
collaboration (Rummel & Spada, 2005). However, there was reason to believe that learning from both model and
script could be further improved by providing elaboration support. As Bandura (1977) pointed out, observational
learning depends to a great extent on paying attention to the relevant model stimuli, cognitively organizing and
rehearsing what has been observed. Also, in research on learning from worked-out examples, self-explanations and
instructional explanations have been shown to improve the processing of the examples and, consequently, learning
of the demonstrated problem-solving strategies (e.g., Renkl, 2002). For the script side, the cognitive apprenticeship
approach (e.g. Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989) indicates that reflective elaboration of relevant script features
might  be  a  promising   measure     to promote    its internalization    and  acquisition   as   a standard   of  subsequent
collaboration. In  this  research,  open  verbalization    and  reflection about    one's  own   behavior   have  proven   to be
important scaffolding strategies to support the acquisition of complex cognitive skills.

                                                              635                                                      ICLS 2006
         Providing specifically targeted support in order to promote learning from instructional material has been
shown to be of great value in a variety of instructional contexts. Of major relevance for the research presented here
are findings concerning two means to promote elaboration and learning in particular, and on the way these two
should be combined: (1) instructional prompts, and (2) guided self-explanations. Instructional prompts are short,
attention-guiding  explanations     provided   immediately     before  or after content    is presented.   They    can  be either
descriptive, i.e. giving a   short  summary    or  paraphrase,   or principle-based,    i.e. pointing  to  the core elements    or
principles underlying the learning contents. Decker (1984) has shown the effectiveness of instructional prompts ­ he
calls them "learning points" ­ for learning complex social skills, such as conflict management skills, from observing
model videos. Renkl (2002) provided evidence for the relevance of instructional prompts in learning from worked-
out examples.   Secondly,    a  great  number   of studies   have   demonstrated    the effectiveness   of  self-explanations   in
supporting learning (e.g. Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989). However, it has also become clear that
self-explaining   activities do  not   occur  naturally, but   that they  have  to  be  prompted    and   guided (Renkl,   Stark,
Gruber, & Mandl, 1998). Recently, collaborative self-explanations have been shown to be a particularly powerful
way of supporting learning (Chi & Roy, 2006). In their study, students who collaboratively self-explained while
observing recordings   of    a tutor   tutee interaction learned  more   than  individuals.   Finally, Renkl   and  his research
group (e.g. Hilbert, Schworm, & Renkl, 2004) demonstrated that for best learning results a transition should be
made from providing instructional prompts to prompting self-explanations.

         In  accordance   with     the above   findings, in  the current  study    we   implemented    elaboration   support  for
learning from model or script in the following way. Instructional prompts directing the learners' attention to the
relevant underlying principles were provided preceding each model scene and each script phase. More specifically,
participants in the model conditions were advised what they were going to observe next, whereas participants in the
script conditions  were  pointed     to the   relevance  of what    they were   going   do   next. Then,   following   the model
presentation or the scripted collaboration, a collaborative self-explanation phase took place in which dyads were
encouraged   to recapitulate    the model    collaboration  or alternatively  their scripted  interaction   and reflect on  what
aspects had been important for a successful collaboration.

Method
Collaborative Scenario and Computer-Mediated Setting
         Dyads    comprised     of  one medical   student   and  one  psychology    student   were   asked  to  collaborate  in a
computer-mediated setting and to jointly develop a diagnosis for complicated psychiatric cases. Two patient cases
were designed to require medical and psychological domain knowledge in order to arrive at the correct diagnosis
(i.e. the complementary domain knowledge represented in each dyad). For example, in case 1 the patient suffered
from cardiac dysrhythmia, but also showed symptoms of a panic disorder. The contents of the two cases did not
overlap so that no transfer of content knowledge was possible from case 1 to case 2. The dyads collaborated via a
desktop videoconferencing system including personal text-editors and a shared text-editor.

Experimental Design
         The experiment was composed of two phases. During the learning phase the experimental variation was
implemented.    Five  conditions    were  realized: model-plus,     model, script-plus,    script, control. Participants   in the
model-plus   and  the script-plus    condition  received    additional elaboration   support   during   the  learning  phase:   in
addition to the model or the script they were provided with instructional prompts and were guided to engage in self-
explaining activities. In the second phase of the experiment, i.e. the test phase, dyads in all conditions collaborated
without  further  support.   In this   phase  dependent   measures   were  assessed     on   three levels: (a) the collaborative
process, (b) the outcome of the collaboration, and (c) the individuals' knowledge of important aspects of a good
collaboration.

Participants
         The sample consisted of 40 dyads in total, specifically 8 dyads in each condition. Dyads were randomly
assigned to one of the five conditions. Each dyad was composed of one student of psychology and one medical
student. Students  were  recruited     during  lectures  and   seminars;  they received    a financial  compensation    for their
voluntary participation. All students were at an advanced level of proficiency in their studies.

                                                               636                                                     ICLS 2006
Procedure
          After an initial introduction, all participants received training with the computer-mediated setting. Next the
learning  phase   was  administered.    Participants  in  the  model    condition  observed     worked-out   scenes    of the
collaboration between a psychology student and a medical student on diagnosing case 1. The model collaboration
was  delivered  as  a multimedia   presentation  on  the computer    screen.  Dyads  in the  script condition  were    guided
through their collaboration on case 1 by a collaboration script giving them instructions for their interaction. Each
phase  of the script  was  allotted a particular  time frame.    The  script was provided    on a second   computer    screen
located next to the one that participants used for their collaboration (i.e., the videoconference and the text editors).
The  model-plus   and  the script-plus  conditions  were  implemented    correspondingly.    In addition  to the instruction
provided by observing the model or alternatively working with the script, the participants in these conditions were
provided with elaboration support as described above. Dyads in the control condition collaborated without further
instructional support during both the learning and the test phase. The participants returned one day later for the test
phase and the post test. During the test phase, all dyads collaborated on case 2 without further instruction. Finally,
each individual filled out the posttest and a questionnaire. During both learning and test phase, the two partners of
each dyad were seated in different rooms and collaborated via the desktop videoconference.

Dependent Variables
          The collaborative process during the test phase was assessed employing a rating scheme that had been
developed in the course of the process analyses for the first study (for more details, see Meier, Spada, & Rummel,
submitted). It allows to assess collaborative process in an economic fashion from the video recordings and combines
a qualitative with a quantitative approach. When looking at the video recording of a dyad's collaboration, process
quality  was  assessed   on   nine  dimensions:  sustaining   mutual   understanding,   dialog  management,      information
pooling,  reaching  consensus,   task division,  time management,     technical  coordination,  reciprocal  interaction,  and
individual task orientation   (assessed  for both partners   individually).  The dyads  collaboration    was rated for    each
dimension on a five-point rating scale ranging from 0 (very bad) to 4 (very good).

          The outcome of the collaboration, that is, the joint diagnosis for case 2, was blind-rated by an expert who
had no knowledge of the study's rationale and experimental design. The expert graded the diagnoses of all dyads on
a scale from 5 (highest grade) to 1 (lowest grade) with intermediate steps at x.3 and x.7 (this partition is common in
the German grading system).

          The posttest was filled out by each participant individually. It included an open-format question asking
participants to describe to colleagues who were going to collaborate on a similar task how they should proceed in
order to collaborate successfully. Participants' answers to this question were assessed by applying a checklist; a
maximum of 16 points could be achieved.

          Finally, each student filled out a questionnaire including a translated and adapted version of the Intrinsic
Motivation   Inventory  (IMI;  http://www.psych.rochester.edu/SDT/measures/intrins.html)          based  on  the motivation
theory by Deci and Ryan (1985), and a number of items to evaluate participants' experiences with the experimental
setting. The IMI is composed of six subscales: interest/enjoyment, perceived competence, effort, value/usefulness,
felt pressure and   tension,  and  perceived  choice.  Each   subscale  consisted   of  four items,  which   were  rated   by
participants on a six-point rating scale (ranging from 1 = not at all true to 6 = very true). The reliability of all scales
proved to be satisfactory (Cronbach's alpha ranging from  = 0.75 to  = 0.90).

Results
          Table 1  gives  an  overview   of  the results that yielded   significance (  = .05)   or showed   a   clear trend.
Compared   to   the   control condition, the  model    and   the script conditions   showed     positive effects on    dyads'
collaboration  during  the  test phase.  Particularly  clear  effects were   found on   process   variables  concerning   the
planning  and  coordination   of the  collaboration  (task division,  time   management).    The  dimensions  "information
pooling" and "technical coordination" revealed the same result pattern, but did not reach statistical significance. On
the other hand, the script conditions performed lower than the model conditions, and partly even lower than the
control condition, on several variables. Their collaborations were rated lowest on one particular process dimension:
individual task orientation (both for the psychology student, P, and the medical student, M). This process dimension
aims at shedding light on a motivational aspect, the individual persons' task alignment:

                                                             637                                                   ICLS 2006
        Last but not least the collaborative process will reflect participants' individual motivation and
        their commitment to their collaborative task...., individual collaborators may employ volitional
        strategies in order to keep up a high level of expended effort in their contribution toward the joint
        task, including   focusing    one's attention  on  solution   relevant  information, keeping   one's
        environment free of distractions, or nurturing positive expectations regarding the collaborative
        outcome (Heckhausen, 1989)." (Meier, Spada, & Rummel, submitted).
        The result may thus indicate that dyads in the script conditions experienced motivational problems during
their collaboration in the test phase. Interestingly, the self-report of motivation assessed by the IMI did not reveal
such effects. We will come back to this result in the discussion. Yet another result points in the same direction: on
the  questionnaire items asking  how    useful participants'   had found   the  learning phase (=phase    1)  for their
collaboration in the test phase (=phase 2) and if they had tried to transfer experiences from the learning phase to the
test phase (see bottom of Table 1), script participants gave the lowest ratings. The script conditions also performed
lowest on the individual knowledge posttest, and with regard to the quality of their joint diagnosis evaluated by the
expert rating (see Table 1). The latter result did, however, not reach statistical significance. A different result pattern
was found on the "pressure/tension" subscale of the IMI. Participants in the script conditions expressed they had felt
less pressure/tension during their collaboration   in the test phase, that is, their second  ­ but first  unscripted  ­
collaboration. On the contrary, model condition participants expressed the highest amount of felt pressure/tension
during their collaboration in the test phase, which in fact was their first collaboration. Overall, the ratings on this
variable were relatively low (max possible was 6). We will discuss this result below. The model-plus condition
showed better performances than the model condition on all variables listed in Table 1, with exception of the quality
of the joint solution. A similar effect of the elaboration support could not be shown for the script-plus condition.

Table 1. Overview of results
                                            Model-    Model     Script-    Script    Control
                                            plus                plus
 Collaborative process (N=40)               M         M         M          M         M         F (p)          ²
                                            (SD)      (SD)      (SD)       (SD)      (SD)
      Information pooling                   2.75      2.69      2.25       2.52      1.88      2.09 (.10)     .19
                                            (0.71)     (0.74)   (0.61)     (0.72)    (0.73)
      Task division                         3.13      2.58      2.13       2.08      1.29      6.04 (<.001)   .41
                                            (0.56)    (0.85)    (1.00)     (0.87)    (0.49)
      Time management                       3.04      2.25      2.00       1.71      0.83      8.10 (<.001)   .48
                                            (0.86)    (0.98)    (0.84)     (0.68)    (0.56)
      Technical coordination                3.33      2.83      2.83       2.83      2.42      2.47 (.06)     .22
                                            (0.31)    (0.69)    (0.67)     (0.59)    (0.58)
      Individual task orientation (P)       3.08      2.92      2.38       2.38      2.50      4.08 (.01)     .32
                                            (0.24)    (0.53)    (0.55)     (0.60)    (0.25)
      Individual task orientation (M)       2.96      2.88      2.08       2.38      2.54      2.75 (.04)     .24
                                            (0.45)    (0.59)    (0.79)     (0.68)    (0.50)
 Collaborative outcome (N=40)
 Quality of joint diagnosis                 3.40      3.96      3.09       2.76      3.26      1.89 (.13)     .18
                                            (0.90)    (0.68)    (0.99)     (0.96)    (0.99)
 Individual posttest (N=80)
 Knowledge about good collaboration         8.63      6.75      6.09       6.09      6.47      6.46 (<.001)   .26
                                            (1.32)    (1.97)    (1.46)     (1.99)    (1.42)
 Questionnaire (N=80)
 IMI scale "Felt Pressure/Tension"          3.38      3.15      2.21       1.88      2.44      5.13 (.001)    .22
                                            (1.43)    (1.29)    (1.00)     (0.64)    (1.06)
 Items assessing experience with setting
      Phase 1 useful for phase 2            5.38      4.69      4.60       4.00      4.73      2.62 (.04)     .13
                                            (0.50)    (1.25)    (1.24)     (1.54)    (0.96)
      Tried to transfer phase1 to phase 2   5.00      3.75      3.20       3.17      4.40      7.39 (<.001)   .30
                                            (0.63)    (1.24)    (1.08)     (1.27)    (1.30)

                                                          638                                                ICLS 2006
Discussion
         Learning from observing a model once again was demonstrated to be a powerful pedagogic approach when
trying to promote good collaboration in a computer-mediated setting. Dyads in the model conditions showed good
collaborative behaviors and were able to put what they had learned about collaboration into words in the posttest.
They also yielded the best results with regard to the quality of the joint solution; however, this result did not become
statistically significant. It is noteworthy that the model conditions achieved these results against the background of a
highly complex (computer-mediated and interdisciplinary) collaborative setting, and despite having observed only
one  single  model collaboration.    In fact, model    participants experienced      a relatively high   amount   of  pressure
compared to the other conditions when trying to put into practice what they had learned during collaboration in the
test phase. This is illustrated by the only significant effect found on the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI): the
one  for the  pressure/tension  subscale. The   results  of  the  current  study have   also  provided   some    evidence   that
elaboration support can further improve learning from a collaboration model.

         In contrast, the learning effects that had been demonstrated for the script condition in our first study could
not be replicated to the same extent. While script condition dyads did show indications of having benefited from
their first, scripted interaction in their collaborative behaviors in the test phase, these effects were not reflected in
the quality of their joint solution. Nor were participants able to make their tacit knowledge about good collaboration
explicit very well in the posttest. So what have they learned during their scripted interaction on case 1? Possibly the
concurrent  demands    of collaborating  on   the  case, following  the script   instructions, and  trying  to   reflect on  the
scripting on a meta-level in order to learn, were too high. Then, the additional elaboration support in the script-plus
condition obviously  could    not aid here  as it  added  another   layer  to the already    high demands.      The result  that
students expressed having felt little pressure during their collaboration in the test phase, might thus be an indication
of the relief they experienced    when   allowed   to  collaborate  freely in the test  phase.  On  the    other hand,   dyads'
observable behavior during their collaboration in the test phase assessed by our process dimension "individual task
orientation"  indicated that  they were   less motivated     than students  in   the   other conditions.   But  why   did  such
motivational  problems    not reveal in the IMI?    In fact, the  IMI scales  did not   reveal  much    at all. Students  rated
positive subscales high   (e.g. interest/enjoyment    subscale)   and negative   subscales   low  (e.g. pressure/tension)    on
average. Also, no other IMI subscale but "pressure/tension" revealed any differences across conditions. Self-report
scales entail the danger that individuals attempt to present themselves in certain way. The necessity to take into
account psychological dynamics such as self-presentation or reactance is also mentioned explicitly by the authors of
the IMI (see http://www.psych.rochester.edu/SDT/measures/intrins.html). Then, it might well be that the external
rating of a person's motivation as it can be inferred from utterances or actions in the context of a given situation is
more objective than the person's self-report.

         In sum, the results of the current study are notable given the complexity of the setting and the relatively
small number of dyads in each condition. The promising main effect that could be established in both of our studies
is that collaboration can be improved through instruction. Whether the learning effects do sustain over time was not
tested by our  studies  hitherto. We  think   this could  be best  investigated  in  a  real-world collaboration    setting. In
conclusion we would like to emphasize that observing a model appears to be a very powerful pedagogic strategy
even when instructing complex social skills. This may point a promising direction for research on learning from
worked examples. However, a caveat: the time expenditure for developing such models is very high. Secondly we
would like to plea for caution when advocating the beneficial effects of collaboration scripts. Collaboration scripts
have recently become quite fashionable in CSCL research ­ and indeed: scripted interactions often lead to better
results than unscripted ones. However, so far not many researchers have been concerned with the question of how
scripting affects learners' interactions after the termination of the scripting. The inconsistent results with regard to
learning effects of collaboration scripts that we have found in our two studies clearly call for more research on this
question.

References
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
         and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Chi, M.   T.  H. &  Roy,   M.   (2006).  Learning   from   observing   tutoring   collaboratively:  Insights    about tutoring
         effectiveness from vicarious learning. Manuscript submitted for publication.

                                                             639                                                     ICLS 2006
Collins, A.,  Brown,    J. S.,  &  Newman,     S. E. (1989).  Cognitive   apprenticeship:   Teaching   the crafts  of  reading,
         writing,   and mathematics.    In  L.  B.   Resnick  (Ed.),  Knowing,    learning, and    instruction (pp. 453-494).
         Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cox, R., McKendree, J., Tobin, R., Lee, J., & Mayes, T. (1999). Vicarious learning from dialogue and discourse.
         Instructional Science, 27, 431-458.
Deci, E. L.,  &  Ryan,   R.  M.   (1985).  Intrinsic motivation    and self-determination   in human   behavior.   New    York:
         Plenum.
Decker, P. J. (1980). Effects of symbolic coding and rehearsal in behavior-modeling training. Journal of Applied
         Psychology, 65, 627-634.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional design.
         In  P.  A. Kirschner    (Ed.), Three   worlds   of CSCL.    Can  we    support  CSCL   (pp.  61-91).  Heerlen:   Open
         Universiteit Nederland.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1995). The evolution of research on collaborative learning.
         In  P.  Reimann    &   H.  Spada   (Eds.),  Learning   in humans     and  machines:   Towards   an  interdisciplinary
         learning science (pp. 189-211). Oxford: Elsevier/Pergamon.
Finn, K.  E., Sellen,  A.  J.,  &  Wilbur,  S. B.   E. (1997).  Video-mediated     communication.    Mahwah,    NJ: Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Fischer, F., Mandl, H., Haake, J., & Kollar, I. (Eds.) (in press). Scripting computer-supported communication of
         knowledge. Cognitive, computational, and educational perspectives. New York: Springer.
Hilbert, T.,  Schworm,      S., &    Renkl, A.    (2004).   Learning   from   worked-out    examples:  The     transition from
         instructional  explanations    to self-explanation   prompts.    In P. Gerjets, J. Elen,  R. Joiner   & P. Kirschner
         (Eds.),  Instructional    design  for  effective   and  enjoyable   computer-supported     learning   (pp. 184-192).
         Tübingen: Knowledge Media Research Center.
Köhler, T., & Trimpop, R. (2004). Sehen und gesehen werden: Teleradiologie mittels Desktop- Videoconferencing.
         [Seeing and being seen: Tele radiology via desktop videoconferencing]. In W. Bungard, B. Koop & C.
         Liebig   (Eds.),  Proceedings     zur  3.   Tagung   der  Fachgruppe      Arbeits- und    Organisationspsychologie.
         München: Rainer Hampp.
Meier, A.,  Spada,  H.,    & Rummel,    N.  (submitted).    Evaluating  collaboration:   A  rating scheme   for  assessing  the
         quality of collaborative process. Manuscript submitted for publication.
O'Donnell, A. M. (1999). Structuring dyadic interaction through scripted cooperation. In A. M. O'Donnell & A.
         King   (Eds.), Cognitive     perspectives   on peer  learning   (pp. 179-196).  Mahwah,     NJ:   Lawrence    Erlbaum
         Associates.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A study on individual differences. Cognitive Science, 21, 1-
         29.
Renkl, A.   (2002). Learning    from   worked-out    examples:   Instructional  explanations   supplement   self-explanations.
         Learning & Instruction, 12, 529-556.
Renkl, A., Stark, R., Gruber, H., & Mandl, H. (1998). Learning from worked-out examples: The effects of example
         variability and elicited self-explanations. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 23, 90-108.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
         problem-solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.
Rummel, N. & Spada, H. (in press). Can people learn computer-mediated collaboration by following a script? In F.
         Fischer,   H.  Mandl,   J.  Haake  &  I.  Kollar,  Scripting  computer-supported     communication     of knowledge.
         Cognitive, computational, and educational perspectives. New York, Springer.
Slavin, R. E. (1992). When and why does cooperative learning increase achievement? Theoretical and empirical
         perspectives. In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz & N. Miller (Eds.), Interaction in cooperative groups: The theoretical
         anatomy of group learning (pp. 145-173). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgements
The   present   research   was    supported    by   the  Deutsche    Forschungsgemeinschaft        (DFG;   [German     Science
Foundation])  with  project    grants Sp   251/16-2  and   16-3. We    would  like to thank   our  student research assistants
Dejana Diziol, Jana Groß Ophoff, Cindy Günzler and Friederike Renner for their help in the material development,
data  collection and   data  analysis.  Furthermore,    we  would   like  to  acknowledge   Anne   Meier,   who    has made  a
substantial  contribution   to  this  project: the   rating scheme    for the   collaborative  process analysis    was  largely
developed as part of her thesis work.

                                                               640                                                   ICLS 2006
