   Direct-manipulation animation: incorporating the haptic channel in
   the learning process to support middle school students in science
                           learning and mental model acquisition

                                        Margaret S. Chan, John B. Black
                                     Department of Human Development
                                  Teachers College, Columbia University
                                                  New York, U.S.A.
                               chan@tc.columbia.edu, black@tc.columbia.edu

Abstract
        The study reported here investigated what learners need to construct and master mental models of
        systems. To enable learners to perform the cognitive processing needed to understand structure,
        purposes,  and   functional  relations among    system    entities,  we  developed      a special    form of
        animation: Direct-manipulation animation. Furthermore, we propose a cognitive processing model
        that elucidates the process of learning with information presented through auditory, visual, and
        haptic channels. To answer our research questions, an empirical study was conducted with 157
        seventh-grade public school students, who were asked to learn about Newtonian mechanics with
        narrative-only,  narrative-and-static-visuals,  or    narrative-and-animation.      The   effect  of  content
        complexity   on  learning  with  different   presentation formats    was  also  examined.      Our   findings
        suggest   that direct-manipulation  animation,   incorporating      the  haptic channel     in the   learning
        process,  provided  learners  with  proper   learning  experiences    to reason  about    structural  causal
        interactions   and functional   relations in systems;  this  in  turn   facilitated acquisition   of  mental
        models of systems.

Introduction and research objectives
        How can we help students develop mental models of systems and scientific phenomena? Systems--simple
or complex, open   or  closed,  visible or invisible--are  pervasive     in the  world  around    us.  Developing   students'
understanding  of systems   is a major  theme     spotlighted in the  National   Science    Education    Standards (National
Research Council, 1996). The American Association for the Advancement of Science has also identified "systems
thinking" as one of four major themes in science education (AAAS, 1993). Although comprehending how systems
work is critical to science learning, considerable research has shown that understanding systems, especially complex
ones, is notoriously difficult for students of all ages (Chi, 2000; Feltovich et al., 1992; Hmelo, Holton & Kolodner,
2000; Jacobson, 2000).

        Mental model acquisition is at the heart of meaningful learning (Black, 1992; Gentner & Stevens, 1983;
Mayer, 2001). To comprehend and reason about how systems work, an individual needs to construct a mental model
of these systems (White, 1993; Wilensky & Resnick, 1999). We argue that constructing mental models of systems
entails understanding structural causal interactions as well as functional relationships among entities in systems.
Specifically, structural causal interactions reveal how one entity is causally related to another (i.e., similar to causal
chains in events or stories); functional relationships describe how a change in one parameter leads to a change in
another parameter or the entire system (i.e., similar to a math function). Furthermore, we proposed a Structure-
Purpose-and-Conceptual Ecology (SPACE) framework for comprehending dynamic systems (Chan & Black, 2005).
The SPACE framework contends that understanding structure, purposes, and interactions among the components of
systems is pivotal to system comprehension. For example, to understand how a roller coaster works, one needs to
understand the topology    and  configuration  of  the coaster   tracks, the  roller coaster    car design   (structure); how
mechanical energy converts in the various components of the ride (e.g., first hill, vertical drop, loop-the-loop, and
270-degree spiral, etc.) to propel the coaster cars and make the thrill ride fun (purposes of each components); and the
interrelationships among various components of the entire system (conceptual ecology, a holistic perspective). These
runnable mental models, in turn, afford individuals explanatory and predictive power to understanding simple and
complex systems    (Schwartz   &  Black,   1996).    However,    most   classroom    instruction    tends  to emphasize    the

                                                            64                                                      ICLS 2006
acquisition (or memorization) of entities and structure over the more crucial understanding of causal interactions and
functional relationships among system entities. Thus, the overall goal of our research is to investigate what kinds of
learning   materials and   experiences are needed   for learners,  especially novices,   to construct   and master    mental
models of systems.

           Systems can be conveyed by different formats; they can be described in text, illustrated by pictures/visuals,
and depicted through animation. Each type of presentation format -- narratives, pictures/visuals, and animation --
has its own   strength  in communicating   conceptual     information. Previous  studies   have  demonstrated    that media
research comparing students' learning outcomes from one medium to another has been largely futile (Clark, 1994).
Adopting   a learner-centered approach,    we  are interested in  investigating  which  presentation    formats  (narratives,
static visuals, or   dynamic animation)  may   best  support   learners in their  efforts  to understand   systems    and to
construct mental models to reason about systems. Furthermore, we propose a cognitive processing model of learning
that elucidates the process of learning with information presented in auditory, visual, and haptic channels.

Theoretical framework
           Written description has long been widely used to convey system structures, operations, and interactions.
Extensive research has demonstrated that readers can construct mental representations of the systems, devices, and
situations described in a text (Garnham & Oakhill, 1996; Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso, 1994; Kintsch, 1998) and
that they can draw inferences from the internal representations about those situations and systems (Black, Turner, &
Bower, 1979; Bransford et al., 1972; Mani & Johnson-Laird, 1982). Although the printed word is the most prevalent
format in education, considerable research evidence suggests that individuals' understanding can be enhanced by the
addition of visuals (i.e., pictures, illustrations, and so on) (Larkin & Simon, 1987; Mayer & Gallini, 1990; Tversky,
1995).
           With the current trend to integrate multimedia and computers into school curricula, the use of animation to
illustrate dynamic   systems  and   phenomena    in science   and  other subjects    is increasingly    commonplace.     One
advantage of animation over narratives and static visuals is its ability to represent change in time and to present
information  about   change  over  time  (Rieber,  1990).  A  pervasive  assumption     is that animation   is a promising
educational tool. Nevertheless, for decades, research comparing the effectiveness of text-and-static illustrations with
animation-and-narration to enhance learning has been inconclusive (Mayer & Anderson, 1991; Pane et al., 1996;
Rieber, 1989, 1990). Interestingly, Tversky et al. (2002) pointed out that while some studies found that animation
appeared superior to static visuals in enhancing learning and transfer, a careful examination of these studies revealed
a lack  of  equivalence   between  animated   and  static graphics in   content  as well   as differences in   experimental
procedures.
           In addition to methodological complications and information nonequivalence, we argue that the failure to
ascertain the benefits of animation in learning may also relate to the way it is perceived and constructed. According
to the apprehension principle for effective graphics (Tversky et al., 2002), "the structure and content of the external
representation  should   be readily and  accurately  perceived    and   comprehended."     Although   animation   increases
perceptually available information, explicitly showing the information does not necessarily guarantee that viewers
will accurately perceive the specific information. Neither does their perception of information promise adequate
comprehension and mental model construction. As Mayer (2001) asserted, meaningful multimedia learning requires
learners' active processing of the instructional material; merely showing animation to learners may not be sufficient
to aid their learning. We believe a good match between presentation format (text, static graphics, and animation) and
what learners need to construct a conceptual understanding of the systems will promote comprehension and learning
(a Format-Support Hypothesis, Chan & Black, 2005).
           Furthermore, Sweller   and  colleagues  (1996)  pointed out   that if the content    is complex  (high  intrinsic
cognitive load) and a high level of interactivity among the entities is depicted in instructional materials (static and
dynamic),   the learners'  extraneous  cognitive   load may   be  overloaded;   consequently,   they  may   have  difficulty
perceiving and understanding the learning content. To overcome or mitigate the perceptual and cognitive demands
that animation imposes on learners, we developed a special form of instructional animation, which we call direct-
manipulation animation (DMA). Specifically, DMA allows learners to directly interact with navigation controls (i.e.,
buttons and sliders), freely determine their viewing direction, pace their navigation of the content, and visualize how
change in one parameter affects other parameters in the system (Chan & Black, 2005). We hoped that DMA, being
the closest match to the functional relations, enables learners to perform the cognitive processing needed to visualize
and reason    about   the  causal interactions and   functional   relationships  among     entities  in systems   (i.e.,  the
constructivist nature of understanding).

                                                            65                                                    ICLS 2006
A cognitive processing model of multimedia learning
         We propose a cognitive processing model of multimedia learning that is based on a theoretical framework
that draws on constructivism, working memory research, and cognitive load theory (Figure 1). According to the
constructivist approach, learning is an active process in which students seek to make sense out of the to-be-learned
information  (Bruner,  1996).      Meaningful   learning  occurs   when   learners   engage in  active                 cognitive processing.
Information  to  be  learned      must be first processed   through   working     memory   (Baddeley,                  1992). Research    has
consistently demonstrated       that the  limited  capacity   of  working    memory  and  the  interaction                between    working
memory and long term memory play a significant role in learning (Baddeley, 1998; Simon, 1974; Sweller et al.,
1998). According to cognitive load theory, three sources of cognitive load (intrinsic, extraneous, and germane) can
be imposed   on  individuals      in learning.  Specifically,  the load  of  working  memory    is         affected        by    the level of
complexity   of  the subject      content (intrinsic  cognitive    load)  and  the  strategies for         information           presentation
(extraneous or germane load). Optimum learning can occur when intrinsic load is considered, extraneous load is
kept  to a  minimum    while      germane   load   is maximized    by    the design  and  implementation                  of  activities  and
representations, thereby facilitating schemata change in long-term memory.

                                                                                                                                          LTM

 Auditory            AudioChannelNarrative     Ears /Hearing        Sound                           VerbalArticulatoryLoop
                                                                                                      (Baddeley, 1992)

                    Written
                     Text
 VisualChannel    Pictures &                   Eyes /Vision         Images                      Visual / SpatialSketchpad(Baddeley, 1992)CentralExecutive
                  Animation

                                                                                                  Kinematics /
 Haptic                 DirectManipulation     Hands /ChannelAnimationMotionTouch                Tactile Displays(Meyer & Kieras,1997)

                       Figure 1. A cognitive processing model of multimedia learning.
         In  our proposed      cognitive  processing  model    of learning,  information may   enter              a    learner's systems   via
three channels: auditory, visual, and haptic. In a technology-supported learning environment, information may be
presented in spoken words, which enter through the ears (auditory-hearing); the learner may select relevant sound
input and move the information to the Verbal Articulatory Loop (Baddeley, 1992) for further processing in working
memory. Similarly, the external representations may be visual (i.e., written words, pictures, and animation), which
enter through   the  eyes  (visual-vision);    the learner  may    attend to  pertinent  incoming          images          and   transfer  the
information  to  the  Visual/Spatial      Sketchpad   (Baddeley,    1992)    for further processing.                Furthermore,     external
representations  may  involve      the haptic  channel  (e.g., direct-manipulation   animations),        entering          via   the sense of
touch through the hands; the learner may decide on and/or interact with relevant motions in the Kinematics/Tactile
Displays (Meyer & Kieras, 1997). To summarize, the working memory is composed of different sections for visual
(Visual/Spatial  Sketchpad),       auditory   (Verbal  Articulatory   Loop),     and haptic    (Kinematics/Tactile                   Displays)
information, together with a Central Executive (Baddeley, 1992) that controls the functioning of working memory
and its interaction with the long-term memory (LTM). Ideally when processing, the 3 different types of information
(i.e., words, pictures, and movement) are integrated to form a stronger representation than any one by itself.
         Interestingly, our interactions with information coming in through the haptic channel are different from our
interactions with information entering the visual and auditory channels. Specifically, when incorporating the haptic
channel in the learning process, learners not only can visualize the information but also interact with it through their
hand controls. The immediate sensorimotor feedback they received from their hand motions can be transferred to
working memory for further processing. A benefit of learning with kinematics displays is that it enables learners to

                                                                66                                                                   ICLS 2006
actively engage    and  participate in   the meaning-making     journey.   It is a  two-way     communication     process, with
learners controlling the pace, speed, direction, and magnitude of the exploration.

Research Questions
         The   principal  research   question  for  the  study  focuses  on   what   learners,  especially   novices,  need  to
understand systems and construct mental models to reason about the structure, purposes, and functional relations of
systems.   Since  systems  can   be   conveyed   in different  formats   (text,  pictures/visuals,   and  animation),   we  are
interested in  examining     which  presentation   formats  may   best  foster   system   understanding    and   mental  model
acquisition. An additional research focus of our work is to investigate the role of content complexity (i.e., simple,
moderate,  and   complex)  in   learning  with the  three presentation  formats.    Do   learners  need different  presentation
formats to understand content at different levels of complexity?

Method and Data Source
         To answer these research questions, we compared the learning and affective outcomes of middle school
students who were asked to learn about Newtonian mechanics with narrative-only, narrative-and-static-visuals, and
narrative-and-animation.     Energy,   a  fundamental   concept   in physical    science, is a    major   topic in the  science
standards and middle school science curricula. Although energy is everywhere, its workings are abstract. Students
are often confused about energy-force and energy-motion relationships and have difficulty understanding the laws of
conservation   (George  et al., 2000;    Grimellini-Tomasini   et al., 1993).  Because    of the   conceptual   complexity  and
invisible nature of the energy transfer process, we chose energy conversion and the law of conservation of energy as
the topic  for   this study.  Students   were  asked  to  learn   about mechanical     energy    conversion   and  the  law  of
conservation   of  energy  in one   of three  scenarios:  a playground   swing,    a roller  coaster ride, and   pole-vaulting.
Students in each scenario were further divided into three presentation format groups: a narrative-only group (N), a
narrative-and-static-visuals group (V), and a narrative-and-animation group (A).

         We conducted an empirical study with 157 students (89 females and 68 males) from six seventh-grade
science classes in an inner-city public school in New York. The mean age of the participants was 13.8 (SD=1.24).
The student population consisted of the following diverse ethnicities: 34% Caucasian Americans, 35% Hispanic
Americans, 26% African Americans, and 5% Asian Americans. All students were given parental consent forms, and
only those with returned signed consents were allowed to participate in the study. All participants were tested during
the same week of classes. Each participant was randomly assigned to a treatment group (N, V or A) and tested
individually in one session lasting approximately an hour and fifteen minutes.

         We used the following measures of learning: (1) a pretest on students' understanding of the theoretical
concepts and the interrelationships among the key entities; (2) a retention test, in which students were asked to write
a summary explaining how mechanical energy works and to draw a diagram to illustrate the process of energy
conversion according to their assigned content scenarios; (3) a "what-if" test, in which students were engaged in
thought experiments to explain and predict the outcomes of scenarios in which the values of key parameters had
changed;   (4) a  near-transfer task,  in which  students   were  asked  to   apply  the concepts   presented   in the learning
materials to two problem-solving tasks; and (5) a far-transfer task, in which students were asked to apply the learned
concepts   to  a novel  scenario.   In addition,  given   our  interest in  students'    affective  reaction to   the treatment
conditions, we asked them to fill out surveys about their learning experience with the presentation formats.

Results
         Three graduate students (double-blinded) rated the results independently, and an inter-rater reliability score
of .883 was achieved. A MANOVA was conducted to determine whether the groups (Narrative, Static-Visuals and
Animation)    with three  content  levels  (simple, moderate,    complicated)    differed on    retention scores,  model-based
reasoning, and transfer, and whether there was an interaction between presentation formats and content complexity
(i.e., the two between-subject factors). The interaction was significant, Wilk's  =.762, F(3, 147) = 1.692, p =. 022,
multivariate 2 = .066. This indicated that by using different presentation formats, participants' comprehension and
transfer performance    differed as  the  content  became   complicated.   The   main    effect for presentation   formats was
significant, Wilk's  = .286, F(3, 147) = 20.695, p = .000, multivariate 2 = .465. This suggested that participants'
learning outcomes differed depending on which group they were in: narrative-only, narrative-and-static-visuals, and
narrative-and-animation groups. The main effect for content complexity was also significant, Wilk's  = .630, F (3,
147) = 6.203, p = .000, multivariate 2 = .207, indicating that participants' learning outcomes also differed for

                                                              67                                                      ICLS 2006
different levels of content (simple, moderate, complicated). Overall, the effect sizes for content, format, and content
by format were .46, .68, and .26, respectively. Table 1 summarizes the means and standard deviations for learning
outcomes across presentation formats and content complexity.
Table 1. Means and Standard Deviations for Retention, What-if scenarios, Problem-solving, and
Transfer as a Function of Presentation Formats and Content Complexity

                                   Summary          Drawing       What-if        Problem-Solving     FarTransfer
         Group             n      Mean (SD)        Mean (SD)     Mean (SD)      Mean (SD)         Mean (SD)
Presentation format
Narrative-only             51     3.39 (1.80)    4.29 (1.75)    1.68 (.69)      3.76 (1.94)       3.67 (1.47)
Narrative & visuals        52     5.77 (1.64)    5.64 (2.13)    2.40 (1.03)     4.60 (1.79)       4.23 (1.66)
Narrative & animation      54     7.63 (1.73)    7.46 (2.11)    2.61 (1.52)     5.04 (1.14)       4.94 (1.70)
Content complexity
 Simple                    50     6.48 (1.77)    6.16 (2.35)    2.72 (.88)      4.78 (1.89)       3.20 (1.47)
 Moderate                  52     5.58 (2.86)    6.15 (2.11)    2.19 (.54)      4.23 (1.76)       4.71 (2.07)
 Complicated               55     4.65 (2.16)    5.23 (1.97)    2.10 (1.08)     4.41 (1.42)       4.98 (1.47)

        One-way ANOVAs on each dependent variable were conducted as follow-up tests to the MANOVA. Using
the Bonferroni method to adjust for Type I error, each ANOVA was tested at an alpha level of .02. Follow-up
ANOVAs    indicated  that effects  of  presentation formats  were significant  for all learning   outcome   measures:
retention, model-based reasoning, and transfer. Content complexity had a significant effect on retention-summary (p
= .000), drawing (p = .006), and transfer (p = .023-marginally significant). Finally, participants in the N, V, and A
groups demonstrated significantly different performance in posttest summary writing (p = .003) and reasoning in
what-if scenarios (p  =   .021-marginally  significant). To   summarize,   the findings  corroborated  Tversky    and
colleagues' (2002) apprehension principle for effective graphics and point to the benefits of leveraging the haptic
channel in multimedia learning, as well as the efficacy of direct-manipulation animation in supporting learners in
their effort to understand systems and construct mental models of systems.
Discussion and Implications
        This study has theoretical and practical implications. First, the study and our proposed cognitive processing
model of learning contributes to the existing body of theory-based research in multimedia learning by exploring how
computer-based instructional animation can be enriched and used in ways that are consistent with how people learn.
From a  cognitive constructivist  perspective, knowledge  construction depends   on the cognitive   processing of  the
learner during learning. While presenting relevant material in words and pictures (static and dynamic) is conducive
to knowledge acquisition, constructivist learning is most likely to occur when the learner is provided with support to
process the presented material in meaningful ways. We contend that structural causal interactions and functional
relationships among the components in systems are pivotal to system understanding. The central challenge lies in
providing learners with the proper learning materials and experiences to reason about the causal interactions and
functional relations in systems.

        Direct-manipulation  animation     affords  learners to actively   manipulate  the learning   content  while
simultaneously visualizing the way a change in a parameter impacts other parameters and interactions within the
system. Our  findings showed     that as the   content became   increasingly complicated   (i.e., increased levels of
interactivity among system entities), DMA proved to be an effective support to assist middle-school students to
comprehend the content, reason on what-if scenarios and problem-solving tasks, and extrapolate what they have
learned to tackle problems increasingly removed from what they have learned (transfer). While learners process
information in the visual and auditory channels in multimedia learning, enlisting the haptic channel in the learning
process provides them added benefits: they use hand movements to actively interact with the content and receive
immediate sensorimotor feedback about causal interactions and functional relations among system entities, all of
which are central to system understanding.

        Furthermore, although animation uses motion to depict movement and portray changes over time, viewing
animation is a nonetheless a passive activity. By contrast, static visuals employ still images or pictures to illustrate

                                                          68                                                 ICLS 2006
dynamic processes or systems; thus, to acquire a deeper understanding of the structure, purposes, and workings of
the systems, learners need to mentally simulate the interactions and functional relations among various components
under different circumstances, as suggested by the static visuals. DMA may represent an example of how a passive
medium (e.g., system-controlled animation) can be transformed into an active one, enabling the learner to avidly
engage in cognitive processes that are pivotal for meaningful learning and mental model acquisition. Nevertheless,
one should be cautious and recognize that active media or interactive learning environments requiring hands-on
activity do    not necessarily,  in  and  of  themselves,   foster   cognitive activity or  guarantee learning.   Similarly,
appropriate cognitive activities can be promoted by "passive media," such as well-written expository text and well-
designed multimedia presentation.

         On    the practical   side, our  findings  suggest  that  classroom   instruction, particularly when   multimedia
presentations are involved, should not focus solely on supporting students' acquisition of a detailed understanding of
entities and structures, while overlooking the importance of fostering their construction of the crucial mental models
required for reasoning and meaningful learning. This is critical since understanding is one of the most valuable
acquisitions an individual can make in the learning process (Halford, 1993).
         In sum, the study reported here investigated what learners need to construct mental models of systems. We
contend  that  functional   relationships are   central in dynamic   mental    model understanding.   We  also proposed   a
cognitive   processing  model   that elucidates  the  process of  learning with  information   presented through   auditory,
visual, and haptic channels. To answer our research questions, we conducted an empirical study with 157 seventh-
grade  public  school   students,   who  were   asked to learn  about  Newtonian    mechanics  through   three presentation
formats: narrative-only, narrative-and-static-visuals, or narrative-and-animation. Our findings suggested that direct-
manipulation     animation, incorporating    the haptic  channel  in the learning process,  provided  learners with  proper
experiences    to reason  about  causal  interactions and  functional relations  in systems; this in turns facilitated their
acquisition of mental models of systems. Furthermore, the benefits of learning with DMA were more significant as
the materials to be learned became more complicated. Our study contributes a specific dimension to the existing
body of literature on multimedia learning and mental model acquisition by examining the interaction between the
complexity of instructional materials and different presentation formats to influence students' learning.

References
American     Association   for  the  Advancement   of   Science  (1993). Benchmarks     for Science  Literacy, New   York:
   Oxford University Press.
Baddeley, A. (1998). Human Memory. Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
Black,   J. B. (1992).  Types   of  knowledge    representation (CCT   Report   No.  92-3). New   York:  Teachers  College,
   Columbia University.
Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. J. (1979). Scripts in memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 177-220.
Bransford,   J.,  Barclay,  R., &    Franks, J.  (1972). Sentence    memory:   A  constructive vs.   interpretive approach.
   Cognitive Psychology, 3, 193-209.
Bruner, J. (1996). Toward a theory of instruction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chan,  M.   &  Black,  J.  B.  (2005) Effect  of  presentation  mode   and visualization  type on  understanding   dynamic
   physical processes, Paper presented at American Educational Research Association annual meeting, Montreal,
   Canada, April 2005.
Chan, M., & Black, J. B. (2005). When can animation improve learning? Some implications on human computer
   interaction     and learning.  In Proceedings   of World   Conference   on  Educational   Multimedia,  Hypermedia    and
   Telecommunications 2005, 933-938. Norfolk, VA: AACE.
Chi, M. T. H. (2000). Cognitive understanding levels. In A. E. Kazkin (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Psychology, 2, (pp.
   146-151). New York: APA and Oxford University Press.
Clark, R.E. (1994). Media will never influence leaning. Educational Technology Research and Development, 42 (2),
   21-29.
Feltovich, P., Coulsen, R., Spiro, R., & Adami, J. (1992). Conceptual understanding and stability and knowledge
   shield for fending off conceptual change. Springfield: Southern Illinois University School of Medicine.
Gentner, D., & Steven, A. (Eds.) (1983). Mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Garnham A., & Oakhill, J. V. (1996). The mental models theory of language comprehension. In B. K.Britton & A.
   C. Graesser (Eds.), Models of understanding Text, (pp. 313         339). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

                                                              69                                                   ICLS 2006
George, E. A., Broadstock, M. J., Vazquez Abad, J. (2000). Learning energy, momentum, and conservation concepts
   with computer support in an undergraduate physics laboratory. In B. Fishman & S. O'Connor-Divelbiss (Eds.),
   Fourth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp.2-3). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994). Constructing inferences during narrative text comprehension.
   Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Grimellini-Tomasini, N., Pecori-Balandi, B., Pacca, J. L.A., & Villani, A. (1993). Understanding conservation laws
   in mechanics: students' conceptual change in learning about collisions. Science Education 7, 2, 169-189.
Halford G.S, (1993) Children's Understanding: The Development of Mental Models. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
melo, C. E., Holton, D. L., & Kolodner, J. L. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. The Journal of
   the Learning Sciences, 9(3), 247-298.
Jacobson, M.J. (2000). Problem solving about complex systems: Differences between experts and novices. In B. J.
   Fishman   &  S. F.  O'Connor-Divelbiss  (Eds.), Proceedings  of  the International  Conference    of the  Learning
   Sciences, 14-21. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kintsch, W. (1998) Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science,
   11, 65-99.
Mani, K., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1982). The mental representation of spatial descriptions. Memory and Cognition,
   10(2), 181-187.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer,  R. E., & Anderson,   R. B. (1991). Animations   need   narrations: An    experimental  test of  a  dual-coding
   hypothesis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 484-490.
Mayer, R. E., & Gallini, J. K. (1990). When is an illustration worth ten thousand words? Journal of Educational
   Psychology, 82, 715-726.
Meyer, D.E., & Kieras, D. E. (1997). A computational theory of executive control processes and human multiple-
   task performance: Part 1. Basic Mechanisms. Psychological Review, 104, 3-65.
Pane, J. F., Corbett, A. T., & John, B. E. (1996). Assessing dynamics in computer-based instruction. In M. J. Tauber
   (Ed.),  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  Conference    on Human     Factors   in Computing      Systems   (pp. 797-804).
   Vancouver, Canada: ACM.
Rieber, L. P. (1989). The effects of computer animated elaboration strategies and practice on factual and application
   learning in an elementary science lesson. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 5(4), 431-444.
Rieber, L. P.  (1990). Using   computer  animated  graphics   with science  instruction with    children.   Journal of
   Educational Psychology, 82, 135-140.
Schwartz, D. L., & Black, J. B. (1996a). Analog imagery in mental model reasoning: Depictive models. Cognitive
   Psychology, 30(2), 154-219.
Simon, H. (1974). How big is a chunk? Science, 183, 482-488.
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1996). Why some material is difficult to learn. Cognition and Instruction, 12, 185-233.
Sweller, J., van Merrienboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. G. W. C. (1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
   Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Tversky, B. (1995). Cognitive origins of graphic conventions. In F. T. Marchese (Ed.). Understanding images (pp.
   29-53). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Tversky, B., Morrison,  J. B., & Betrancourt, M.   (2002).  Animation:  can   it facilitate? International  Journal of
   Human-Computer Studies, v. 57 n.4, pp. 247-262, October 2002.
Wilensky, U. & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: a dynamic systems approach to making sense of the world.
   Journal of Science Education and Technology. 8 (1), 3-19.

Acknowledgement
We are grateful for the constructive comments given by the reviewers.

                                                         70                                                  ICLS 2006
