           Collaborative learning with animated pictures: The role of
                                                  verbalizations

                                 Mirweis Sangin, Gaëlle Molinari, Pierre Dillenbourg,
 Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), School of Computer and Communication Sciences CRAFT,
                          EPFL-CRAFT CE 1 631 Station 1 CH-1015 Lausanne Switzerland,
                             {mirweis.sangin, gaelle.molinari, pierre.dillenbourg}@epfl.ch
                                          Cyril Rebetez, Mireille Bétrancourt,
                      University of Geneva TECFA, Acacias 54 CH-1227 Carouge Switzerland,
                                  {cyril.rebetez, mireille.betrancourt}@tecfa.unig.ch

         Abstract: The present study examines the benefits of instructional animations in a collaborative
         learning situation. We investigated the interactions that occur during collaborative learning from
         different  materials:   animated   versus  static pictures,  both  with  or   without  persistency    of
         information. The animation factor had no effect on the types of interactions but the persistency of
         information  led  to  fewer   content-focused interactions.  We   also analyzed   the impact   of   these
         interactions on  learning  performances:   Two    types  of interactions (content-focused   and   social
         relations and coordination management) mediate some of the effects of the permanence factor on
         learning performances.

Introduction
         The  present  study  is aimed   at deepening  some   findings from  a  larger investigation  of   the benefits   of
multimedia instructions in two different settings: individual and collaborative learning. We used two complementary
theoretical frameworks, cognitive research on multimedia learning (e.g., Mayer, 2001; Schnotz & Lowe, 2003) and
sociocultural studies  of collaborative   learning (e.g.,  Baker, 2002;  Dillenbourg,  1999).   The   latter were   further
explored to highlight the mediating functions of the peers' interaction on learning effects.

Learning with animation
         Animated    pictures are used   in multimedia    environments  to represent the   dynamic   aspects   of  complex
subject matters in an explicit way (Lowe, 2004). According to Schnotz and Rasch (in press), animations have two
different positive functions in learning. First, they enable learners to perform more cognitive processing (enabling
function)  by providing   them   with  additional information   that cannot be  displayed   by static pictures    (e.g., the
temporal   relationships  of  entities within  a  system). Second,   they  help   learners to  build  a  dynamic    mental
representation (facilitating function) by giving them an external support for simulating the behavior of the system
depicted.

         Although there is some evidence that animations have positive effects on the understanding of dynamic
situations (e.g.,  Mayer  &   Anderson,  1992),   research failed to  establish systematic  benefits  of using    animated
graphics   instead versus static ones   (e.g., Bétrancourt &  Tversky,  2000).   In some   cases, animations    may  even
prejudice learning (Lowe, 2004). Lowe (2004) suggested two different types of problems to explain these negative
results, i.e., overwhelming and underwhelming. First, given the limited capacity of working memory, learners may
not be able to meet the additional processing demands associated with animations. When learning from dynamic
visualization, they have to select relevant elements (for the purpose of the task) from a larger amount of information
provided by multiple frames (rather than by the single frame of a static picture) in a very limited time. They have
also to keep in memory and integrate information distributed either spatially across the display area or temporally
through the different frames of the animation. In other words, the overwhelming effect appears when some aspects
of animation (e.g., the overflow of information, their transient aspect) impose a cognitive load that leads learners to
reduce their cognitive resources available for learning (see also Sweller, 1999). In contrast, underwhelming may
arise when dynamic presentations induce in learners either an illusory feeling of understanding or an investment
withdrawal (usually caused by the complexity of the animations). In consequence, these learners do not process
information at a deep enough level to ensure learning. This type of problem may occur when learners do not have
adequate prior knowledge on the domain to be learned: To avoid cognitive overload, they may focus their attention

                                                            667                                                   ICLS 2006
on some   partial aspects  of  the  animation.  Moreover,    Schnotz and   Rasch   (in press) showed     that the facilitating
function of animations can be harmful for experts who do not need external support for cognitive manipulations.

Collaborative learning with animation
         Over the past decades, research on collaborative learning has been predominantly carried out within what
has been termed the "interactions paradigm" (Dillenbourg, Baker, Blaye, & O'Malley, 1996). They therefore mean
that "The question   `under    which   conditions  is collaborative  learning efficient?'  is  splited   into two (hopefully
simpler)  sub-questions:  Which    interactions occur  under   which  conditions   and what   effects do  these   interactions
have"  (Dillenbourg  et  al., 1996).   Researchers focused   on  "constructive" interactions   such   as conflict resolution,
explanation or mutual regulation, and identified them as potential vehicles of conceptual learning. Indeed, they have
in common that they lead students to verbalize knowledge (that would remain otherwise tacit) necessary for building
a shared representation of the task.

         According    to Roschelle     (1992)  or  Crook   (1998),   collaborating students   may   benefit   from  external
representations  such as  pictures   or animations,   because  they  can play the   role of   referential anchors   that may
resource the construction of a shared understanding. Schnotz, Böckheler and Grzondziel (1999) also argued that
computer-based    learning    environments  with   animations    would  be well    appropriate  for   collaborative learning
because they could enhance the possibilities for interaction and exploration. In order to test this hypothesis, they
carried  out an   empirical   study  in which   they  compared    learning  from   animated    versus  static  pictures  in  a
collaborative situation. Contrary to their previous study on individual learning with the same materials, learning with
animations resulted in lower performances with two different tasks. The authors interpreted these negative results in
terms of cognitive load (Sweller, 1999). The animations would impose a heavy extraneous cognitive load that would
be increased with the social interaction load needed to manage interaction with the peer.

Goal and research questions
         This paper reports a study conducted to investigate the effectiveness of animated and static pictures under
the conditions of individual and collaborative learning (Rebetez, Sangin, Bétrancourt, & Dillenbourg, 2005; Sangin,
Rebetez,  Dillenbourg,   &  Bétrancourt,  2005).   Our first results provided evidence   that  animated   pictures  result  in
higher  retention and   inference  performances    compared   to static  pictures. Moreover,   contrary   to  Schnotz    et al.
(1999), the positive effect of animations on inference performance was higher in collaborative situations than with
individual situations. Our results also indicated that, in the individual condition, learners benefit from snapshots of
previous steps of animations (permanently presented on the screen). In contrast, this "persistency of information" (or
permanence tool) led to lower scores in the collaborative condition. According to Sangin et al. (2005), two possible
explanations for this negative (and also counter-intuitive) result could be assessed. First, a split-interaction effect
could occur due to the addition of cognitive load associated with the interaction with the computer interface on one
hand, and with the interaction between peers on the other hand. The second explanation could be some sort of socio-
cognitive underwhelming effect: The permanence of information could lead the learners being insufficiently engaged
in the construction of a shared understanding.

         The analysis presented here focuses on the collaborative learning settings. It is conducted according to the
"interactions paradigm", and dissociates 3 types of questions (see Figure 1):
A) What   is the  effect of   learning  conditions ("animation"  and   "permanence"    factors) on    intermediate  variables
(types of interaction)?
B)   What is  the relationship   between   categories   of interaction  and learning    outcomes,   i.e., the  effects   these
interactions may have on retention and inference performances?
C) How the intermediate variables (types of interactions) mediate the relationship between learning conditions and
learning effects?
                                                Intermediate variables

                                        A                                     B
                                                             C
                         Independent variables                           Dependent variables

                              Figure 1. The interactions paradigm (Dillenbourg et al., 1996)
                                                             .

                                                             668                                                    ICLS 2006
Method

Participants and design
        Participants were 80 French-speaking students from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (Lausanne)
and the University of Geneva. We used a factorial 2 x 2 between-subjects design with the first factor being the mode
of presentation (static slides  vs. animations)   and the second    factor being the  permanence   of information  ("with-
permanence" vs. "without-permanence") according to whether permanent snapshots of the previous sequences were
presented or not. In each group, there were 20 participants who worked in dyads. Moreover, all participants reported
low prior knowledge     in the  2 learning  topics (Venus   transit  and tectonic  plates) through an  individual  pre-test
questionnaire (5 multiple-choice questions per topic).

Material and instruments:
        Instructional   material.    The    material  consisted  of    2   successive  multimedia  instructions   (images
accompanied     by audio   narration),  the first  one designed     to explain   the  phenomenon   of  the Venus   transit
(astronomy), and the second one the phenomenon of the tectonic plates (geology). Two versions of each multimedia
instruction were constructed. The first version was composed of 12 animated sequences ("animations" version), the
second of 12 static pictures ("slides" version). In the static version, each slide corresponded to the most significant
picture taken from the corresponding animation. In addition, the static and animated pictures had the same size (800
x  600 pixels), and were   laid out  on the top-right  part of  the  interface. In the "with-permanence"   conditions, 24
grayed labels (12 in the "Venus transit" phase, 12 in the "tectonic plates" phase) (320 x 200 pixels) were provided
on the left side of the screen (see Figure 2). After either a slide (slides/with-permanence condition) or an animated
sequence (animations/with-permanence condition) was shown, a new label became colored and gave access to a
static snapshot. Participants could see a bigger version of the snapshot by moving the mouse over the corresponding
label (640 x 480 pixels). The snapshots in the slides condition were the same as those in the animations condition,
and thus represented the critical steps of each studied phenomenon. Finally, there were no snapshots in the "without-
permanence" conditions (slides/without permanence condition; animations/without-permanence condition).

           Figure 2.    Interface screen-shot of the "with-permanence" condition after the ninth sequence

        Learning    tests: The  testing procedure    followed  the  conventional   paradigm  used to  evaluate the mental
model  constructed  during   multimedia  learning    (Mayer et  al., 1992).  After   the presentation of each  multimedia
instruction (Venus transit and tectonic plates), all participants were provided with an individual post-test consisting
of 2 types of multiple-choice questions (presented in either a graphical or a textual format): 9 retention questions and
7 inference questions. The retention questions measured what participants can remember about each topic; their
answers were explicitly quoted either in the images or in the audio narration. The inference questions tested a deeper

                                                            669                                                  ICLS 2006
understanding of each described phenomenon. Indeed, they involved inferring information from the learnt dynamic
mental model. Finally, the retention and inference questions were presented in random order.

          Apparatus:   All instructional  materials and   (pre-   and post-test)    questionnaires  were    computer-based
(Authorware   software). Responses   to  multiple-choice  questions   were   recorded  by  the  computer.   In   addition,  the
verbal interactions of the 10 dyads were audio and video recorded.

Procedure and scoring
          Procedure: The experimental session consisted of two phases ­ the "Venus transit" phase followed by the
"tectonic plates" phase ­ of 3 parts each: (a) pre-test questionnaire (b) learning phase, (c) post-test questionnaire.
Moreover,    each learning   phase was   composed   of  2 sub-parts.  In the  first sub-part,  participants   were    asked  to
individually  study  a  media-based   introduction  designed   to  provide    them  with   prior knowledge       necessary   to
understand the upcoming instructional material. In this introduction, 2 or 3 illustrated paragraphs were presented
describing some general concepts on the solar system topic (e.g. movement of planets, transit phenomena) or on the
tectonic plates topic (e.g. various layers, movements). In the second sub-part, one pair member had to leave his/her
working station, and to join his/her peer to explore together the multimedia presentation. Between each slide or each
animation, the instruction ­ "explain what has changed since the last part" ­ appeared on the screen; it aimed to
encourage peers to interact with each other and to synthesize together the lastly presented information.

          Interaction coding system: All videotaped interactions were transcribed verbatim. Turn-taking was used as
criteria for the  audio corpus segmentation.   For  purposes of   statistical analysis, we   decided   to use    a simple  but
relevant  coding  system to  analyze  the interactions. The  coding   system   was  inspired  by   the RAINBOW        method
(Baker, Quignard, Lund, Molinari, & Séjourné, 2005) and modified on the basis of our own research interests. The
set of   categories we  used  is   based  on three  main   distinctions: (a)  between    interaction   that   is "inside"   the
collaborative activity or "outside" (off-task activity) of it, (b) within "inside" activity, between interaction that is
"content-focused"   or  "not content-focused"  (social  relation, interaction  management,     task management),      and   (c)
within the "content-focused" interaction, between "information seeking" and "information providing". In addition,
the last category was divided into 3 sub-categories corresponding to 3 levels of elaboration (see Table 1). A unique
and mutually exclusive category code was associated to each corpus segment and was systematically counted for
each participant  (two  researchers  analyzed  the  interactions; inter-coder  reliability was   good:  Kappa      =  .81, p <
.0001).

Table 1. Mutually exclusive codes for the between peers' interaction corpus.

                        category                code      description
 Content-focus          elaborated              A         Elaborated segments based on the pedagogical content plus
 categories                                               information    not  provided  by  the  material   (learners' prior
                                                          knowledge,     inferences,    deductions      etc.;    high  level
                                                          elaboration)

                                                B         Summarizing     segments     based    on  all   past   multimedia
                                                          sequences. (medium level elaboration)
                                                C         Summarizing segments containing information based only
                                                          on the latest multimedia sequence (low level elaboration)
                        Information seeking     D         Segments    composed     of any  questioning    and    information
                                                          requests
 Non-content-           Interaction-            E         Segments     concerned      with     interaction     management
 focus categories       management                        activities
                        Task-management         F         Segments    related   to    task  management        and  interface
                                                          manipulation activities

Results
          According to the interactions paradigm, we present the results in 3 steps, respectively represented as A, B
and C on Figure 1.

                                                           670                                                       ICLS 2006
A) How factors determine group interactions?
        To explore the influence of the main factors on the intermediate interaction variables, we performed a set of
one-way    ANOVA     tests. The  factors  are  "presentation    mode"    (slides/animations)    and  "permanence"    (with-
permanence/without-permanence). The verbal interactions are either 'content-focus' (categories A, B, C, D in Table
1) or non-content-focused (categories E & F). Since interaction time was not controlled, frequencies (number of
interactions divided by the total time) are used for all the following analyses (instead of raw data). We found no
significant effect of the "presentation mode" factor on verbal interactions, but an effect of the "permanence" factor:
The "content-focused" interactions are more frequent in the "without-permanence" condition (M = 1.43) than in the
"with-permanence"    condition  (M  =  1.07), (F(1, 75) =   10.95, p  <  .01).This  difference  does   not appear for "non
content-focused" interactions (F(1, 75) =.46, p > .1).

B) Intermediate and performance variables' relations
        In order to test the relations between the interaction intermediate variables and the performance variables,
regression  analyses were   conducted  with   the intermediate  variables  as predictors   of the retention  and  inference
scores. Concerning the relation between the retention scores and frequency of the "content-focused" interactions, the
regression analysis showed a positive significant relation ( = 0.331, p < .01). A positive significant relation was
also found between the "content-focused" intermediate variable and the inference scores ( = 0.250, p < .03). The
more the peers provide content-focused utterances, the better their scores seem to be; both on retention and inference
items. The  regression  analyses revealed   no  significant relation between   the   frequency  of   "non-content-focused"
interactions and neither the retention scores ( = 0.163, p > .1) nor with the inference scores ( = 0.078, p > .5).

        To deepen our understanding of the relations between the interaction variables and the learning scores, a
regression  analysis was   conducted   with each  functional  verbalization   categories   (namely   A, B,  C, D, E  and   F
categories; see Table 1) as predictors and peers' learning performance scores as dependent variables. The predictors
explained more than 49% of the peers' retention scores (R2 = 0.49, p < .01). Two of the 6 predictors reached the
significant level: the A category ( = 0.25, p < .02) and the E category ( = 0.27, p < .01). When we used the
inference scores as a dependant variable, the same model explained more than 51% of the peers' inference scores
(R2=0.51; p < .01). As for the retention scores, the same 2 categories reached the significant level, namely the A
category ( = 0.261, p < .02) and the E category ( = 0.260, p < .02). Hence the 2 best predictors for the retention
and inference scores are high elaborated information providing segments of the peers' verbalizations (category A)
and the segments concerned with interaction management (category E).

C) Mediation of the performance scores by the intermediate variables
        Interaction variables were examined as variables potentially mediating the effect of the permanence factor
on the inference scores, i.e., the measure on which the performance of the "without-permanence" conditions' peers
was  higher than the   "with-permanence"    conditions' peers   (Sangin,   Rebetez,  Dillenbourg,    &  Bétrancourt, 2005).
Four steps  were taken   to assess  mediating  effects using    regression methods   as  suggested   by Baron   and  Kenny
(1986). The first step is met when variations in the level of the independent variables significantly account for the
variation in the level of the presumed mediating variable (see Figure 1, path A.). The second step is verified when
the variation of presumed mediating variable significantly account for the variation in the dependent variable (see
Figure 1, path B.).

        Regression analyses were performed to verify these 2 first steps by taking our interaction categories as
potential mediators, the permanence factor (coded -1 for "without-permanence" and +1 for "with-permanence") as
an  independent  variable   and the inference   scores as   a dependent    variable. Two   of   our  variables reached   the
significant level on the 2 steps. The regression test confirmed that the "content-focused" variable was significantly
and  negatively related  to the "permanence"    independent     variable (  = -0.357,   p  =  .002), and   significantly and
positively related  to the  "inference score"  dependent    variable (   =  0.250,   p =  .03). The   dialogue  category   E
(interaction management) was also significantly and negatively related to the permanence independent variable ( =
-0.293, p = .01), and significantly and positively related to the inference dependent variable ( = 0.298, p = .009).
The third step was to verify the relation between the independent and the dependent variables (see Figure 1, path C.)
which  was  marginally  significantly  negative   ( =  -0.210,  p =  .069). This step   is the  same   for our 2 mediating
variables.

        According    to  Baron  and   Kenny   (1986),  in   the last step,  we entered     both the  independent  variable
(permanence) and the mediator variable ("content focused" and Category E) at the same time as predictors for the

                                                            671                                                   ICLS 2006
dependant  variable   (inference scores).   Concerning  the  "content-focused"   mediating     variable, this last regression
showed that permanence was no longer a significant predictor ( = -0.138; p = 0.26) whereas the "content-focused"
variable  was  still marginally  a significant predictor  (  =   -0.210, p =   .069). Thus,  it can be   concluded    that the
frequency of "content-focused" interactions mediates some of the permanence factor's effect on the peers' inference
scores. Concerning the E category (interaction management), this last step showed that permanence was also no
longer a significant predictor ( = -0.134; p = .252) whereas the E category was still a significant predictor ( =
0.259, p = .002). Thus, it can be suggested that E variable did also mediate some of the effects of the permanence
factor on the learners' inference scores.

Discussion
          Our  previous   research  had suggested   benefits  of animated    pictures  for collaborative  learning   on both
retention and inference performances (Rebetez et al., 2005; Sangin et al., 2005). A second factor was also used in
this previous research which offered a permanence tool providing snapshots of the movie critical steps as a memory
and grounding support. Surprisingly, the results indicate a negative effect of the permanence tool on collaborative
learning. Indeed,    peers who   were   not  provided   with  this   permanence   tool  performed    better.  Two    possible
explanations were provided to account for this negative effect, i.e., split-interaction effect and the socio-cognitive
underwhelming effect. Do the new results enable us to choose between these explanations?

          The  interaction analyses  suggest   that only  content-focused    interactions  are  related  with peers  learning
performances. Indeed, the results suggest positive and significant relation between the amount of "content-focused"
verbalizations and    the retention and  inference  scores  whereas    no  significant relations   occurred   between  "non-
content-focused" verbalizations and the learners' performances. The results are consistent with those found by Webb
(1991): Elaborated explanations are positively correlated with explainers' performances. Nonetheless, verbalizations
about interaction management are also positively correlated to subjects' performances. A possible explanation of this
second effect is that argumentation and negotiation of the collaboration process, even when students do not talk
about the content to be learned, are still beneficial for learning (Dillenbourg, 1999).

          Regarding our main factors, results suggest no effect of the animation factor on the social interactions.
Peers do not verbalize more or less when provided with static pictures versus animated pictures. Regarding the fact
that content-focused   verbalizations   are positively related   to  learners' performances,    no evidence   of   a potential
mediating effect of the verbal interactions on the benefits of animated pictures on learning performances could be
provided. Conversely, concerning the permanence factor, the results showed that the permanence of information
reduces learners' amount of "content-focused" verbalizations. Moreover, the results support a (partly-) mediating
effect of the frequency of interactions on the detrimental effect of the permanence tool on inference scores. This
decrease  of  interaction  frequency    induced  by   the  permanence     of   information  supports     our  socio-cognitive
underwhelming hypothesis: Offering a permanence tool which primarily aimed to facilitate the grounding processes
by stabilizing referential objects occurs to be detrimental to collaborative learning processes because it decreases the
learners' verbalizations and interaction management processes.

          In this paper, we focused on data concerning the relations between the subjects' verbal productions and
their learning scores. Actually, a deeper analysis of our results requires to dissociate the role of the explainer and the
explainee, and to treat separately the effects at the individual or the pair level through multilevel analyses.

References
Baker, M. J. (2002). Argumentative interactions, discursive operations and learning to model in science. In P. Brna,
          M. Baker, K. Stenning, & A. Tiberghien (Eds.), The Role of Communication in Learning to Model (pp.
          303-324). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Baker, M.  J., Quignard,   M.,   Lund,  K., Molinari,  G.,  &  Séjourné,   A.  (2005). The  elaboration   of  argumentative
          knowledge in multi-representational computer-mediated debates. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social
psychological  research:   Conceptual,  strategic,  and  statistical considerations.  Journal   of Personality     and Social
          Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.
Bétrancourt, M. & Tversky, B. (2000). Effect of computer animation on users' performances: A review. Le travail
          Humain, 63(4), 311-330.

                                                            672                                                      ICLS 2006
Crook, C. (1998). Children as Computer Users: The Case of Collaborative Learning. Computers Education, 30(3/4),
          237-247.
Dillenbourg,  P. (1999). What    do you   mean   by   collaborative learning?  In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.),   Collaborative
          learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches (pp. 1-19). Oxford: Elsevier.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1996) The evolution of research on collaborative learning. In
          E. Spada & P. Reiman (Eds.), Learning in Humans and Machine: Towards an interdisciplinary learning
          science (pp. 189-211). Oxford: Elsevier.
Lowe, R. K. (2004). Animation and learning: Value for money? In R. Atkinson, C. McBeath, D. Jonas-Dwyer, & R.
          Phillips (Eds.), Beyond the comfort zone: Proceedings of the 21st ASCILITE Conference (pp. 558-561).
          Perth, 5-8 December.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia Learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E., & Anderson, R. B. (1992). The instructive animation: Helping students build connections between
          words and pictures in multimedia learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84(4), 444-452.
Rebetez,  C., Sangin, M.,  Bétrancourt,   M.,  & Dillenbourg,   P.  (2005).  Learning from   animations   is enabled by
          collaboration. Manuscript in preparation.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning   by    collaborating: Convergent    conceptual change.  The   Journal of  the  Learning
          Sciences, 2, 235-276.
Sangin, M., Rebetez, C., Dillenbourg, P., & Bétrancourt, M. (2005). Collaborative learning with animated pictures:
          From the persistency of information to the split-interaction effect. Manuscript in preparation.
Schnotz, W., Böckheler, J., & Grzondziel, H. (1999). Individual and co-operative learning with animated pictures.
          European journal of psychology of education, 14(2), 245-265.
Schnotz, W., & Lowe, R. K. (2003). External and internal representations in multimedia learning. Learning and
          Instruction, 13(2), 117-254.
Schnotz, W, & Rasch, T. (in press). Enabling, facilitating, and inhibiting of animation in multimedia
learning: Why    reduction of   cognitive load can    have negative  results  on  learning. To appear  in    Educational
          Technology Research and Development.
Sweller, J. (1999). Instructional design in technological areas. Camberwell, Australia: ACER Press.
Webb, N. M. (1991) Task related verbal interaction and mathematics learning in small groups. Journal for Research
          in Mathematics Education, 22(5), 366-389.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the contribution of Patrick Jermann, Florence Colomb, Shuja Parvez and Jean-Baptiste
Haué. This research was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant #11-68102.02).

                                                           673                                                 ICLS 2006
