 Student-Generated Animations: Supporting Middle School Students'
 Visualization, Interpretation and Reasoning of Chemical Phenomena

                                            Hsin-Yi Chang & Chris Quintana
                     University of Michigan, 610 E. University, 4039SEB, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                   Email: hsinyc@umich.edu, quintana@umich.edu

        Abstract:     The  study  explores  the roles   of  instructional  animation   to support    middle  school
        students' learning of chemistry concepts. We discuss two roles of animations: a constructivist tool
        to support visualization and interpretation of chemical processes, and a problem-solving tool to
        support    reasoning   about  chemical  phenomena.      We    developed   Chemation,    a  handheld-based
        chemistry animation tool, to address the roles. We conducted an initial evaluation study to assess
        the impact of Chemation for supporting students' visualization, interpretation, and reasoning of
        chemical phenomena. Two teachers and 73 seventh grade students participated in the study. The
        results of pre- and posttests indicated a positive gross effect of the learning environment including
        all aspects such as teacher and tool supports. Close examination through classroom observations,
        student interviews, and student artifacts revealed the relationships between student learning and
        tool supports. The results inform the design of interactive learning environments that incorporate
        animation as a learning support.

Introduction
        Animation     can  serve as  an instructional   aid to  support  visualization of  dynamic    processes  or   abstract
relationships that   might otherwise   be difficult  to depict.  Weiss,    Knowlton,  &   Morrison   (2002)    discussed    five
functions of instructional animation, including (1) cosmetic functions that make instruction attractive to learners, (2)
attention gaining functions that signal salient points of a topic, (3) motivation functions that provide feedback to
reinforce correct responses, (4) presentation functions that provide concrete reference and a visual context for ideas,
and (5) clarification functions that clarify relationships through visual means. However, researchers have difficulty
to establish  the instructional  value of animation.    Empirical  studies  have  shown   mixed    results for  the   effect of
instructional animation on student learning (e.g., Tversky & Morrison, 2002).

        The role of instructional animation has mostly been studied in the context of tools that provide external
dynamic representations to help learners build mental models of a given concept or phenomenon. Here learning may
occur by learners transforming external representations into internal ones, but the role of the instructional animation
remains passive.   While   the "viewing"   approach  has   its value, we   are exploring  additional  roles  of instructional
animation in supporting student learning: (1) animation as a constructivist tool that supports students' visualization
and interpretation   of abstract  processes, and    (2) animation  as    a problem-solving   tool    that supports  students'
reasoning   processes.  A  new   computer-based  program,      Chemation,   was  developed   to address    the two    roles  for
instructional animation. It allows students to build 2-D molecular models and flipbook style animations to represent
chemical phenomena at the molecular level. Chemation provides features to enable and deliver student-generated
animations. The purpose of the study is to discuss the rationale for the design of Chemation, analyze its supports in
light of how it serves as a constructivist and problem-solving tool, and assess its impact on promoting three aspects
of learning: visualization, interpretation and reasoning. Our contribution in this paper is an example of incorporating
constructivist perspectives to the development of instructional animation tools for young students. Furthermore, our
evaluation of its impact in real-world classrooms illustrates the active roles that animation tools may serve.

Empirical and Theoretical Background
        Few   studies   focus  on the  role  of instructional   animation   other than  serving    a presentation   role  (e.g,
Williamson   & Abraham,     1995).  A  study found   that   the positive  effect of animation   is more    apparent   in open,
interactive learning  situations than  in situations less  open-ended    (Kehoe,  Stasko,  & Taylor,   2001).   The   result is
consistent with constructivist perspectives, suggesting that cognitive growth requires learners to actively participate
in the process    of knowledge   construction   (Piaget,  1977),  and  understanding   occurs   when      individuals connect
between external symbolic forms and internal cognitive structures (Olson, 2003). Moreover, several studies indicate
that animation alone may not be enough to amplify student understanding (e.g., Hubscher-Younger & Narayanan,

                                                             71                                                     ICLS 2006
2003).  Researchers    have     started to  address different  methods     to use  animation  to promote   understanding   (e.g.,
Mayer & Moreno, 2002; Vermaat, Kramers-Pals, & Schank, 2003).

          We discuss two constructivist perspectives as rationale for the development of Chemation in the present
study: (1) learners as active knowledge constructors and (2) prior knowledge as an important role in learning and
understanding. First of all, children are active constructors of knowledge rather than passive recipients of other's
knowledge (Piaget, 1977). Building on the constructivist perspective, our animation tool allows students to construct
their own   artifact  (i.e., animations).     Constructing  animations     encourages  active   learning, requiring   students  to
employ a variety of strategies, such as selecting and organizing information, and making connections between prior
experience  and   new   knowledge.       Specifically,  when   students    use  Chemation    to  construct animations   about    a
chemical phenomenon at the molecular level, they are engaged in visualizing chemical processes, and thinking about
important   characteristics     in the  process. Moreover,     the   task  of   constructing may   help   students  interpret   the
representation, since  through      constructing  students   connect    to the  context   of the representation   (Kress &    van
Leeuwen,    1996).   Second,     constructivists assume    that  all knowledge     is  constructed   from  previous    knowledge
(Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000), and students' experiences and prior knowledge are building blocks for their
later learning  (Linn,  2000).     For   example,   research  indicates    that many   middle   school  students   have  little or
fragmented knowledge of the particulate nature of matter (e.g., Nakhleh, Samarapungavan, & Saglam, 2005). A gap
may exist between middle school students' prior knowledge about chemistry and the knowledge often embedded in
an advanced modeling tool in chemistry. The complex chemistry concept may impede young students to conduct
reasoning or other higher-order thinking, because successfully engaging in such tasks is built on a foundation of
learned   content  knowledge.       Several    studies argue   for   the   necessity   to transform    scientific knowledge     or
representation  to make      it accessible  to students (e.g.,  Lee  &    Butler,  2003). The   design of  Chemation   considers
students' prior   knowledge        as  addressed  in   the literature   by    reducing the   complexity    of molecular   model
representations, to make chemistry representations accessible for young students for visualization, interpretation,
and reasoning of chemical phenomena.

Chemation: Animation to Support Visualization, Interpretation and Reasoning
Features of Chemation
          Chemation is a program for Palm devices that allows students to build 2-D molecular models and flipbook
style animations. It runs on handheld computers for portability and pervasive access of student artifacts. Chemation
contains  five modes   (Figure     1):  (1) Atom  mode:    Chemation     provides  an  atom  palette that  contains 21  different
atoms, each a different color from which students can choose and drag to the main screen. Sixteen of these atoms
include element symbols such as "H" or "O". The other five are blank circles and can be used to represent other
elements. (2) Link mode: The link mode is used to connect two atoms. Instead of showing different types of bonds,
Chemation provides only single lines to represent the concept of connections between atoms. (3) Molecule mode:
The molecule mode is used to manipulate the atoms as a group. Once atoms are drawn and connected, they are
viewed as a group of atoms in a molecule. Students can use the molecule mode to copy, paste, rotate, and flip the
whole molecule. (4) Label mode: Labels are free form text boxes that allow students to document their model. (5)
Animation mode: After building molecular models, students can develop a series of frames to animate the models to
articulate the details of a chemical or physical process.

Learning Activities and Supports From Chemation
          The design of Chemation follows the learner-centered design approach (Quintana, Krajcik, & Soloway,
2003), emphasizing learning goals and contexts to help develop supportive features in software. We discuss three
kinds  of learning    activities    regarding  student  use   of animation      in a   seventh-grade   inquiry-based   chemistry
curriculum: (1) visualization of a chemical process: students construct animations that include atom rearrangement
or molecule movement to show the molecular view of a given process, (2) interpretation of a chemical process:
students  explain  the meaning      of  the animation,  and  relate  it to the  macroscopic   chemical    process  the animation
represents, and   (3) reasoning     about   a chemical  phenomenon:       students use    animations to explain   the  observable
changes in a chemical reaction, decide whether a given process is a chemical reaction, and predict the products of a
chemical reaction.

          The goal of Chemation is to provide supports for each of the learning activities. We discuss six aspects of
support from Chemation (see Table 1): (1) content-specific supports to help learners build appropriate animations,

                                                                 72                                                     ICLS 2006
                      1  2 3   4 5
                                   Figure 1. Five modes and the atom palette of Chemation

such as  the simplified atom   palette, element  symbols, and   real-time messages   for invalid  atom connections,  (2)
construction supports to help learners build animations efficiently, such as copy tool for information transfer and
undo/redo tool  for  revision, (3) multiple   representations to support   multi-modal   articulation, such as    graphic
interface for building visual (non-textual) representations and label tool for inserting textual description, (4) multiple
paths of navigation to support different spatial and temporal needs as students interpret, such as frame-by-frame
navigation and navigation to a particular frame, (5) manipulation tools to support atom/molecule rearrangement and
movement, such as functions of deleting and dragging, and (6) sustained artifacts to support ongoing reasoning,
such as real-time save function for preserving students' working processes.

Table 1. Supports from Chemation

                                             Student activity related to the use of animation
                 1. Visualization of a chemical      2. Interpretation of a chemical    3. Reasoning about a chemical
                     process                            process                           phenomenon
Supports         (1) Content-specific supports       (3) Multiple representations to   (5) Manipulation tools to
provided by           to help learners build            support multi-modal               support atom/molecule
Chemation             appropriate animations:           articulation:                     rearrangement and
                     Simplified atom palette           Graphic interface for            movement:
                     Element symbols                    building visual (non-            Deletion function to
                     Real-time messages for             textual) representations           remove connections
                      invalid atom connections          Label tool for inserting           between atoms for atom
                     Simplified link tool               textual description                rearrangement
                 (2) Construction supports to        (4) Multiple paths of                Dragging function to
                      help learners build               navigation to support               move atoms or molecules
                      animations efficiently:           different spatial and          (6) Sustained artifacts to
                     Copy tool for information         temporal needs of viewing:        support ongoing reasoning:
                      transfer                          Frame-by-frame                   Real-time save function
                     Undo/redo tool for                 navigation                         for preserving students'
                      revision                          Continuous playing                 working processes
                     Non-linear tool bar for           Navigation to a particular
                      multiple paths of revising         frame

Classroom Study to Assess Student Learning With Animation
         The  present study  is  situated in  cycles of design  experiments   (e.g., Brown,   1992):   development   and
research take  place  through  iterative  phases of  design,  implementation,  assessment,    and redesign; researchers
engineer innovative   learning  environments     and simultaneously   conduct   studies  of those  innovations.   In the
following sections we discuss the methods of the study and report on initial results from the first round of design,
implementation and assessment.

                                                           73                                                  ICLS 2006
Participants
         We assessed Chemation in light of promoting students' visualizing, interpreting and reasoning. We have
completed an evaluation study with 73 seventh grade students distributed in four classes taught by two teachers at
urban middle schools in the Midwest. The majority of the students are African American or Hispanic students. One
teacher used Chemation with two classes (n=40) and the other teacher at a different school used Chemation with two
classes (n=33). The former had two years of experience teaching the chemistry curriculum, and the latter taught this
curriculum for the first time. The students and teachers had used different programs on handheld computers in a
previous learning unit. Therefore, they were Palm-literate when they started the chemistry unit. In addition, pretests
showed no statistically significant differences between the students at the two schools, indicating low diversity of
the participants' prior content knowledge.

Data Collection
         Each student in the study was provided with one handheld computer to build animations in four lessons
during the   eight-week  curriculum.  For   each  lesson,   we videotaped    the entire class   along   with group   activities
involving student use of Chemation. In addition, we collected pre- and post-test data. Items in the pre- and posttests
are identical, including 12 multiple-choice and three open-ended questions assessing chemistry concepts targeted in
the four lessons. Students' scores on the tests revealed some but not all aspects of student understanding. The data
source did   not indicate how   thorough    students' responses   were,    and how  students    used animations   to conduct
reasoning tasks. Therefore we also interviewed 15 students selected from the 73 students at the teacher's suggestion.
The teacher indicated that four of them were students with low academic achievement in science, five were medium,
and six were high. We developed four to seven interview questions for each lesson (24 questions in total). The
questions require students to use the animation they built during class to either interpret or reason about a given
chemical  phenomenon.     We  also  interviewed   the teachers   to obtain   feedback   about   Chemation.   Additional  data
collected include artifacts that students produced during class (i.e., student-generated animations).

Data Analysis
         We conducted two-tailed paired t-tests and effect size (calculated by using the difference between posttest
and  pretest mean  scores   divided by the  pretest   standard   deviation) to  analyze the  pre- and   posttest data for  all
students, and developed coding schemes to analyze interview transcripts, student artifacts, and observation notes for
the 15 select students. We developed detailed, content-specific criteria for the three aspects of student learning:
visualization, interpretation and reasoning. In general, student visualization is measured by student construction of
animations at three levels: (1) proficient: students construct animations that include two parts- correct types of atoms
and molecules, and accurate atom rearrange or molecule movement, (2) basic: students' animation includes one part
or two parts with minor errors, and (3) unsatisfactory: students' animation includes none of the parts or major errors.

         Student  interpretation is also coded    at  three levels: (1) proficient:  students   discuss the  meaning    of the
animation  appropriately,   and  discuss atom    arrangement     or molecule    movement     in detail, (2)  basic:  students'
interpretation is appropriate but not in detail, or thorough interpretation with minor errors, and (3) unsatisfactory:
students' interpretation is not appropriate or in detail. The three levels for students' reasoning include: (1) proficient:
students' reasoning includes two parts- accurate evidence and explicit connection to scientific principles, (2) basic:
students  demonstrate  either part, or both  parts   with   prompting  or  minor  errors, and   (3)  unsatisfactory: students
demonstrate none of the parts. Teacher interview data were transcribed but not coded and analyzed in detail. This
data source was used to triangulate our assertion regarding the role of the animation tool. For example, the analysis
of student   interview data may  indicate   areas in  which   students  showed   strong   or weak    performance.   Teachers'
feedback  on  the tool  helps confirm    or disconfirm    the  relationships   between  student  performance    and  the   tool
supports.

Results and Discussions
         The pre- and posttest result shows significant gains of students' content knowledge during the eight-week
period [t(72) =15.62,   p<.001]. Moreover,   the  effect  size   indicates that the mean  score   on  the posttest  was  4.17
standard deviations greater than the mean score on the pretest (effect size = 4.17). Both results suggest a positive
gross effect of the learning environment including all aspects such as the supports from the teacher, the technology
tool and  other  material used,  and the  roles  they  play.  In-depth  analysis  of data  from   the   select students helps
establish the relationship between student use of the animation tool and student learning. We particularly examine

                                                              74                                                    ICLS 2006
the quality of student visualization, interpretation and reasoning with animations. We discuss the findings in the
following sections.

Visualization and Interpretation of Chemical Reaction
         Students'   visualization   of  chemical    reactions     contained  three   major   parts:  the   reactants,  atom
rearrangement,  and  the  products.  All  select students    built proficient animations    except two  had   minor    errors.
Students demonstrated the capability to represent chemical phenomena at the molecular level. As most students
were able   to build appropriate    animations,  their verbal    interpretations were mediated   by  their   animation. The
majority of student interview responses (87%) demonstrated proficient or basic interpretation of a chemical process.
The following example illustrates how George used his animation to explain what happened to his experiment in
which two substances, penny (copper) and vinegar (acetic acid), were put together.

          Interviewer:    Look at your animation and tell me what you did.
                George:   This   is what  we called    a chemical   reaction. There   are two   substances.  They
                          have to break bonds and make new substances. First frame just shows copper
                          and two other molecules [acetic acid]. The second one hasn't broken any bond
                          yet. Frame 4 the bonds are all broken and they make new bonds because the
                          copper...the  bonds   broke    off the two hydrogen    and  went  on  to the copper   to
                          make copper acetate.

         George did not simply describe how he made his animation (such as "I connect two atoms"). Rather, he
focused  on using   the animation   to interpret a conceptual    process and     generalize the process   as an example   of
chemical reaction, which reconfirms his definition of chemical reaction (i.e., bond breaking and generation of new
substances). He demonstrated successful visualization and interpretation of a chemical process. We argue that the
animation tool impacts student learning at two levels. First, the task of constructing a series of molecular models
prompts students to think about not only spatial but also temporal changes in a chemical process. Second, the made
animation serves as a backdrop for students to point at or refer to, mediating their interpretation. As a result, more
than half of student interpretations were thorough, and focused on the process in detail. However, some students
also held common alternative conceptions during their visualization or interpretation. For example, they showed
confusion between atoms and molecules (Schollum & Osborne, 1985), neglect of the gaseous product in a chemical
reaction (Hesse & Anderson, 1992), or use of ill-defined language such as "mix" or "combine" to describe the action
between two reactants in a chemical reaction. More content-specific supports are needed to address these alternative
conceptions.

Reasoning About Chemical Phenomena
         More than half (78%) of the student responses demonstrated basic or proficient reasoning of a chemical
phenomenon. The following segment shows one example of basic reasoning. Cheryl, a low science achievement
student, was asked to use her animation (Figure 2) to decide the products of the chemical reaction of copper penny
(copper) and   vinegar  (acetic acid). At first  she only    mentioned copper    acetate, neglecting   the gaseous  product
(hydrogen gas) that she had not noticed in her experiment. As the interviewer reminded her that the reaction also
generates hydrogen gas, Cheryl was able to examine the numbers and types of atoms in her animation and reasoned
that there should be two leftover hydrogen atoms, although she also showed some minor error (she called carbon as
carbon dioxide).

          Interviewer:    Did you see them [hydrogen gas] in your experiment?
                Cheryl:   No. All I see was there was penny and vinegar. I kind of do think there is a bit
                          hydrogen.
          Interviewer:    Tell me more about it.
                Cheryl:   There had to be hydrogen there because in acetic acid, there are 8 hydrogen, 4
                          oxygen, and 4...um...carbon dioxide. Still there has two hydrogen because when
                          the copper mixed with acetic acid it took two out to make a new bond so all
                          together there were 6 in copper acetate.
          Interviewer:    So you are saying you have two leftover?
                Cheryl:   Yah.

                                                              75                                                   ICLS 2006
                                   Figure 2. Three major screens of Cheryl's animation

          We argue    that the  animation  tool   contributes  to student  reasoning    by  providing objects  for  students to
concretize the abstract concepts of atoms and molecules. The students were able to use the objects to count and
manipulate to assist their reasoning process. Although it is arguable that other tools, such as physical manipulations,
may have similar effects on supporting reasoning, the animation tool preserves students' work in a real-time and
permanent   manner    so  that the  artifacts are available  for  ongoing     thinking, reasoning   and reflection. Moreover,
compared to physical objects that may lack emphasis on processes, the animation tool supports students to compare
different processes.  Although     research   indicates that  students    often confuse    physical  processes with  chemical
processes (Ahtee & Varjola, 1998), only one student in the present study showed this problem.

          On the other hand, our result shows that all unsatisfactory reasoning was from medium or low science
achievement   students,   indicating  that reasoning    is difficult  for this  group   of students. For future work   we are
exploring incorporation of scaffolding such as content-specific or reasoning skill related supports. In addition, our
classroom observations show that the one-to-one nature of handheld computers encourages students' continual, but
individual work. Student sharing expertise rarely occurred in the learning environment we observed. Given peer
collaboration as an importance resource to promote mastery of knowledge or skills, future Chemation work will
consider promoting diverse students' interactions for sharing experience such as peer evaluation of animations.

Concluding Remarks
          Although using student-generated artifacts to promote learning is not a brand new idea, as informed by the
"learning by design" literature (e.g., Barab, Hay, Barnett, & Keating, 2000; Schank & Kozma, 2002), there is less
research focusing on using animations as constructivist and problem-solving tools to support student understanding.
In the present study we argue for the use of instructional animation to go beyond the typical cosmetic or presentation
roles that animation plays. The results provide information for multimedia designers to consider enabling animations
to play a more active role in educational settings. With appropriate supports, students as young as seventh graders
may   build  appropriate   animations   and    use   them   to conduct     higher-order    thinking  such   as reasoning  and
interpretation. One limitation of the paper is the role of the teacher not discussed. Our future work will focus on the
interaction among teacher, technology and student to advance understanding of how teachers may facilitate student
learning with a constructivist, problem-solving animation tool. Other future work includes revision of the animation
tool to address   the remaining    challenges  that  we    identified in  the study,  and  development   of animation-related
activities to promote social interactions among students, for which we will conduct another evaluation study with a
large number of participants.

References
Ahtee,  M.,  &   Varjola,  I. (1998). Students'   understanding   of  chemical   reaction.  International  Journal  of Science
          Education, 20(3), 305-316.
Barab, S. A., Hay, K. E., Barnett, M., & Keating, T. (2000). Virtual solar system project: Building understanding
          through model building. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 37(7), 719-756.
Bransford,   J., Brown,    A.  L., &  Cocking,    R. (2000).   How    people   learn:   brain, mind,  experience   and school.
          Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Brown,    A. (1992).     Design    experiments:   Theoretical     and  methodological      challenges   in  creating   complex
          interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Hesse, J. J., & Anderson, C. W. (1992). Students' conceptions of chemical change. Journal of Research in Science
          Teaching, 29(3), 277-299.

                                                               76                                                    ICLS 2006
Hubscher-Younger, T., & Narayanan, N. H. (2003). Dancing hamsters and marble statues: characterizing student
         visualizations of algorithms. Paper presented at the 2003 ACM symposium on Software visualization., San
         Diego, CA.
Kehoe, C., Stasko, J., & Taylor, A. (2001). Rethinking the evaluation of algorithm animations as learning aids: an
         observational study. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 54, 265-284.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images: The grammar of visual design. New York: Routledge.
Lee, H.-S., & Butler, N. (2003). Making authentic science accessible to students. International Journal of Science
         Education, 25(8), 923-948.
Linn, M. C. (2000). Designing the knowledge integration environment. International Journal of Science Education,
         22(8), 781-796.
Mayer, R. E., & Moreno, R. (2002). Animation as an aid to multimedia learning. Educational Psychology Review,
         14(1), 87-99.
Nakhleh, M. B., Samarapungavan, A., & Saglam, Y. (2005). Middle school students' beliefs about matter. Journal of
         Research in Science Teaching, 42, 581-612.
Olson, D. R. (2003). Psychological theory and educational reform. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University
         Press.
Piaget, J. (1977). Introduction and the growth of logical thinking from childhood to adolescence. In H. Gruber & J.
         J. Voneche (Eds.), The essential Piaget (pp. xvii-xL, 405-444). New York: Basic Books.
Quintana, C., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2003). Issues and approaches for developing learner-centered technology.
         Advances in Computers, 57, 271-321.
Schank,  P., &  Kozma,   R. B.  (2002).  Learning chemistry   though the   use of a representation-based  knowledge
         building environment. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 21(3), 253-279.
Schollum, B., & Osborne, R. (1985). Relating the new to the familiar. In R. Osborne & P. Freyberg (Eds.), Learning
         in science: The implications of children's science (pp. 51-65). Portsmouth, New Hampshire: Heinemann
         Publishers.
Tversky, B.,  & Morrison,   J. B.  (2002). Animation: Can it  facilitate? International Journal of Human-Computer
         Studies, 57, 247-262.
Vermaat, H., Kramers-Pals, H., & Schank, P. (2003). The use of animations in chemical education. In Proceedings
         of the International Convention of the Association for Educational Communications and Technology (pp.
         430-441). Anaheim, CA.
Weiss, R. E.,   Knowlton, D.   S., & Morrison,  G.  R. (2002).  Principles  for using   animation  in computer-based
         instruction: theoretical heuristics for effective design. Computers in Human Behavior, 18, 465-477.
Williamson, V. M., & Abraham, M. R. (1995). The effects of computer animation on the particulate mental models
         of college chemistry students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 32(5), 521-534.

Acknowledgments
This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-0328797.     Any
opinions and findings expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
National Science Foundation. We especially would like to thank Professor Joseph Krajcik and Dr. Lisa Scott Holt
for their insight on the development of the present study, and our teachers, Kerry Girardin, and Alycia Meriweather,
for their consistent classroom supports.

                                                          77                                                 ICLS 2006
