                  The Ideal Science Student and Problem Solving

          Florence R. Sullivan , University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 14 Furcolo Hall, 813 N. Pleasant St.,
                                    Amherst, MA 01003, fsullivan@educ.umass.edu
                Xiaodong Lin , Teachers College, Columbia University, 322C Thompson Hall, 525 W.
                                    120th St., New York, NY 10027, xlin@tc.edu

Abstract: We examined the nature of students' social mental models of the ideal science student, whether or not
these models vary with student ethnicity, and the relationship of these models to problem solving strategies used,
and problem solving ability in a robotics challenge. Participants were twenty-six, academically advanced, eleven and
twelve year olds. Two social mental models were identified, a traits-based model and a robust model. While models
do not appear to vary with ethnicity, a significant association was found between model group and strategy usage (p
= .032). In addition, the robust group achieved higher scores on their final solution than the traits-based group (p =
.03). The robust group made excellent use of the tools in the environment to solve the problem. The traits-based
group did not. The robust group evidenced an environmental view of learning. The traits-based group displayed a
mental representations view of learning.

          Problem solving has been identified as an important aspect of student learning in science and technology
and  in the development   of scientific literacy (National  Research  Council, 1996).   Social factors,  such  as student
beliefs about   what it means to be  an ideal student  and  their implicit theories of  personality appear  to influence
student academic activity, problem solving approaches, and achievement (Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Hogan, 1998;
Lunenberg & Vollman, 1999). However, these social factors have not been a focus of science education research
(Patrick & Yoon, 2004). Indeed, many investigations of student problem-solving in science focus on either cognitive
factors (e.g., Chang, C.Y., 2002; Dhillon, 1998; Reid, N. 2002;), or on students' science epistemological beliefs
(e.g., Hammer, 1995; Lin & Chiu, 2004). Consequently, we know little about the specific relationship of social
factors to student problem solving activity and achievement in science. The purpose of this study is to address this
lack of   knowledge  by  examining  the  relationship of middle   school students'  social mental   models  of the  ideal
science student to their problem solving activity and achievement in a robotics environment.

Social Mental Models
          A social mental model is defined as an individual's understanding of the functioning of society and societal
entities. For most children in the developed world, school is the dominant societal entity in their lives. Students'
social mental models of school are developed by participation in school (Hatano & Wertsch, 2001), and they appear
to be influenced, in part, by teachers (McRobbie & Tobin, 1996), other students (Cashmore & Goodnow, 1985), the
classroom environment (Ames & Archer, 1988), the school environment (Buchanan-Barrow & Barrett, 1996), and
parents (Smith, 1982). Students create a social mental model of the school as a dynamic system that includes not
only individuals, but also rules, roles and distributions of power and authority that govern the relationships of the
individuals in the school system (Buchanan-Barrow & Barrett, 1998). Researchers have investigated student social
mental models from two perspectives, the ideal student construct and implicit theories of personality research.

The Ideal Student
          What is meant by the term "ideal student?" According to Durkheim (1972/1922), "...every society sets up a
certain ideal of man" (p. 203); he argues that members of the society come to share this ideal, to a certain degree,
through the mechanism of schooling. Durkheim (1972/1922) argues that one of the purposes of education is to instill
in the  members   of a  society the ideals of that society.  Further, he   reasons that the values  of  varying   societal
groupings will affect the ideals held by members of these groups. Therefore, while a general societal ideal exists,
variations in the ideal develop as a function of specific positional differences in societal groupings.

          Ideal student research has been  limited  and  it has primarily  focused  on  identifying variations in  social
mental models of the ideal student (Cashmore & Goodnow, 1985; Lin & Schwartz, 2003; Ten Dam, 1995). As
Durkheim (/19721922) predicted, the "ideal" is not defined singularly or even similarly by individuals residing in
the same society. Indeed, researchers have found that student social mental models of the ideal student appear to
differ based on age, country of origin, gender, and school type (Cashmore & Goodnow, 1985; Lin & Schwartz,

                                                          737                                                   ICLS 2006
2003;   Lunenberg     &   Volman,    1999;    Ten   Dam,     1995). Lunenberg     and  Volman     (1999)  also  investigated  the
relationship of students' social mental model to their classroom activity. The researchers found that students who
viewed the ideal student as a passive receiver of knowledge from the teacher, behaved in just this fashion in class.

         Given the small number of existing studies, it is not possible to draw strong conclusions about the variation
in and effect of student social mental models of the ideal student on learning activities. However, there is evidence
that models  vary     based on    societal  positioning  and   that social mental   models   may   be aligned  with  subsequent
learning activities. Therefore, we hypothesize that students with varying societal positioning will have varying social
mental   models  of   the ideal   science   student and  these  variations  in models   will   be associated with  variations in
learning activities.

Implicit Theories of Personality
         The second perspective from which students' social mental models have been investigated is through their
implicit theories of personality. Implicit theories of personality are naïve theories that each of us develop as a result
of everyday     lived experience;    we   use  these  theories  to  explain   the behavior  of self  and  other (Bennet,    1993;
Moscovici, 1981). A students' social mental model of the ideal student may be considered a specific instance of
their implicit theory of personality (Dweck & Leggett, 1988). In other words, the ideal student construct is related to
the notion of an implicit theory of personality inasmuch as it represents the student's model, shaped by everyday
societal experience, of a specific personage and the behavior governing attributes this personage will possess.

         Dweck & Leggett (1988) present a research based social-cognitive model of motivation and personality
that is offered  as   an approach    to understanding    the  relationship  of students'  implicit  theories and  motivation  to
problem solving and achievement. The model posits students' implicit beliefs about the nature of intelligence as
related  to their  subsequent     learning   goal   orientation,  problem   solving   strategy  use,  and   achievement   in  the
classroom. In this model, Dweck & Leggett (1988) have defined two beliefs that students might hold: the belief that
intelligence is  a  fixed   trait (entity   theorists), and   the belief that  intelligence  can  be  increased   through   effort
(incremental theorists). Researchers have investigated Dweck and Leggett's model and it has garnered empirical
support (Ablard, 2002; Leonardi and Gialamas, 2002). For instance, Stipek & Gralinski (1996) found that students
who endorse entity beliefs are more likely to adopt performance goals and to use "superficial learning strategies that
undermine their achievement" (p. 404), than their incrementalist counterparts.

Domain Specificity
         Dweck & Leggett (1988) reasoned that their model might be useful in understanding behavior in domains
other than intelligence. Subsequent research has produced mixed results regarding the cross-domain generality of
beliefs (Bempechat, London, & Dweck 1991; and Stipek & Gralinski, 1996). For instance, Bempechat, et al., (1991)
report that fourth and fifth graders held different beliefs in the different domains of intelligence, sociability, physical
skills, and  physical  appearance.      For example,    an   individual may    hold an  entity view   about  intelligence but an
incremental view about sociability. Meanwhile, Stipek and Gralinski (1996) found that elementary school students
in their study did not hold differentiated beliefs about the nature of intelligence in regards to the academic domains
of math and social studies. Based on these studies, it remains unclear as to whether or not students' implicit theories
about intelligence vary by domain.

         Much    research   regarding     students'  beliefs  about  intelligence   has been   conducted   using  forced  choice
questionnaires.   There   are two    problems    with   this approach.  First, when   using  forced  choice  questionnaires   the
student-generated     viewpoint   is left  out (Quihuis,     Bempechat,  Jimenez    &  Boulay,    2002).  Second, forced  choice
questionnaires present hypothetical situations that a student might face. Presenting decontextualized, hypothetical
situations to students may not indicate their actual beliefs or reveal the actual actions they would undertake when
confronted with a real problem-solving activity (Schunk, 1995). There is a need for more field-based research into
students' beliefs and behaviors that focus on actual problem-solving activity, not self-reports of what one might do
in a given situation. Additionally, this research should occur in a more diverse learning environment as much of the
present data has been collected from white, middle class students (Quihuis, et al., 2002).

         The    research  undertaken    in  this study  addresses   these  issues  by investigating   the domain  specificity of
student  social  mental   models     of the  ideal  science   student   using  an open-ended    questionnaire.  Furthermore,   it
examines    the relationship  of  these   social mental   models    to problem-solving   activity  and   achievement in   a more

                                                                 738                                                   ICLS 2006
ethnically diverse, authentic robotics problem-solving environment. This study advances our understanding of the
relationship of social factors to problem solving in science.

Methods
        Three   over-arching    research  questions  are  investigated  in this study: 1) what   are  student  social mental
models of the ideal science student? 2) Is there a relationship between varying social mental models and student
ethnicity? And 3) How are students' social mental models of the ideal science student related to student problem
solving and achievement in the robotics environment?

        The data for this study was collected at one of the Center for Talented Youth's summer camp programs.
The  students  in   the study  are  considered   academically   advanced   based   on  their scores  on standardized   tests.
Participants attended   either  of two three-week   long,   intensive summer    robotics sessions.  Twenty-six   eleven   and
twelve year-old students participated, 22 boys and four girls. Fourteen of the participants were white (12 boys and
two girls), nine were Asian American (eight boys and one girl), and three were bi-cultural students (two white and
Middle Eastern ­ one boy and one girl), and (one white and Native American boy). Socio-economic status was not
available; however, the camp was expensive and none of the students were receiving scholarship assistance.

        The research design was correlational and observational. Students completed two questionnaires on the first
day of class, a demographic survey and the Ideal Science Student survey. This survey asked students to write five
qualities the ideal science student would have. In the last week of both sessions, each student individually engaged
in a robotics  problem-solving     activity that  was videotaped.    Students were  instructed   to think-aloud   during   the
problem solving session. The robotics challenge was as follows: The robot must follow a black line on the track
provided. When it bumps into an object, it will back up six inches, make a complete 360-degree turn and stop.

        Robotics, in this study, refers to the RCX microprocessor created at MIT, the Robolab software program
created at Tufts University, and the Lego Mindstorms kit. The use of specific tools is an important aspect of problem
solving in robotics. In this study, the students had available in the task environment a paper track (with a ruler
inscribed on it), the microprocessor, input sensors, various structural resources (i.e. different sized wheels, different
Lego pieces, etc.) and the Robolab program itself.

Results
Social Mental Models
        Quantitative content analysis (Chi, 1997) was used to analyze the responses on the ideal science student
survey. Two    graduate  students  were   trained on  the  use of the   codes with the data   and  interrater reliability was
achieved at k = .86. All coding disagreements were resolved through discussion. Four categories of response were
identified: 1) learning  strategies and   performance;   2) classroom   order and  discipline;  3)  motivation,  interest and
effort; and 4) personal traits. Learning strategies and performance refers to responses that focus on external and
outcome oriented academic aspects of classroom behavior. Classroom order and discipline refers to responses that
focus on external, non-academic, orderly student behavior in the classroom. Motivation, interest, and effort refer to
responses   related to  student  internal motivation  and   interest in science, and   their external effort  in the  science
classroom. Personal traits refer to internal personality traits that a student may possess.

        Two    primary    social   mental models   of   the ideal student  emerged    from   the  analysis of  the category
responses, a traits-based social mental model group with responses falling primarily in the traits category and a
group with a richer social mental model whose conception of the ideal science student included not only personal
traits, but also motivational, behavioral, and learning strategy and performance aspects. Students with this fuller and
richer view of the ideal science student are termed the robust social mental model group.             The traits and robust
categories are similar to those reported by Bempechat et al., (1991). They found that students categorized as entity
theorists were likely to use trait terms as evidence to support their attributional judgments, and fifth grade students
categorized  as incremental     theorists were   likely to  use  action or  process   terms  as  evidence  to  support    their
attributional judgments of behavior.   Therefore, our categorization aligns with the findings of previous researchers.
        We systematized the classification of the students into one of these two groups by developing a metric that
could be applied to each case. The metric developed for determining classification in the traits-based social mental
model group is as follows: 1) the majority of responses to the ideal science student survey (at least 60%) must be
categorized as a personal trait response; and 2) all responses must fit into just two categories overall, the personal

                                                             739                                                   ICLS 2006
traits category and one other category. Using these criteria, ten students were classified as having a traits-based
model. The metric developed for classifying students as having a robust social mental model of the ideal science
student is as follows: the responses are categorized in at least three of the four response categories. Therefore, none
of the categories receive a majority of responses. Fourteen students were classified as having a robust social mental
model. Using these metrics, two students of the 26 students fit into neither classification. Both of these students were
male; one is Asian American, the other white. Of these two students, one had primarily motivation, interest and
effort responses,  and  the other  student had  mostly    classroom  order  and  discipline based    responses. These  two
students were dropped from further analysis.

Social Mental Models and Ethnicity
         Of the 24 students who remained in the study, eight of the students are of Asian American descent, 13 of
the students are white, and three of the students have bi-cultural backgrounds (two are middle-eastern and white and
one is  Native  American    and   white). Chi  square  analysis of   student ethnicity and  social   mental  model    group
membership revealed no association, x2 (2, n =24) = 2.479, p = .290.

Social Mental Models and Problem Solving
         Descriptive written logs of student activity during problem solving were created through multiple viewing
of the videotapes. The unit of analysis was shift in activity (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). A shift in activity refers to
an attentional  shift from  one element   or task in   the challenge  to another element    or task. The  transcripts were
analyzed  to identify  the  problem solving    strategies  students used to  solve the challenge.    Five domain  specific
strategies and four domain general strategies were derived from the viewing of the videotapes.

         Domain specific strategies are ones that derive from the domain itself. As previously mentioned, robotics is
a tool-intensive activity. Therefore, most of the domain specific strategies deployed in a robotics environment regard
use of the available tools. The strategies thus identified were: 1) measure with ruler on map; 2) take light readings
with the light sensor; 3) simulate the movement of the robot; 4) use the Robolab context-sensitive help; and 5) make
structural adjustments with Lego pieces. Four of these five strategies are self-explanatory. Simulate the movement of
the robot refers to the observed student activity of reading the challenge, picking up the RCX and affixing a light
sensor, manually moving the RCX over the black line on the paper track, and reasoning aloud about the factors
involved in programming the robot to follow the black line. Domain general strategies are those that may be used in
any domain. Such strategies used by students in this study were: 1) guess and check; 2) sub-goal analysis; 3) ask
questions; and  4) take  notes. These nine   strategies were  used   to code each  student  log. A   graduate student  was
trained on the use of the codes; interrater reliability was established at k = .94. All disagreements were resolved
through discussion. The ratio of domain specific to domain general strategies used by each student was calculated
and used to designate students as using primarily domain specific or domain general strategies.

         A chi square test of independence was conducted to examine the association of social mental model group
and strategy type primarily used. A significant association was found, x2 (1, n=24) = 4.608, p = .032. Students with a
robust social mental model are more likely to use domain specific strategies than students with a traits-based social
mental model.

         Students' scores on their final problem solutions serve as a measure of problem solving ability. These final
solutions  were  scored using   a conceptual   rubric. The  computer    science concepts inherent    in the problem   were
input/process/output, procedural flow, and iteration. Possible scores ranged from zero to seven points. Points were
allocated  based  on  judgment  of  difficulty and complexity    of  each  concept  as embodied      in the challenge. For
example, the line following task engaged the input/process/output concept and was considered to have a high level
of difficulty and complexity because students had to take into account a number of factors to solve it correctly,
including how many light sensors to use, where to place the light sensors, and the variations in light reflection due to
sensor placement and/or temporal fluctuations in the quality of light in the room. Content validity of the rubric was
achieved when two Robolab experts independently reviewed the rubric and agreed that it accurately reflected the
difficulty and complexity of each concept as embodied in the challenge. Students' final problem solution scores
were tabulated using the conceptual rubric. A one-way ANOVA (see Table 1) was conducted to test the significance
of differences in the group mean scores.

Table 1. Solution Score by Social Mental Model Group ANOVA

                                                            740                                                   ICLS 2006
Source              SS                 df                  MS                    F                     p
Between Groups      18.31               1                  18.31                 5.367                 .030
Within Groups       75.03              22                     3.41
Total                                  23

          The test was significant, F = 5.367, p = .030, the effect size was 2 = .196, and the observed power was
.601. Students with a robust social mental model obtained significantly higher solution scores (M = 3.07, SD = 2.06)
than the traits-based students (M = 1.30, SD = 1.49).

Discussion
          The results of the study indicate that while students have varying social mental models of the ideal science
student, these models do not vary based on ethnicity. However, variations in social mental models are associated
with variations in problem solving activity. These differences may be attributed to students' use of the distributed
intelligence inscribed in the tools found in the task environment (Pea, 1991). The traits group relied largely on their
mental representations to solve the robotics problem; they did not take advantage of the affordances for solving the
problem offered by the tools as evidenced by their strategy usage. Students in the robust group made excellent use of
the provided tools and, by extension, the distributed intelligence in the tools themselves. This is exhibited by the
robust groups greater use of domain specific strategies to solve the problem.

          To what may we attribute the relationship of a specific social mental model to the decision to use or not use
the distributed intelligence in the task environment to help solve the problem? We conjecture that students' social
mental model of the ideal science student may be related to their beliefs about learning and cognition. Greeno (1991)
distinguishes two views of learning and cognition, a mental representations view and an environmental view. The
former view relies on internal representations to reason about problems. The latter view relies not only on internal
representations, but also on physical and social resources in the environment to reason about problems. It is possible
that the traits group has a mental representations view of learning and cognition, hence they relied on their internal
representations and  well-known domain    general  strategies to   reason about  the robotics challenge.  Whereas,   the
robust group    may  have an   environmental  view    of learning    and  cognition  that  relies not  only  on mental
representations and known strategies, but also employs the domain specific strategies made possible by the available
tools  in the task  environment to   reason  about and   solve   the problem.   In   this study,  the students  with an
environmental view displayed greater problem-solving ability. These students, by virtue of their tool use, continued
to construct their knowledge of robotics as they solved the challenge. The learning space of these students was
expanded by their active engagement with the resources available to them.

Implications and Conclusions
          This study has important implications for educational policy and classroom teaching. These results suggest
that  standardized assessments  that rely on mental   representations    may  be an  inadequate    form  of assessment.
Students who utilize the affordances of physical and social resources to solve problems may be at a disadvantage
when such resources are not available to them. In essence, students may be capable of much more than what these
tests are able to discern. Therefore, expanding methods of assessment beyond tests of mental representations will
provide a better picture of both what students have already learned and what they are capable of learning. Regarding
classroom teaching, If a teacher has a social mental model of the ideal science student that is traits-based, and a
mental representations view of learning and cognition, this teacher may not provide a classroom environment that
includes the physical and social learning resources utilized by environmental learners. This type of classroom may
put these learners at a distinct disadvantage. Indeed, Thomas, Pederson, and Finson (2001) find teachers' beliefs
about themselves as science teachers influence the type of classroom environment they create. Furthermore, the use
of tools in science is an important element of developing scientific understanding (Roth, 2001). The NRC (1996)
emphasizes tool use as an important aspect of scientific literacy.

          This study offers thought provoking results to those interested in social factors related to student problem
solving in science. It is presented as a first foray into the thicket of such factors and their relationship to learning.
The generalizability of these findings are limited due to the small number of participants, and the lack of academic
and socio-economic diversity of the participants. Therefore, future research should address these issues.

References

                                                          741                                                  ICLS 2006
Ablard, K.E. (2002). Achievement goals and implicit theories of intelligence among academically talented students.
       Journal for the Education of the Gifted, 25(3), 215-232.

Ames, C., & Archer, J. (1988). Achievement goals in the classroom: Sudents' learning strategies and motivation
       processes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80(3), 260-267.

Bempechat, J., London, P., & Dweck, C.S. (1991). Children's conceptions of ability in major domains: An interview
       and experimental study. Child Study Journal, 21(1), 11-35.

Bennett, M. (1993). Introduction. In Mark Bennett (Ed.) The development of social cognition. New York: The
       Guilford Press.

Buchanan-Barrow, E., & Barrett, M. (1998). Individual differences in children's understanding of the school. Social
       Development, 7(2), 250-268.

Buchanan-Barrow, E., & Barrett, M. (1996). Primary school children's understanding of the school. British Journal
       of Educational Psychology, 66, 33-46.

Cashmore, J.A., & Goodnow, J.J. (1985). Agreement between generations: A two-process approach. Child
       Development, 56, 493-501.

Chang, C.Y., (2002). An exploratory study on students' problem-solving ability in earth science. International
       Journal of Science Education. 24(5), 441-451.

Chi, M.T.H., (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the Learning
       Sciences, 6(3), pp. 271-315.

Dhillon, A.S. (1998). Individual differences within problem-solving strategies used in physics. Science Education,
       82, 379-405.

Durkheim, E. (1972). Education and society. (A. Giddens, Trans.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       (Original work published 1922).

Dweck, C.S., & Leggett, E.L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and personality. Psychological
       Review, 95(2), 256-273.

Greeno, J. (1991). Number sense as situated knowing in a conceptual domain. Journal of Research in Mathematics
       Education, 22(3), 170-218.

Hammer, D. (1995). Epistemological considerations in teaching introductory physics. Science Education, 79(4) 393-
       413.

Hatano, G. & Wertsch, J.V. (2001). Sociocultural approaches of cognitive development: The constitutions of culture
       in mind. Human Development, 44(2/3), 77-83.

Hogan, K., (1998). Relating students' personal frameworks for science learning to their cognition in collaborative
       contexts. Science Education, 83(1), 1-32.

Jordan, B., & Henderson, A., (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the Learning
       Sciences. 4(1), 39-103.

Leonardi, A., & Gialamas, V. (2002). Implicit theories, goal orientations, and perceived competence: Impact on
       students' achievement behavior. Psychology in the Schools, 39(3), 279-291.

                                                        742                                                ICLS 2006
Lin, H.S., & Chiu, H.L., (2004). Student understanding of the nature of science and their problem-solving strategies.
       International Journal of Science Education, 26(1), 101-112.

Lin, X.D., & Schwartz, D.L. (2003). Reflections at the crossroads of culture. Mind, Activity and Culture, 10(1), 9-
       26.

Lunenberg, M.L., & Volman, M. (1999). Active learning: views and actions of students and teachers in basic
       education. Teaching and Teacher Education, 15, 431-445.

McRobbie, C., & Tobin, K. (1995). Restraints to reform: The congruence of teacher and student actions in a
       chemistry classroom. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 32(4) 373-385.

Moscovici, S. (1981). On social representations. In Forgas, J.P., (Ed). Social cognition: Perspectives on everyday
       understanding, (pp. 181-209). London: Academic Press.

National Research Council, 1996. The national science standards. Retrieved April 5, 2005 from the World Wide
       Web: http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/nses.

Patrick, H. & Yoon, C., (2004). Early adolescents' motivation during science investigation. Journal of Educational
       Research, 97(6), 319-328.

Pea, R.D., (1991). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In Gavriel Salomon (Ed.),
       Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 56-67) Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.

Quihuis, G., Bempechat, J., Jimenez, N.V., & Boulay, B.A. (2002). Implicit theories of intelligence across academic
       domains: A study of meaning making in adolescents of Mexican descent, New Directions for Child and
       Adolescent Development, 96, 87-99.

Reid, N., (2002). Open-ended problem solving in school chemistry: a preliminary investigation. International
       Journal of Science Education, 24(12), 1313-1332.

Roth, W.M., (2001). Learning science through technological design. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
       38(7), 768-790.

Schunk, D.H. (1995). Implicit theories and achievement behavior. Psychological Inquiry, 6(4) 311-314.

Smith, T. E. (1982). The case for parental transmission of educational goals: The importance of accurate offspring
       perception. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 44, 661-664.

Stipek, D., & Gralinski, J.H. (1996). Children's beliefs about intelligence and school performance. Journal of
       Educational Psychology, 88(3), 397-407.

Ten Dam, G.T.M. (1995). Drop out from adult education: social environment, school culture and perceptions.
       International Journal of Lifelong Education, 14(1), 51-63.

Thomas, J.A., Pedersen, J.E. & Finson, K., (2001). Validating the draw-a-science-teacher-test checklist (DASST-C):
       Exploring mental models and teacher beliefs. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 12(3), 295-310.

                                                        743                                                ICLS 2006
