Congruence and Tension among Activity Systems in a Tripartite
                            Partnership for Systemic Reform

     Daniel D. Suthers, Joyce Yukawa and Violet H. Harada, Department of Information and Computer
       Sciences, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, 1680 East West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822, U.S.A.
                       suthers@hawaii.edu, yukawa@hawaii.edu, vharada@hawaii.edu

         Abstract: Systemic reform often involves partnerships between multiple communities of
         practice (CoP). In order to understand the strengths and challenges of a partnership, it is
         necessary to examine the objectives and practices of the constituent communities and the
         forces   that shape these  practices.    This    paper  presents  an activity  theory analysis   of
         relationships   between   three  CoPs    in    a systemic   reform   effort,  Hawai`i Networked
         Learning Communities. Essential tensions between the activity systems of the CoPs are
         analyzed to understand key issues encountered in the implementation, particularly with
         respect to the role of technology in mediating systemic reform.

Introduction
         Systemic reform--the effort to effect sustainable changes in the functioning of a school system
that lead to  improved   student   achievement    (Fullan,    2001;  Harris, 2005)--is    typically undertaken   as a
partnership among multiple communities of practice (Huffman & Hipp, 2003, Schlager et al., 2004). For
example,  the   systemic  reform   initiative that   is   the topic  of this paper,   Hawai`i  Networked    Learning
Communities (HNLC), is a partnership between a state school system and university researchers. Partners
bring not  only   different strengths  to the    collaboration  but  also enact  distinct practices   under  different
reward systems and sets of constraints (Hildreth & Kimble, 2004). In order to understand the strengths and
challenges   of a partnership,  it is  necessary  to  examine    the  objectives   and  practices  of the constituent
communities and the forces that shape these practices. Such reflections on a reform process should be an
ongoing affair, conducted not only at the outset during the planning process but also during implementation
as experience provides an empirical basis for further reflection and identification of problems motivates its
urgency.

         This paper is the product of ongoing reflection within the HNLC initiative, which is in the fourth
year of its implementation. Several theoretical frameworks are being employed. In this paper we report on
our  use of  Activity  Theory   (Cole  &  Engeström,      1993;  Engeström,     2001)  to identify  congruences  and
tensions  between    the partner   communities      that   help  us  understand    key  issues encountered    in  the
implementation of HNLC, particularly with respect to the role of technology in mediating systemic reform
(Suthers  et al., 2004). This   analysis  is augmented     with  the  concept   of dualities  from  Communities     of
Practice  theory  (Wenger,   1998).   We  write   from    our  point of view  as   the university  partner, and  have
grounded our claims about the activity systems of other partner communities in qualitative data including
surveys  of  teacher   cohorts, focus   groups,   interviews    and  other   communications,   meeting    notes, and
documents resulting from our joint effort such as strategic plans and reports. As explained below, we view
our partnership as a tripartite one between school system staff, teachers, and university researchers. This
paper will   focus on   how  activity  theory    and dualities   helped  us  conceptualize   observed   tensions that
involve the activity systems of all three of these communities.

Background

Hawai`i Networked Learning Communities
         Hawai`i Networked Learning Communities (HNLC) is a Rural Systemic Initiative funded by the
National  Science   Foundation.    Its goal   is to  empower     educators   to prepare   students  in economically
disadvantaged rural schools for life and careers in today's complex and technological world by enabling
them to attain high standards in science, mathematics, and technology. The initiative involves a partnership
between the Department of Information and Computer Sciences (ICS) at the University of Hawai`i (UH)

                                                           744                                                   ICLS 2006
and  the   Advanced    Technologies    Research    Branch    (ATRB)   of the  Hawai`i    Department     of Education
(HDOE). The HDOE is the only statewide school district in the United States. Approximately 40 K-12
schools have participated in HNLC, having joined the initiative in four successive cohorts starting in 2002.

           Alongside our other roles as project leaders and facilitators, the UH team provides technology
support for the systemic reform effort (Suthers, et al., 2004). Our intent is to support the change process
itself, especially  as manifest    in teacher   professional  development     and   the collaborative    reflection of
practitioners.  While   ATRB      focuses on   application   of  technologies  in   the  classroom    as vehicles   of
instruction or the object of study, we offer information technologies in the form of an interactive web site
(hnlc.org)  to  support  collaboration  and   share   resources  across  institutional  and geographic     boundaries
between isolated rural schools in our island state. This "virtual community center" is designed to support
the needs of special purpose groups that are embedded in a statewide virtual community of educators. This
nested community approach is intended to capitalize on the advantages of larger groups such as resource
sharing and potentials for new interpersonal relationships (Resnick, 2002) while also meeting local needs
and  enabling   negotiability  of  purpose    (Wenger,    1998).  Community       support  includes   a  membership
directory, a database of educational resources particularly relevant to Hawai`i educators, and a community
forum for news and announcements. Smaller groups are supported by workspaces that collect together wiki
pages, file sharing, and document-centered discussion tools.

           The  concept  of  communities    of  practice  (Wenger,    1998)   has   been   central to our   initiative.
However, the subject of systemic reform--the state school system--is not a unitary community of practice.
In HNLC we soon found that the most salient distinction (expressed by participants as well as substantiated
by  our   own   observations)   is between    "the    state" and  "the   schools."   "The   state" is the   statewide
administrative system in Honolulu, of which ATRB constitutes one branch. "The schools" are the teachers,
principals and other support personnel who work together within schools geographically distributed across
the islands. Our    systemic   reform  effort includes  a third  community     of practice, university   researchers,
forming a tripartite relationship. Although ideally all participants will function as one community (Barab,
Schatz & Scheckler, 2004), the current reality is that multiple communities of practice are involved. The
functioning of the entity formed of these three communities of practice is influenced by the orientation of
each community's practice, its resources, and its constraints; so conceptual tools are needed to understand
each partner community in relation to the others.

Theoretical Foundations
           Activity theory provides a useful framework within which to understand the primary focus of each
community, the resources with which a community replicates its practices, and the influences and tensions
generated by the context within which its members work. Originating in Vygotsky's (1978) recognition that
cultural artifacts mediate human action, the second generation of activity theory provided conceptual tools
to understand   cultural-historical   resources for   and constraints  on collective    action (Cole  &    Engeström,
1993; Engeström, 2001). The activity of any subject is directed towards an object in order to achieve some
outcome. Object-directed activity may be accomplished directly, or may be mediated by tools, including
language and other representational tools as well as physical devices, and by participation in a community,
which   is organized   by   rules  and division    of labor.  Mediation   is a key   concept   and  can    be applied
analytically between any three elements of the activity system. For example, the subject's relationship to a
community is mediated by rules that enable or constrain the ability to enact his or her role. Problems and
the potential   for change  can   be  understood   in terms   of contradictions   or tensions  within    and  between
elements of the activity system. More recently, a "third generation" of activity theory considers networks of
interacting activity systems (Engeström, 2001), the approach taken in this paper.

           Like Barab   et al. (2004),  we    find that multiple  analytic   models    are needed.  Activity   theory
provides a structural model within which tensions are to be identified, but additional guidance is needed to
analyze these tensions. Our analysis incorporates the dualities of Wenger's (1998) communities of practice
(CoP) model. A duality is not a binary variable, nor even a spectrum along which a system has some value.
Both elements of the duality are always present and interact both problematically and productively. Wenger
(1998)   identifies four   dimensions  that   address  "the   fundamental    issues of  meaning,   time,   space, and
power," namely: (1) participation and reification, (2) the designed and the emergent, (3) the local and the
global, and (4) identification and negotiability. While Wenger uses the concept of dualities to examine the

                                                          745                                                    ICLS 2006
forces that create and sustain CoPs, we apply this concept to understand forces between as well as within
communities.

Three Communities, Three Activity Systems
           This section outlines an activity-theoretic characterization of the three major participants in our
systemic reform effort. The activity systems are illustrated in Figure 1, along with relationships between
them and "emergent activity systems" to be discussed later.

           Teachers act as members of a school community. Students are the object of their activity and
student learning the outcome (lower right, Figure 1). The artifacts that mediate teachers' student-oriented
activity include curricular resources such as unit and lesson plans, instructional media, and technologies.
According to our survey and focus group data, tensions within the teachers' activity system that affect the
systemic   initiative include   resource   limitations of  all types--curricular    and  technological resources,
technical knowledge, experience with collaborative technologies, and time for professional development
activities (constrained by the need to hire substitute teachers). During the course of our project, the state
content and performance standards were revised twice, creating added challenges for teachers endeavoring
to organize their curriculum plans by the standards.        The  threat  of No Child   Left Behind   sanctions can
result in de-prioritization of all activities--including implementation of the place-based inquiry learning
advocated by HNLC--other than preparation for standardized tests.

           Our systemic reform effort is a collaboration with the Advanced Technologies Research Branch of
the state-level Department of Education. ATRB team members who are tasked with HNLC responsibilities
direct their activity towards teachers as their object and change in practice as the intended outcome (upper
right, Figure 1). ATRB seeks the implementation of assessment-driven, standards-based curricula through
activities that   engage   student  interest and  participation,   in  particular,  place-based  inquiry   learning
leveraging  the   environmental,   economic,   and  cultural   context  and  concerns   of students.  ATRB   team
members seek to achieve this outcome through professional development (PD). The "mediating artifacts"
include plans for PD sessions and the incorporation of available PD materials. Tensions within this activity
system  affect   success   at reform  efforts. Revisions   to  the content  and    performance  standards  created
ambiguity over which version to use in professional development activities before the new version was
officially adopted. Budgetary and political pressures result in operational directives that change priorities
and constraints (e.g., limiting travel for school visits) or mandate new foci and methods (e.g., curriculum
mapping or creating learning communities).

           The University of Hawai`i (UH) team, the other systemic reform initiative partner, consists of
members of the Laboratory for Interactive Learning Technologies in the Department of Information and
Computer Sciences (ICS). The university team's activity system as a research team and associated tensions
and constraints are familiar to many readers of this paper (left side, Figure 1) As an actor in the systemic
reform effort, the UH team has as its object both the teachers (lower left, Figure 1) and the ATRB team
members (upper left, Figure 1). Desired outcomes in both cases are changes in practice, and the primary
mediating artifact considered in this paper is the use of hnlc.org to support collaboration and community.
With  teachers    as  the object, the UH     team shares   some    of the outcome    objectives with  ATRB,    but
additionally has an emphasis on communities of practice. Tensions within this activity system include the
competing priorities of project implementation and the need to examine the technological mediation of
communities and collaboration, directed towards research findings and publications as outcomes.

Relationships Among Activity Systems
           A systemic reform effort involving partners from three distinct communities of practice cannot be
fully understood by considering those communities individually. More complex relationships--pair wise
and   tripartite in  this case--must    be   considered  to understand    challenges   and  potential  for change
(Engeström, 2001). A multi-system analysis is particularly important in systemic reform where one partner
introduces tools that are intended to mediate the activity of the other two, as in the present case.

           When the members of one community are oriented towards members of another community as
their object,    we  might expect  that  a new    activity system   that  reflects the relationships  between  the
communities will emerge. The mediational triangles of these emergent activity systems are illustrated in

                                                        746                                                   ICLS 2006
Figure 1, placed between the communities from which they are to be formed and framed in ellipses. For
example, the ATRB team's activity system oriented towards teachers is intended to engage teachers in a
new system (right ellipse, Figure 1) in which their curricular resources are the objects and professional
development is the mediating tool. Similarly, the UH team activity system oriented towards teachers seeks
to engage   teachers  in a new  system  (lower ellipse, Figure 1) in  which they are   oriented  towards  their
curricular  resources as   the object mediated  by a  community   of  practitioners  using hnlc.org;  and UH
oriented towards  ATRB     similarly  seeks to engage   ATRB   staff in facilitating community    of reflective
practitioners supported by hnlc.org (upper ellipse, Figure 1). In this section we identify both congruences
(structural similarities)  and tensions between  both   the primary  and  emergent    activity systems in our
partnership.

                       Figure 1. Relationships between three primary activity systems.

(a) Congruence of teacher orientation towards curricula between emergent activity systems fostered by both
   ATRB's and UH's orientation towards teachers.
(b) Participation/reification tension between teachers' orientation towards students and the orientation
   towards curricula in the emergent activity systems sought by ATRB and UH.
(c) Cultural and local/global tensions between teachers' norms of noncritical conduct and reflection in a
   community of practice sought by UH orientation towards teachers.
(d) Mismatch in mediating artifacts emphasized in emergent activity systems sought by ATRB and UH.
(e) Emergent activity system sought by UH places greater emphasis on ATRB's role as mentors of
   teachers' ongoing reflective practice in a CoP.

                                                      747                                                 ICLS 2006
Congruence in Reflective Practice
          Both  the ATRB     and UH     teams want to  help    teachers become      reflective practitioners  (Schön,
1983; York-Barr et al., 2001), reflecting on their instructional resources and unit and lesson plans and how
they  are implemented   in   the classroom    towards  the objective    of improving    student  achievement.    This
common goal is congruent in the emergent activity systems that both ATRB and UH teams seek to create in
their orientations  towards  teachers   (curved lines, Figure   1(a)).  Teachers'   mediating    artifacts (curricula)
become the objects of inquiry in the activity system of the reflective practitioner.

          Figure 2. In reflective practice, the tools for the current practice (1) become the object of reflection
                                        (2) leading to a revised practice (3).

          A schema for reflective practice is shown in Figure 2. Practitioners are engaged in a primary
practice indicated by the lower activity system (1). For example, teachers are the Subject, students the
Object, and curricular resources and plans are the Tool (Tool-1 at time 1). In the reflection process, the
mediating tools of this activity system (Tool-1) become the objects of deliberation, criticism, innovation,
and revision (2). Other aspects of the primary practice, such as rules and division of labor, may also be
considered and revised; this is omitted from the present paper for simplicity. A meta-tool is employed as
the tool by which reflective consideration of the primary tool is accomplished. For example, the meta-tool
can be theory, professional development materials and activities, and/or discourse within a community.
Tool-1 of the primary activity system is deliberately revised into a new one, Tool-2, in order to improve
outcomes. As a result, the primary activity system is transformed into a new activity system using Tool-2
with  different (hopefully   improved)   outcomes  (3).    The  process    repeats  with this   transformed   activity
system:   in an ongoing   process    of expansive  learning    (Engeström    2001),   reflective   practitioners must
simultaneously maintain a reflective activity (2) in order to continuously transform practice in the primary
activity (1  3).

Tensions Between Activity Systems
          Some   tensions may    be  noted between     the emergent     activity system  (reflective  practice)   and
teachers' primary activity system. In order to engage in the professional development activity, teachers
must reify their curriculum planning so that it can become an object of inquiry in itself. This reification can
be difficult for those who practice a more spontaneous approach to instruction (jagged lines, Figure 1(b)).
For   teachers who  are not  accustomed    to critically examining     their own    practice,  the focus   on teacher
performance    (in  addition to  student  performance)     is a paradigm     shift. In the  community      version of
reflective practice, teachers are asked to share their reified tools with other teachers for co-reflection, which
can be threatening in a culture where teachers seldom critique each other (Figure 1(c)). This is one among
several factors accounting for the lack of peer commentary on teachers' units in hnlc.org. A local/global
tension also complicates the exercise: will the plans teachers developed to fit their situation make sense in
other schools and classrooms? This duality also has a top-down manifestation: does the statewide set of
standards and other criteria and practices promoted by the professional development program make sense
in every teacher's classroom?

          We noted that there is congruence between the ATRB and UH teams' intended emergent activity
systems for teachers. However, there is also a difference: ATRB focuses on its professional development
activities while UH focuses on technology-mediated community in hnlc.org (Figure 1(d)). The need to
integrate hnlc.org with ATRB's PD planning has been an ongoing issue in the project. The same tension is
evident   in a comparison    of  the UH-oriented-to-ATRB        emergent   activity  system    and ATRB's     primary

                                                       748                                                       ICLS 2006
activity system.     These  tensions between    planned  professional  development    and  practitioner  discourse
reflect  both designed/emergent      and identification/negotiability dualities.  In  inviting ATRB   staff to use
hnlc.org, we are attempting to implement a model that equates professional development with ongoing
facilitation and mentorship of the reflective practice of members of a community of practice. Although the
object of activity in the emergent activity system remains the same (i.e., teachers), we are asking ATRB
staff to use a different mediating artifact, the online tools for collaboration and community support, and to
orient their activity towards the outcome of an ongoing community of practice (Figure 1(e)).

         The     use of technology    (hnlc.org) in  itself is not a  challenge   for members    of  an  Advanced
Technology Research Branch. Difficulties we have encountered are better explained by our assumption of
identification with (1) a community of practice model of professional development, and (2) the need to
mentor   teachers  to support   such  a  model.  Further negotiation  towards    consensus on   these outcomes   is
needed, and will impact the role of technology as mediator. In addition to ATRB's orientation toward
helping teachers use technology for student learning, technology becomes a mediator for teacher learning.
It should be noted that ATRB promotes both reflective practice and learning communities. The issue is
what these terms mean to different people, whether the concepts are integrated as reflective practice in a
community     of practice,  and  the consequent   implications   for the role of  technology.   We   are presently
working with ATRB to negotiate a shared conception of professional development and better integrate our
offerings.

Structural Issues in Mediation
         Like any school system, the HDOE is a hierarchical system in which system administrators and
staff produce reifications of "best practices" for replication--desired practices to be adopted by teacher
practitioners. Yet, change in practice is not imposed from outside (Osterman & Kottkamp, 1993). Teachers
and HDOE staff need to negotiate a shared object (Engeström, 2001): the practices that are promoted by
professional  development.      In an   attempt  to support    HDOE's    efforts  towards  best  practices  with a
technological    artifact, the UH    team inadvertently   became   an  intermediary   in  (and  a barrier  to) this
conversation. The technological artifact is the "unit plan template," a web-based form for describing a unit
plan. HDOE       professional  development   staff  wanted   to  guide   teachers through  an   assessment-driven
backwards-mapping approach to unit planning (Wiggins & McTighe, 2001), and requested that the unit
plan template enforce this process. According to this model, teachers should first identify the content and
performance standards to be addressed and then identify the assessment instruments to be used to measure
outcomes, before indicating student activities and the materials needed to support these activities. This
scripted approach to unit authoring is the opposite of many innovative teachers' approach of identifying an
engaging activity first and designing a unit around this activity. While this designed/emergent tension is a
significant issue, the greatest problem lies in a failure of negotiability. The web-based unit template was
controlled by the UH team, and therefore served to place us in a mediating role between HDOE staff and
teachers. HDOE staff requested revisions in the template's structure, while teachers who were using the
template expressed frustration with its inflexibility and noted incompatibilities with formats being used in
their local school. When the UH team tried to respond to one community, the other sometimes disagreed
with the changes. Our role as designers of the artifact intended to mediate between the systemic reform
agenda and teachers' practice placed us in the role of mediator of conversations about tensions between this
agenda and teachers' practice, conversations that should have taken place directly between HDOE staff and
teachers. We realize in retrospect that a better choice would be to provide tools for reification that are
accessible to both HDOE staff and teachers, and associate these tools with support for conversation about
the reifications. Then teachers and professional development staff could negotiate directly over the timing
and content of reifications such as the unit plan template.

Conclusions
         Most if not all systemic reform efforts are a partnership between multiple communities. Ideally,
they would function as one community, but reality demands that reform leaders examine their practices to
find congruences and potential tensions between partners. Activity theory, augmented with concepts of
dualities in communities of practice, provided us with tools for this analysis. This approach was applied to
understand a tripartite partnership in a systemic reform effort involving staff in a statewide school district,
school-based teachers, and us as university researchers. Examination of the corresponding activity systems
and the  emergent     activity systems   sought  by these   partnerships identified  congruence   in objectives  of

                                                         749                                                   ICLS 2006
reflective practice, along with tensions in the role of technology to support this reflection, individual versus
community (collaborative) reflection, and a risk unique to tripartite relationships: that one partner might
become intermediate to negotiations that should take place directly between the other two.      We are using
this information in engaging partners in re-examining goals and strategies. The paper also illustrates a
theoretical point: communities of practice are activity systems, and communities and their activity systems
are nested.  Therefore, concepts  developed  for analysis  of   internal tensions of communities   and their
activity systems can also be applied to understanding relationships between communities and their activity
systems: intra- and inter- are two views on the same relations.

References
Barab, S. A., Schatz, S., Scheckler, R. (2004). Using Activity Theory to conceptualize online community
         and using online community to conceptualize Activity Theory. Mind, Culture, & Activity, 11(1),
         25-47.
Cole, M. & Engeström, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Salomon
         (Ed.)  Distributed  Cognitions:  Psychological   and    Educational    Considerations.  Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press, pp. 1-46.
Engeström,   Y. (2001)  Expansive learning  at work:  Toward     an activity theoretical reconceptualization.
         Journal of Education and Work 14(1): 133-156.
Fullan, M. (2001). The New Meaning of Educational Change. New York: Teachers College Press.
Harris, E. (2005). Key Strategies to Improve Schools: How to Apply Them Contextually. Lanham, MD:
         Scarecrow Press.
Hildreth, P. & Kimble, C. (2004). Knowledge Networks: Innovation Through Communities of Practice.
         Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publications.
Huffman, J.    & Hipp, K. (2003). Reculturing Schools as Professional Learning Communities. Lanham,
         MD: Scarecrow Press.
Osterman, K.F. & Kottkamp, R.B. (1993). Reflective Practice for Educators: Improving Schooling through
         Professional Development. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Resnick, P. (2002). Beyond Bowling Together: SocioTechnical Capital. In J. Carroll (Ed.) HCI in the New
         Millenium. (pp. 647-672.) New York: Adddison-Wesley.
Schlager, M.S. & Fusco, J. (2004). Teacher professional develoment: Are we putting the cart before the
         horse? In S. Barab, R. Kling, & J. Gray (Eds.), Designing Virtual Communities in the Service of
         Learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schön, D.A. (1983). The Reflective Practitioner. New York: Basic Books.
Suthers, D., Harada, V.,   Doane, W., Yukawa,    J., Harris, B.  &  Lid,  V. (2004). Technology-Supported
         Systemic Reform: An Initial Evaluation and Reassessment. Proceedings of the Sixth International
         Conference of the Learning Sciences, Santa Monica, CA - June 22-26, 2004. pp. 537-544.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge,
         MA: Harvard University Press. (Originally published in 1930.)
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Wiggens, G. & McTighe, J. (2001). Understanding by Design. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
York-Barr, J. et al. 2001. Reflective Practice to Improve Schools. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the numerous individuals who have contributed towards HNLC, including Vicki Kajioka
(HNLC co-PI and ATRB director), Claudia Atta and Pat Donohue (former HNLC project directors), and
the other members of the ATRB and UH teams for their hard work during the period reported in this paper:
Sam Joseph, Viil Lid, Paulo Maurin, Heidi Salvador, Kyle Shodai, Joshua Wingstrom, and Ryan Yoshioka.
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Cooperative Agreement No. 0100393.
Any  opinions,  findings, and conclusions or recommendations      expressed  in this paper  are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation, the HDOE, or UH.

                                                     750                                                 ICLS 2006
