  Who Knows Whom in a Virtual Learning Network? Applying
  Social Network Analysis to Communities of Learners at the
                                     Computer Clubhouse

Elisabeth Sylvan, MIT Media Laboratory, 20 Ames Street Cambridge MA 02139, sylvan@media.mit.edu

         Abstract: Social network analysis can be used to describe influence, group dynamics and
         collaboration in  learning  networks.     The current analysis   focuses on  a distributed
         community     of  learners'  email    communication   and  represents   the  first  step  in
         understanding  the community's     social dynamics.   It focuses upon the online intranet
         presence  of  the Computer    Clubhouse,   a  network of  after-school  computer   learning
         centers. The paper presents network analysis and graphs that highlight characteristics of
         the relationships between the youth, such as strength of their ties, gender, and location of
         emailing dyads.   Implications for future network analysis of learning communities are
         discussed.

Introduction
         Social network analysis (SNA) can be used to describe influence, group dynamics and
collaboration in learning networks.  In other fields it has provided great insight on a range of social issues
such as who gets hired for different positions in businesses (Erickson 2001), where power resides in
organizations (Lin 2001), and how ideas flow through individuals and across communities (Valente 1996).
The current analysis focuses on a distributed community of learners' email communication and represents
the first step in understanding the community's social dynamics.

         A social network is the social structure of people or organizations. Social network analysis (SNA)
evaluates the structure of groups of people using statistical methods. Individual people are represented as
nodes and connections between individuals as lines or edges.   An edge could represent different intensities
or types of relationships such whether a person knows another at all, how well they know each other, or
whether one person  likes or dislikes another. The general shape of the network can be described
numerically or graphically, specifying who is connected to whom, how strong the connections are ("tie
strength"), and who contacts others via intermediaries (Degenne & Forsé 1999).

         This study describes the characteristics of the learners, the use of an online resource, and the email
exchanges between members of the group. The email exchanges are analyzed in a network analysis that
describes who emailed whom and how email connections are different throughout the network. These
findings lay the groundwork for more extensive use of SNA techniques with this community and suggests
the ways in which it can be useful in the learning more generally.

         The study focuses upon the online presence of the Computer Clubhouse, a network of after-school
computer learning centers where young people from under-served communities work with adult mentors to
explore their own ideas (Computer Clubhouse web site n.d).    The Computer Clubhouse network is
composed of 107 centers supporting a total of about 20,000 youth members.      Sixty-nine percent are in the
United States. Thirty-eight percent are located in 21 other countries or political regions: Ireland, Northern
Ireland, the Netherlands, Denmark, Germany, Israel, the Palestinian Territories, Jordan, South Africa,
India, Taiwan, the Philippines, Australia, New Zealand, Mexico, Costa Rica, Panama, Columbia, and
Brazil. A central overarching organization coordinates activities, goals, and information across the
network, but within the network structure, each learning center functions independently and is run by its
own Clubhouse Coordinator.    Different clubhouses may have very different cultures in which youth engage
in different activities such as using Photoshop filters to make portraits of themselves, creating 3D worlds
using 3D Studio MAX and creating their own games using GameMaker.

                                                      758                                                ICLS 2006
          A challenge in a distributed learning environment such as this one is coordinating the flow of
information and encouraging interactions across locations.   To address this need, the Computer Clubhouse
has its own intranet called the Village (see Figure 1). Through the Village members of the community have
the unusual opportunity to discuss who they are and what interests them, and to share their ideas and
projects with youth around the world (Computer Clubhouse Village web site n.d).

                            Figure 1. The Computer Clubhouse Village

          The Village is used to disseminate programmatic information, coordinate events, share the youth's
creation and suggest activities and ideas to inspire new projects. It has five main sections: Projects, People
and Clubhouses, Software Studio (an area that lists all the software available at the clubhouses, along with
help and online software), Talk (which has discussion groups and email), and Topic Tree (information on
various Clubhouse issues such as sustainability, tutorials, digital photography, web design, and gender
equity.). From their homepages, members can post photo albums, galleries and describe who they are.
With the Village, youth can get involved with new projects and interact with others outside their clubhouse
in ways unimaginable without it.

Who Uses the Village
          As of October of 2005, the Computer Clubhouse Village has over 3000 users. Eighty-two percent
of Village users are youth members, while the remainder are adult coordinators, mentors, and other staff.
An equal number of male and female members use the Village (1213 male and 1214 female).   The mean
age of the youth is 15.28 (see Figure 2.)

                                                     759                                                 ICLS 2006
                                 350

                                 300

                                 250

                         Count   200

                                 150

                                 100

                                  50

                                   0
                                     2.5   5    7.5   10  12.5   15  17.5   20  22.5  25   27.5
                                                                Age

                        Figure 2. Count of Age of Members of the Clubhouse

         Though youth from many countries use the Village, sixty-nine percent of the users are from the
United States. Beyond that, five percent are from Columbia and the Philippines respectively, four percent
from Mexico and Northern Ireland, respectively, and the remaining are from Australia, Brazil, China, Costa
Rica, Denmark, India, Ireland, Israel, Jordan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Palestinian Territories,
Panama, South Africa, and Taiwan.        Seventy-nine percent of the youth describe their primary language as
English, 13 percent Spanish, 3 percent Filipino and the remaining 4 percent all other languages including
Chinese, Danish, Dutch, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Kannada, Portuguese, and Russian.                  Currently most of
the Village content is in English though menu bars are available in many languages and some content is in
Spanish.

How the Users are Connected Via Email
         Of the 2427 registered youth users of the Village, 712 sent email between August 21 2005 and
Sept 15 2005 when the current data was collected.         These emails were between 1854 distinct pairs of users.
Thirty-seven percent of these pairs were single emails that the receiver did not respond to.         For these
emails, it is possible that many members use the Village to reach out to others, perhaps outside of their
usual circle, and do not get a response.     Sixty-three percent of the emails were two emails within the pair.
Two pairs of youth emailed each other 93 and 277 times respectively.            These pairs may be using email
more like instant messages.

         In Figure 3, the graph on the left shows the entire social network of 712 youth with no adults
including in any of the following analyses.     Lines between members indicate that they exchanged emails.
The width of the line indicates the number of emails sent between the two individuals.            The relationships
between the different shapes roughly indicate which members are more closely tied to others.            From this
graph we see two subgroups, one large cluster at the bottom left side and one smaller cluster near the top.
We can see there are many members on the peripheries as well.             Many of these peripheral members have
tie strengths of 1: that is only one email was sent between the pairs.         There are several explanations for
these peripherals. First the senders could be "spamming" people.          Second they could be social isolates.
Third they could be more central to the network but not enough data has been collected. In the future,
collecting more data and analyzing the directions of the emails will help to clarify this issue.

         The graph on the right side of Figure 3 is identical to that on the left except it shows only ties with
at least 3 emails sent between each pair.    Comparing the stronger ties on the left with all ties on the right,
one can see better where stronger ties exist.   These ties are in the more central part of graph.      There seems
to be several members spanning the two cohesive groups with many relationships, some with strong and
some weak ties.  The members that bridge two distinct groups may be instrumental in spreading ideas
through the different subgroups. (Granovetter 1973).        The characteristics of these members and their
groupings are presented next.

                                                           760                                                    ICLS 2006
                         Figure 3. All Tie Strengths versus Strong Ties Only
       Figure 4 is the same basic graph as those in Figure 3 except a gray line between two shapes
demonstrates that emails were exchanged between two youth in the same clubhouse whereas a black line
indicates they are at different clubhouses. Many ties, including strong ones, were made between members
in different clubhouse, including the ones connecting the two subgroups. From this graph it seems the
Village is succeeding in its goal to connect youth with others outside their neighborhood clubhouse.

       What about connections made within clubhouses?        The graph reveals that many of the weaker ties
on the extreme perimeters of the network are connections within clubhouses. This result is hard to
interpret. It is possible that these members simply emailed others who don't use Village. Connections
were also made within clubhouses on the perimeters of the two subgroups whereas the center is composed
of connections across clubhouses.  These ties may be instrumental in getting information through the
network (Granovetter 1973). The next graph addresses the same concept of regions, but considers
countries instead of clubhouses.

                                                      761                                                ICLS 2006
               Figure 4. Emails Between Members from Different and the Same Clubhouses
       Grey lines in Figure 5 demonstrate a connection within clubhouses, whereas black lines represent
emails exchanged between countries.  The shape of the nodes represents the country of the individual.  The
large subgroup that we noticed in previous graphs is primarily composed of triangles, representing the
United States. The other large subgroup is composed of double triangles, representing the Philippines. As
one would expect, there are far fewer connections between countries than there are between clubhouses.
Still a few connections are scattered throughout. In particular, members communicate between the US and
the Philippines. Since the network staff does not report any particular activities, this finding is unexpected.
It will be interesting to see if this pattern continues over time and whether additional connections develop
between these countries and others.

                       Figure 5. Emails between Members in Different Countries

                                                     762                                                ICLS 2006
        Figure 6 shows the gender of email communicators.    Every square represents one girl and every
triangle represents one boy. A gray line between two shapes demonstrates that emails were exchanged
between two youth of the same gender, whereas a black line indicates a connection across genders.   From
the graph we can see that communication between different genders is far more common than same gender.
Perhaps we are observing flirting?  We also see that girls email more than boys and appear more centrally
located than boys. The bridges between the two main subgroups are girls from the US emailing with boys
from the Philippines.

                                   Figure 6. Social Network and Gender
        From these series of network graphs we have a picture of what happens with email on the village.
Two subgroups emerged primarily representing members from the US and the Philippines, respectively.           A
few members connect these two groups while an encouraging amount of communication occurs between
clubhouses and even countries.    It is likely that the youth are emailing with others they have never met in
person. It is exciting that some pairs email intensively and interesting that girls seem to email more but
cross gender communication is far more common than within gender.

Future Work
        Understanding the ways groups of learners interact with one another is tricky. Researchers
interested must unpack a complexity of individuals' processes and development, and the multiple social
interactions that influence them. SNA is an exciting tool for learning science researchers interested in
group dynamics, group influences, and the social aspects of learning. It provides methodologies for
addressing how learners in a community interact with each other, gain knowledge from, and influence each
other's learning.

        This exploratory analysis of who is connecting with whom on the Computer Clubhouse Village is
a first step in understanding how networks of learners function. Viewing the graphs and exploring the
statistics provides an understanding of overall communication trends across the network. A few analyses
will improve the understanding of members' communication:

            ·     Changes over time: This includes what changes, what remains the same, and what
                  precipitates change (such as school vacations or special Clubhouse events).
            ·     Direction of email: How much do members send versus receive email and what does this
                  say about their contribution to and gain from the network?

                                                     763                                                 ICLS 2006
              ·   Cohesion: How well connected is the network overall and how connected are particular
                  groups? Do regions, gender or ages characterize cohesive subgroups?
              ·   Email Content: Ask members what they discuss including projects, personal preferences,
                  differences between their worlds, and whether they flirting.

         Once the nature of the relationships are better understood, the next step will be to explore project-
related data. SNA allows researchers to understand how ideas move through a network through a process
called diffusion of innovation. "Diffusion is the process by which an innovation is communicated through
certain channels over time among members of a social system."   (Rogers 1983 quoting Beal & Bohlen
1955). Analysis of the flow of innovation might help researchers understand how ideas are adopted in
learning communities, how network structure influences who adopts, and the factors that influence
widespread adoption. In the case of the Village, this includes who posts projects, who looks at them, who
creates their own version of a project, and who adopts project ideas into a new space. Are the youth who
email a lot considered active social participants within their clubhouses? How much are active emailers
considered active project creators? What role do they have in the transference of project ideas? This type
of work would be profoundly exciting for those who are interested in how groups of learners influence one
another.

Conclusions
         This paper considers the structure of the Computer Clubhouse social network by looking at email:
who emails whom and how much members email people outside their clubhouse.         These analyses help to
describe the nature of a community of distributed learners. The author argues that these types of analyses
are only a first step in applying SNA to learning communities and as this work progresses, it may uncover
insights into how ideas move through a network of learners and how learners influence each other.

References
Computer Clubhouse website. (n.d.). http://www.computerclubhouse.org
Computer Clubhouse Village website. (n.d.). http://village.computerclubhouse.org
Degenne, A and Forsé M (1999). Introducing Social Networks. Sage Publication, Thousand
         Oaks, CA.
Erickson, B. (2001). Good Networks and Good Jobs: The Value of Social Capital to
         Employers and Employees. Lin, et al (eds.), Social Capital: Theory and Research. Aldine de
         Gruyter, New York.
Granovetter M (1973). The Strength of Weak Ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78 (May):
         1360-1380.
Lin, (2001). Building a Network Theory of Social Capital. Lin, et al (eds.), Social Capital: Theory
         and Research. Aldine de Gruyter, New York.
Rogers. E (1995) The Diffusion of Innovations, 4th Edition.  The Free Press, New York.
Valente T (1996) Social network thresholds in the diffusion of innovations. Social
         Networks, 18: 69-89.

Acknowledgments
The author thanks Mitch Resnick, Ingeborg Endter, Chris Garrity, Mikhail Rutman, Liz Doherty, and the
Computer Clubhouse Network staff for their support of this project.

                                                     764                                                 ICLS 2006
