                   Enhancing Learning of Expository Science Texts
                    in a Remedial Reading Classroom via iSTART

                     Roger S. Taylor, Tenaha O'Reilly, Grant P. Sinclair, Danielle S. McNamara
               Institute for Intelligent Systems, The University of Memphis, Department of Psychology

          Abstract:  Scientific literacy  is a critical skill that requires the  ability to deeply   comprehend
          challenging scientific concepts. This research investigated the effectiveness of extended classroom
          practice with an automated      reading strategy  training  program   (iSTART)    that  is designed  to
          enhance the comprehension of expository science text. Twelve 9th grade students, enrolled in a
          high school  remedial   reading  program,   were    trained with  the iSTART     program.   They   were
          compared to a control group of twelve other 9th grade students, who were comparable in reading
          ability but who did not receive such training. There were no significant pretest-posttest differences
          between the groups on comprehension questions that could be answered from a single sentence
          within a passage. However, the iSTART training group performed significantly better than those
          in the control group on bridging inference questions, which require the generation of inferences
          between two or more sentences within a passage.

Introduction
          The impact of science literacy on our economy and society in general is significant, and has been widely
documented (e.g. AAAS, 1993; NRC, 1996). The recent report by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS, 2005)
describes how American leadership in the areas of science and technology has been eroded, and lays out the serious
economic   problems  that will  result if this trend is not   reversed. The   committee  rated as "most  urgent"  the  key
recommendation to "Increase America's talent pool by vastly improving K-12 mathematics and science education"
(p. 4-2).

          A primary  mode  of   science  instruction involves  the reading  of  expository  science  texts. Given that the
intended purpose of such texts is the introduction of new and unfamiliar concepts, it is not surprising that many
students have difficulty reading such materials (Bowden, 1999; Snow, 2002). This problem is exacerbated because
students do not typically use good reading strategies (Cox, 1997; Garner, 1990). Therefore, one promising approach
is to improve  students'  ability to comprehend    and  learn  from   science texts through  training in the  use of  more
effective reading strategies. Empirical studies have demonstrated that interventions targeting the enhancement of
reading strategies have been successful in improving reading comprehension (e.g. Pressley et al., 1992; Rosenshine
& Meister, 1994; Rosenshine, Meister, & Chapman, 1996).

          Recently, attention has been given to a reading intervention called Self-Explanation (Chi, De Leeuw, Chiu,
& LaVancher, 1994). Self-explanation is a process in which a learner attempts to construct a more coherent mental
representation of a poorly understood phenomenon, such as those in science texts. Previous research demonstrated
impressive learning gains for students when they were prompted to self-explain (e.g., Chi et al., 1994). McNamara
and colleagues have built upon this research by providing learners with scaffolded training in metacognitive reading
strategies (McNamara,    2004;  McNamara,      Levinstein, &   Boonthum,    2004).  In the training  program,  called self-
explanation reading training (SERT), students learned to use six metacognitive reading strategies: comprehension
monitoring, paraphrasing, prediction, logic and common sense, elaboration, and bridging inferences. Overall, the
results of SERT training indicate that it results in improved comprehension, particularly for low-knowledge readers
(McNamara, 2004; O'Reilly, Best, & McNamara, 2004).

Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading and Thinking:                         iSTART
          While previous SERT results have been encouraging, there are two limitations. First, the high cost of
human tutors makes widespread adoption of the program extremely difficult, particularly in economically distressed
areas. Second, the structure of the SERT program does not allow for dynamic instruction that is tailored to the
specific needs of the learner. Consequently, McNamara and colleagues developed an automatized version of SERT
training called iSTART (Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading and Thinking, see McNamara et al.,
2004). Training with iSTART occurs in three phases and takes approximately 2 1/2 hours. The delivery of

                                                            765                                                   ICLS 2006
information and feedback provided to the students is accomplished using animated pedagogical agents. The content
of the feedback is determined based on the quality of the students' self-explanations, as assessed via a set of
algorithms (for details, see McNamara et al., 2004).

         The first phase of training is strategy Introduction. This phase includes definitions and examples of self-
explanation  and  five  reading    strategies (i.e., comprehension    monitoring,  paraphrasing,  prediction,   bridging
inferences, and elaboration). After each strategy is presented, students are asked to answer four multiple-choice
questions and are then provided with immediate feedback by the program. The second phase of training is strategy
Demonstration. In this phase, pedagogical agents model the use of the reading strategies while self-explaining a
science text. Students are asked to identify the strategies used by the pedagogical agent during self-explanation, and
again are provided with immediate feedback. The third phase of training is strategy Practice. In this phase, students
read two short science passages and are asked to apply the newly learned strategies while typing self-explanations of
the sentences in the texts. As they proceed through the text, several algorithms are employed to evaluate the quality
(e.g., self-explanation length   and the  number     and type   of content words)  of the  generated self-explanations
(McNamara    et al., 2004).   Based  upon this  analysis,  scaffolded  feedback is  provided. For  instance,  a    student
providing an "impoverished" self-explanation that does not go beyond the content of the text's sentence is prompted
by the agent to provide more information.

         The iSTART system is adaptive and responsive to the user by providing feedback that is appropriate for
specific level of the student. Investigations have revealed that using iSTART improves comprehension as compared
to normal reading controls (O'Reilly, Sinclair, & McNamara, 2004a). Furthermore, research has shown the benefits
of self-explanation training for low-knowledge readers, less-skilled readers, and for readers with little or no prior
knowledge of reading strategies (Magliano et al., 2005; McNamara, 2004; McNamara, O'Reilly, Best, & Ozuru, in
press; O'Reilly, Sinclair, & McNamara, 2004b). However, to date, there has been no study examining how self-
explanation training affects the comprehension of less skilled readers over an extended period of post-training self-
explanation practice.

Current Study
         In the current study, we investigated the impact of iSTART in an ecologically valid, but highly challenging
situation. That is to say, the administration at a local high school approached our research team for some assistance
in helping with a remedial reading program. The administration had identified the 50 students exhibiting the lowest
scores on an eighth grade reading comprehension proficiency exam, and offered them the opportunity to participate
in a remedial reading class to enhance their reading comprehension skills. Twenty-five students were offered the
class in the fall semester. Fifteen students accepted the offer.

         Our goal was to integrate iSTART into the remedial reading class.      At the beginning of the academic year
we designed a curriculum that included iSTART training, followed by three weeks of extended practice using the
iSTART    reading    strategies.   We  compared      the iSTART-trained    students   to regular students on       several
comprehension measures at various points throughout the training/extended practice period to assess any beneficial
effects of the iSTART training.

         It is again emphasized that this study has high ecological validity because the intervention (i.e. pre-testing,
iSTART training and extended practice, post-testing) was conducted by high-school teachers in their regular classes.
In addition, all the texts used during the extended practice sessions were taken directly from the students' textbooks.

Method

Participants
         The initial sample consisted of 93 9th grade students from a suburban Tennessee high school who were
enrolled in a 9th grade life science course. Fifteen of these students, identified by the school as having reading
comprehension difficulties based on an 8th grade reading exam, were enrolled in a special reading class designed to
improve their reading comprehension. Three of the 15 reading class students did not complete the pretest reading
ability measure and were, therefore, not included in these analyses. The remaining twelve students served as the
iSTART group.   Twelve students from the life science class were found who matched the iSTART students based on
their pretest scores on a standardized measure of reading ability. This matched group of 12 students from the life

                                                            766                                                ICLS 2006
science class served as the control group.

Materials
        Standardized Reading Ability. Reading ability was measured by the Gates-MacGinitie reading skill test for
grades 7/9 (form K at pretest, form L at posttest). The Gates-MacGinitie is a 48 item, four-alternative, multiple-
choice measure of reading skill designed to assess comprehension on several short text passages.

        Prior   Science   Knowledge.   Prior   science knowledge    was  measured    with a  20­item, four-alternative,
multiple-choice   test to assess students' science  knowledge.   The    test covered several areas including   biology,
chemistry, earth science, research methods and mathematics. Questions were selected from high school science texts
collected from several states (i.e., Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia).

        Pretest   Passage   Comprehension.     The pretest passage  was  a   333 word passage   on earthquakes   which
described the definition and causes of various types of earthquakes. The 25 sentence passage had a Flesch Reading
Ease of 61.46 and a Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level of 8.0.      An accompanying set of eight open-ended questions were
developed for the passage. The answers to four of the questions could be found within a single sentence of the
passage, and are referred to as text-based questions. The answers to the remaining four questions required the reader
to combine information contained in two or more sentences of the passage, and are referred to as bridging inference
questions. An example     of a text-based  question was   "What  is a subduction  boundary?"   while  an example  of a
bridging inference question was "Describe how earthquakes occur according to the elastic-rebound theory."

        Posttest Passage Comprehension. The posttest passage was a 284 word passage on red blood cells which
described the structure and function of red blood cells in the human body. The 21 sentence passage had a Flesch
Reading Ease of 59.06 and a Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level of 8.4. Eight open-ended questions (four text-based and
four bridging inference   questions),  similar to those in the pretest, were   developed  based on the   content of the
posttest passage. An example of a text-based question was "How does sickle-cell disease get its name?" while an
example of a bridging inference question was "Explain why blood plasma is a poor carrier of oxygen?"

Procedure
        Prior to  the  experiment,  the remedial   reading class teacher attended  a two   day workshop   that covered
general principles of learning, memory, and reading comprehension, as well as a detailed lecture on iSTART and
how to utilize it in the classroom.

        The experiment consisted of four phases: pretest, training, extended practice, and posttest. The pretest and
posttest phases were identical for both the iSTART and control conditions, while the iSTART training and extended
practice were performed only by students in the iSTART condition.

        During the pretest, students in the iSTART and control group were administered the pretest measures in the
following order and time frame: prior science knowledge (10 minutes), Gates-MacGinitie reading measure (Form K,
15 minutes), and the passage on earthquakes along with the set of comprehension questions (15 minutes).

        During the training, students in the iSTART group progressed through the three sections of the iSTART
program  over   the course   of  three class   periods on  three consecutive   days. Beginning   the  following  week,
participants in the iSTART condition entered the extended strategy practice phase. This phase took place over the
course of three consecutive weeks. Each week the students self-explained two texts that were taken directly from the
textbooks used in their regular courses.  On day one, the students used the computer portion of iSTART practice to
self-explain text one, with feedback being provided by the pedagogical agent in the same manner as during the
practice phase of iSTART training. On the following day (day two), the teacher led the class in a self-explanation
task of text 1, and provided feedback on performance. On day three, students used the practice section of iSTART to
self-explain text 2, while on the following day (day four) the teacher led the practice for text 2. The time spent on
practice each week on the two texts was approximately three hours, one and a half hours of iSTART practice and
one and a half hours of teacher-guided practice. On the fifth day of the week, students were given quizzes on the
material that had been covered during that week. The quizzes were also administered to the control subjects, who
had studied the material in the classroom in the manner normally used by the life science teacher.

                                                           767                                                 ICLS 2006
         During the posttest, students in the iSTART and control groups were administered the posttest measures in
the following order and time frame: Gates-MacGinitie reading measure (Form L, 15 minutes), and the passage on
red blood cells along with the set of comprehension questions (15 minutes).

Results

Pretest Equivalence: Reading Comprehension and Prior Science Knowledge
         The twelve students in the iSTART condition were matched with twelve students in the control condition
based on the number of correct responses and the number of questions attempted on the standardized measure of
reading comprehension                   (Gates-MacGinitie   pretest scores).  T-tests revealed  no significant difference in  pretest
reading scores between the iSTART condition (M = 9.75, SD = 4.29) and the control condition (M = 9.92, SD =
4.36), t(22) = 0.09,                 p = .93 (2-tailed), and no  significant difference in pretest  prior science knowledge    scores
between the iSTART condition (M = 0.35, SD = 0.09) and the control condition (M = 0.39, SD = 0.10), t(22) = 0.97,
p = .34 (2-tailed).

Text-Based Questions
         Performance on the text-based questions was assessed by scoring the number of correct answers to the text-
based questions as a proportion of the total number of text-based questions (n = 4).                 A mixed-model ANOVA was
performed on the between-subjects factor of condition (iSTART, control) and the repeated-measures factor of time
(pretest reading comprehension, posttest reading comprehension).                  Due to problems with the high-school computer
network, the data for six students' pretest reading comprehension scores was incomplete.                   These observations were
replaced with means based on the total sample1. There was a significant increase in performance over time, F(1, 22)
=10.6, p = .004. There was no significant effect of condition, F(1, 22) = 1.08, p = .311. The interaction of time and
condition was not significant, F(1,22) = 0.038, p = .847.

Bridging Inference Questions
         Performance on the bridging inference questions was assessed by scoring the number of correct answers to
the bridging inference                 questions as a proportion of  the total number   of bridging inference  questions  (n = 4). A
mixed-model    ANOVA                    was  performed   on the between-subjects  factor   of condition (iSTART,   control)  and the
repeated-measures factor of time (pretest reading comprehension, posttest reading comprehension). As noted earlier,
missing data for six students' pretest reading comprehension scores for the pretest text were replaced with means
based on the total sample2. There was significant improvement in performance over time, F(1, 22) = 58.15, p = .000.
There was a significant effect of condition, F(1, 22) = 7.68, p = .011. Most importantly, the interaction of time and
condition was significant, F(1,22) = 7.65, p = .011 (see Figure 1), and indicated that the students in the iSTART
condition exhibited a greater increase in performance from pretest (M = 2.00, SD = 2.09) to posttest (M = 35.42, SD
= 14.92) than that of the students in the control condition from pretest (M = 2.08, SD = 7.22) to posttest (M = 17.71,
SD = 14.56). Additionally, the difference between the iSTART condition and the control condition at posttest was
significant, t(22) = 2.94, p = .004.

                                  40
                                  35
                                  30
                                  25
                                                                                                               iSTART
                                  20
                                  15                                                                           Control
                                  10
                                   5
                                   0
                                        Pretest (Earthquakes)             Posttest (Cells)

                                  Figure 1. Percentage of correct bridging inference questions between conditions.

                                                                         768                                                ICLS 2006
               Percentage Correct
Discussion
         The aim   of this  study was to  examine   the  potential enhancement      of  student  learning from  expository
science texts with extended classroom practice using the iSTART system. The key finding from this work was that
this type of instructional  intervention did in   fact result in significantly  greater performance   on   comprehension
questions that required students to make inferences between different parts of a science text passage. This finding is
especially important because this improved performance occurred on a more challenging aspect of comprehension.

         During the course of the pretest phase, it was discovered that the school's computer system was not as
reliable as had been believed, resulting in some data loss during that phase of the experiment. As a result of that
discovery, the iSTART system has been reconfigured so that data collection can be managed independently of a
school's computer network. Thus, this classroom experience helped us to identify a weakness in the software which,
because we were able to address the problem, improves the viability of the iSTART program in school settings.

         It should be noted that the passage for pretest comprehension assessment was on the physical science topic
"earthquakes," while the passage for posttest assessment was on the biological science topic "red blood cells." A
possible explanation for the higher overall scores on the posttest questions (red blood cells) is that the students in the
study were enrolled in a life science class (a pre-biology course). Therefore, it is possible that the students were
more familiar with the posttest materials. Nonetheless, it is clear that the iSTART trained students exhibited greater
ability at answering the bridging inference questions after the training and practice phases of the experiment.

         One  of  the main  strengths of  this study   was its high    ecological validity. Upon   receiving a  request to
integrate the iSTART system into a local public high-school's remedial reading program, we were able to provide
the teacher with the ability to conduct the training and practice in a normal classroom setting using texts from the
student's textbooks.  In the past, iSTART, and its feedback algorithms that are implemented during the practice
phase, only included two training texts.  This study indicated that iSTART practice can be readily extended to other
texts.

         A second encouraging factor is that, even with a limited number of students in a single remedial reading
class, it is clear that the iSTART training had a significant facilitative impact on reading comprehension ability.
While computer problems at pretest resulted in partial data loss, it is still clear that in comparison to the control
group, the iSTART group performed significantly better on the posttest comprehension questions. Moreover, this
result emerged on the more challenging bridging inference questions. In other words, the iSTART training helped
these  students, identified as  needing  remediation    by the   school   system,  to  more  deeply  understand     difficult
expository science texts. We are currently performing more fine-grained analyses, including the hand-coding of the
self-explanations, to more precisely determine the mechanism via which the training can enhance learning.

         Previous  research  has  suggested  that  iSTART     training is effective because   it improves   the quality of
students' elaborations (McNamara, O'Reilly, Best, and Ozuru, in press) and encourages students to use their general
knowledge to construct deeper representations of the text (McNamara, 2004). The current results make sense with
respect to these previous findings given that the more challenging bridging inference questions often require the use
of elaborations and general knowledge.

         With growing recognition of the national importance of science literacy, the ability to meaningfully read
and learn from expository science texts is a critical educational issue. The results presented here demonstrate the
value of using a powerful educational tool such as the iSTART instructional system.

Endnotes
(1)  The results were the same when the missing values were replaced with the matched students' scores.
(2)  The results were the same when the missing values were replaced with the matched students' scores.

References
American  Association   for the  Advancement    of Science    (AAAS),   Project   2061. (1993).  Benchmarks     for science
         literacy. New York: Oxford University Press.

                                                           769                                                   ICLS 2006
Bowen, B. A. (1999). Four puzzles in adult literacy: Reflections on the national adult literacy survey. Journal of
         Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 42, 314­323.
Chi, M.  T.    H., De    Leeuw,    N.,  Chiu,  M.,    &  LaVancher,    C.   (1994). Eliciting self-explanations    improves
         understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Cox, B. D. (1997). The rediscovery of the active learner in adaptive contexts: A developmental-historical analysis of
         transfer of training. Educational Psychologist, 32, 41-55.
Garner, R. (1990). When children and adults do not use learning strategies: Toward a theory of settings. Review of
         Educational Psychology, 60, 517-529.
Magliano, J. P., Todaro, S., Millis, K. K. Wiemer-Hastings, K., Kim, H. J., & McNamara, D. S. (2005). Changes in
         reading   strategies as a  function  of   reading training:  A comparison    of live and    computerized  training.
         Journal of Educational Computing Research, 32, 185-208.
McNamara, D. S. (2004). SERT: Self-Explanation Reading Training. Discourse Processes, 38, 1-30.
McNamara,   D.   S.,   Levinstein, I.  B., &  Boonthum,    C. (2004).   iSTART:   Interactive strategy  training for  active
         reading and thinking. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36, 222-233.
McNamara,   D.     S., O'Reilly,   T., Best,  R.,  &   Ozuru,  Y.  (in  press). Improving  adolescent    students'  reading
         comprehension with iSTART.         Journal of Educational Computing Research.
National Academies      of Sciences    (NAS). (2005).   Rising above    the gathering  storm:  Energizing  and   employing
         America for a brighter economic future. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research      Council  (NRC).     (1996). National   science  education  standards.  Washington,      DC: National
         Academy Press.
O'Reilly, T., Best, R., & McNamara, D.S. (2004). Self-Explanation Reading Training: Effects for low-knowledge
         readers.  In  K.  Forbus, D.  Gentner,    T. & Regier (Eds.),  Proceedings   of the  26th  Annual Meeting    of the
         Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1053-1058). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
O'Reilly, T.P., Sinclair, G.P., & McNamara, D.S. (2004a). Reading strategy training: Automated versus live. In K.
         Forbus, D. Gentner, T. & Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
         Society (pp. 1059-1064). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
O'Reilly, T.P., Sinclair, G.P., & McNamara, D.S. (2004b). iSTART: A web-based reading strategy intervention that
         improves students' science comprehension. In Kinshuk, D. G. Sampson, & P. Isaías (Eds.), Proceedings of
         the IADIS International Conference Cognition and Exploratory Learning in Digital Age: CELDA 2004 (pp.
         173-180). Lisbon, Portugal: IADIS Press.
Pressley, M., Wood, E., Woloshyn, V. E., Martin, V., King, A., & Menke, D. (1992). Encouraging mindful use of
         prior  knowledge:      Attempting    to   construct  explanatory    answers    facilitates  learning.  Educational
         Psychologist, 27, 91-109.
Rosenshine, B.,    &   Meister, C.  (1994).  Reciprocal   teaching:   A review   of the  research.  Review of   Educational
         Research, 64, 479-530.
Rosenshine, B.,    Meister, C.,  &  Chapman,   S.   (1996).  Teaching   students to  generate questions: A     review of the
         intervention studies. Review of Educational Research, 66, 181-221.
Snow, C. (2002). Reading for understanding: Toward an R & D program in reading comprehension. Santa Monica,
         CA: RAND.

                                                              770                                                  ICLS 2006
