                                              The Expert Novice

                       Bobbie Turniansky, Dina Friling, Kaye College of Education, Beer Sheva, Israel
                                              bobbie@erez.org.il, friling@macam.ac.il

          Abstract: The central proposal of this paper is that the novice experience is critical to the learning
          process of  groups    as well  as individuals.    How   do  "experts" become    "novices"    and move    in
          directions that require them to put aside their theories of action?       How does a group of experts
          collectively accomplish that?     From our experiences as members of the ACE teacher educator
          team, and the research we have done on the team over the past three years, we propose that not
          only is the novice state of mind essential for professional development, change, and creativity, it
          also enables the teacher educator to empathize with students' experiences of being novices.             We
          propose  a  new   way    of looking  at the   term "professional   development"    which   suggests     that
          "novice" is not   the opposite   of "expert".   These   two states are not   different sides of  the same
          continuum - they can exist simultaneously.

The Concept of Novice Within the Community
          Often, making a difference involves making a change and transformational change means learning.                  This
paper will briefly   examine    the development   of   a community    of  learners,  a team of   teacher  educators,   and   the
importance of the concept of "novice" within that community.         The central proposals of this paper are that the novice
experience is critical to the learning processes of the group as well as the individuals and that the novice state of
mind fosters the conditions that enable change in those two spheres.       As opposed to the traditional way of looking at
professional development as a linear progression from novice to expert, we propose that these are not different sides
of the same continuum - that "novice" is not the opposite of "expert".          These are two states of mind and ways of
being that can exist simultaneously.

          The authors of this paper are members of the ACE team and the data on team processes were gathered
through participant observation and content analysis of semi-structured interviews with all team members, meeting
protocols, email exchanges and informal conversations over the past three years.

Where it all Started
          The ACE staff is a group of experienced teacher educators working together to develop and implement an
experimental program of teacher education within the Kaye College of Education in Israel.            The long-range goal of
the program is to bring about a transformation in teacher education and a resulting change in the state educational
system.

          Over the past four    years  the  program   has   moved  from   an idea  to  a reality and the   program     staff has
transformed itself from a collection of individuals to a "group" and eventually, a "team ­ "a small number of people
with complementary skills who are committed to a common purpose, performance goals, and approach for which
they hold themselves mutually accountable", (Katzenbach & Smith, 1993, p. 45).           This process was accompanied by
differences of opinion, trial and error, fights over territory and status and the necessity of learning to cope with a
high level of ambiguity.    It was also accompanied by feelings of achievement and satisfaction, group cohesiveness
and support, and a clear program and team identity.

          One  of the central   features of the program     that resulted from  this  multi-faceted  experience   is practical
wisdom.    This   approach  sees    knowledge  as emerging    through   experience   but experience  in  and   of itself is  not
enough.   That experience must also be researched and learned in order to be understood.          Since learning is the main
topic that concerns   the   team,   developing    its own   practical wisdom,    researching  and    understanding     its   own
experiences, is a natural part of the group process.

The Past as Prologue
          No group   starts out  as   an empty  shell  just waiting  to be filled.   When talking about a community of
learners, it is important to realize that each individual comes into the group with the outcomes of past individual
learning. Whether people come together to form a group or someone joins an existing group, each member of these

                                                              778                                                    ICLS 2006
groups comes with a past ­ with an inheritance that becomes a "dowry".            From this point on, a process of mutual
interaction begins. Each person, who they are and what they bring with them, interacts with the group as a unit and
with the individuals within it.     There   is a  web   of interaction and   influence and  although  it cannot   usually be
determined exactly what influences what or who influences who and to what degree, the one certainty is that there
are mutual influences.    Therefore, it is important to understand who comprises the team and what the members of
the team bring with them.

         This  year's  team   of   10 is a  heterogeneous    group   whose   diversity finds  expression    on a  variety of
dimensions.    The  team    can collectively   be described  as women     and men   with an  age range   of about  15  years,
married and single, with children and without, grandparents and the parents of school-age children.               They were
brought  up in Israel, America,    Romania     and  Egypt  and  are Jewish,  Moslem    and Druze    with mother   tongues of
Hebrew, Arabic, English, Romanian and French.         They live in big cities, suburbs, rural areas and kibbutz spread out
geographically over an area of 185 kilometers.      They have formal education in philosophy, educational counseling,
biology, literature, psychology and education and have taught in higher educational settings, kindergarten, primary
and secondary schools and have been school principals.

         Each individual has numerous theories of action (Argyris & Schon, 1978), theories, learned or developed,
that tell them what to do to achieve a specific outcome in a specific situation.    As experienced teacher educators and
as experts in their specific fields, ACE team members have theories of action that have served them well.         One proof
that their theories of action are successful is that they were selected to join the ACE program on the basis of past
performance.   But on the other hand, one of the missions of the program is to develop something new ­ a different
way of helping students prepare themselves for the teaching profession in hopes of educating teachers who will
make a difference.

         In many    cases  of change,   there  is a gap  between    knowledge  and  practice; between    vision   and reality.
Often,  resistance to change    is responsible  for much    of that gap.  What helped this team overcome some of the
obstacles of change?   How do "experts" move in directions that require them to put their theories of action on the
side?  How does a group of experts do that as a collective?          What are the cognitive and affective aspects of the
process?  These are questions that will be briefly considered in this paper.

Professional Development and the Novice State of Mind
         Most  views   of   professional    development    assume   that  novices will   develop  expertise   based   on  the
experiences in their work setting (Daley, 1999).        Many definitions of professional development view it as linear
improvement    as  professionals    progress   in their career.     Sometimes  this viewpoint    is clearly   expressed  and
sometimes it is implied.    The professional starts out at point A and progresses to point B and beyond.          Often it is
conceptualized as "keeping current".      For example, the Commission on Applied and Clinical Sociology (undated)
defines professional   development    as "a   process   of learning and   keeping up-to-date  in  one's  area  of expertise".
Fullan  (1991) looks   specifically  at the professional   development    of teachers  and takes a  much   broader  view  by
including "the sum    total of  formal   and  informal  learning  experiences  throughout   one's   career from   pre-service
teacher education to retirement" (p. 326).

         In light  of  the  ACE    team  experience,    we  would    like to  endorse  looking at   the  term  "professional
development" in a way similar to more recent perspectives on teacher professional development (Villegas-Reimers,
2003).  This approach to professional development is characterized by a focus on a series of related events based in a
constructivistic pedagogy that emphasizes the active learner rather than one-time workshops or lectures using on a
transmission-based model in which the learner is passive.         Professional development is a collaborative process of
culture building and not mere skill training (Cochran-Smith and Lytle, 2001) and therefore it must be linked to a
realistic context and work to develop staff member communities of learning and inquiry.

         We propose that if this view is accepted, the most effective way to further professional development is to
adopt the novice state of mind and act in accordance with it.

                                                              779                                                  ICLS 2006
Ruthi and Ariela - Two Views of "Novice"
        Ruthi, an ACE team member from its inception, talked about the juxtaposition of expertise and learning, in
her interview.   The experience of "being in two worlds" became apparent to her when this "expert" teacher, with
long-term experience in both secondary and higher-education, had to face the task of teaching others to teach.

        "I think that on one side it's because I'm new.        I never supervised student teachers in the field
        before, and I don't have all the most basic knowledge or expertise.       Right, I'm a teacher and I've
        been a teacher for many years and that's a type of expertise also but I feel much more comfortable
        in this part because there is nothing that I feel I built inside myself that is stable and solid and that
        has proved itself and that I want to insist on.     I'm more open.     I accept a lot of things and it's
        become    clear that I  learned a lot  of things  that  I thought   I already   knew.   But with time, I
        discovered that I didn't know them well enough.        I'm still pretty much in the learning stage about
        different aspects of supervising including all kinds of paradoxes and uncertainties and things are
        very, very open."

        On the surface, this quote from Ruthi seems to present a paradox.         The lack of knowledge she expresses
here tells us that she is a novice. However, admitting doubt or a lack of knowledge requires a basic confidence in
her own abilities, a state not typical of novices (Daley, 1999).

        Ruthi tells us that when she has a solid, proven theory of action she is likely to insist on its correctness and
its implementation. But when it comes to field supervision, she has no theory as yet.      She admits she is a novice and
therefore is open to learning.  Only because of her expertise can Ruthi identify what she knows and does not know
and isolate a  specific area in which   her novice  state  is  acknowledged.    However, Ruthi is not a novice in the
traditional sense of the word.  She is an expert and she is aware of her expertise and this awareness is the tool that
allows her to admit her inexperience.

        The novice experience can also be conceptualized as a state of mind not connected to a specific perceived
lack. After a routine staff meeting in which the concept of "novice" was briefly mentioned, Ariela talked about the
co-existence of expert and novice and its implications for her in an email exchange with other staff members.

        "One   of my    strongest experiences  in starting  to  act in a  new  field is a feeling of dissonance,
        cognitive   and  professional, that is created as   a  result  of the tension   between my   professional
        repertoire and experience that I bring with me and the desire to put it on the side in order to permit
        newness, listening to others and a real dialogue aimed at creating something new.         When trying to
        do this I rely on Freire's argument that in order to have a real dialogue, you have to feel that the
        other person has something worth learning and if I know so much, it will be hard to teach me.        On
        the other hand, I discovered that for me, the cost of doing this is heavy because shedding my cloak
        of professional knowledge and experience sometimes leaves me feeling naked, I have nothing.
        I'm left with the question of "what's my part in this new dialogue?"

        But in the end, I don't really remove my cloak of professional knowledge.          It changes along with
        me in this process of renewed dialogue.    In this way, when I put it across by shoulders again, both
        of us are already in a new place.   In short, I don't take off my uniform, leave the field and return to
        the place I knew before.     Rather I continue in the field that I was in, alone and with others, and
        redefine it: different, improved, new and known together."

        In  this quote,  Ariela is  basically giving us   a description   of  professional development   as a  process of
transformation.  Through reflective dialogue, her understandings and knowledge are constantly changing although
her basic professional identity remains the same.   As Don Schon said, "Our systems need to maintain their identity,
and their ability to support the self-identity of those who belong to them, but they must at the same time be capable
of transforming themselves" (Schon 1973, p. 57).     Although he was talking about organizational systems, his views
of the process and necessity of transformation can be applied to individuals as well.     How can this process of change
and identity maintenance be nurtured and sustained?    What does it mean to change and not change at the same time?

        Each team member came into the ACE program with a "double dose" of expertise.                Each individual was
formally educated in a specific subject matter and each is also an experienced teacher educator.         But as Ariela's

                                                            780                                                  ICLS 2006
quote shows, openness to learning with and from others is possible only if our own expertise is not allowed to take
center stage. We have to become "zipped experts", meaning the expertise is moved to the background although it is
always available to be called into action, or unzipped, when needed.         The essence of individual expertise doesn't
shrink; only the volume that it takes up in day-to-day working.      The aspect of being an expert in a specific field of
knowledge is preserved but the aspect of expert as conferring overall status is rejected.      The specific subject matter
expertise retains a lot of its flavor but the teacher education expertise becomes open to change.       Having individual
expertise is what gives confidence, a faith in oneself that allows one to "zip it up" and at the same time to admit
vulnerability and be  willing  to take   risks in a changing,   uncertain and   complex   environment.   Individually and
collectively, team members can say "I don't know", "I'm not sure", or "Let's try it and see what happens".       They are
not really novices in the true sense of the word - they might better be called "expert novices" or having "the novice
state of mind" and they are willing to act accordingly.

          From this perspective, it seems that these two states of being - novice and expert - are not different sides of
the same continuum - they can exist simultaneously.

Easier Said Than Done
          Even when the team culture encourages, supports and even subtly requires its members to adopt the novice
state of mind, there is no guarantee they will do so.     What is obvious and taken for granted by some members may
be unnoticed or unappreciated by others.

          The novice state of mind is an essential part of becoming a full member of the ACE team and all that
implies.  The limited scope of this paper does not permit an explanation of what it means to be a member of the
team, but suffice it to say that it is a very intensive, high involvement experience.        Although the ideal situation
would be  otherwise,  the  team   is not a single   unit.  That  reality was expressed    in the interviews when   veteran
members of the team were referred to by terms such as "the inner circle" and "the nuclear team".

          The veteran team members, those who joined the program during the first 2 years, went through a personal
and collective novice stage.  The process was a natural one, inherent in the process of developing something new - a
new  program    aimed at  changing   the perceptions  of  teaching   and learning in  the educational   system.  The staff
realized that going in a new direction meant being willing to put their old perceptions and ways of doing things on
the side.  In   addition, change  always   entails  frustration  and ambiguity   and  being   part of a group   of novices
legitimates that feeling.  But even at that starting point, not all of the original staff members opened themselves to
that experience.  They    stayed  within the   confines   of their expertise and  the result  was  turnover of  some  staff
members during the first year and at its end.

          Towards the end of the second year, as a result of reflection on the team's ways of working and being,
"novice" became one of the team's central values and took on a life of its own.           Being a novice was no longer
viewed as just part of a developmental process that occurred and then ended.        "Being a novice" became a state that
was actively encouraged and in its ideal form, non-ending.

          After that initial two-year  period,    new members      who   joined the team  did  not  go  through  the same
experience and there are several possible explanations why they did not.        One possibility is that newcomers entering
an established group with a strong group identity may believe they have to prove themselves and may not feel they
have the luxury of putting their knowledge aside and opening themselves up totally to the new experience.            From
this point of view, it may be unreasonable to expect that newcomers will allow themselves to show their uncertainty.
Their actions may also have been a display of "respect".      Perhaps they did not feel comfortable raising the questions
and doubts of the novice because they perceived themselves as entering something already formed, something other
people had put a lot of time and effort into, something that had been carefully thought out.          From the other side,
perhaps the veteran members did not encourage questions and doubts as fully as they should have because of an
unconscious desire to protect what they had worked on so long and so hard.

          Individual confidence is not enough to allow the novice state of mind to emerge.            Other conditions are
necessary and the basic one is trust - trust in others that the outcomes of openness and of exposed vulnerability will
be used in positive ways and not as ammunition.       If newcomers do not have basic trust in the rest of the group they
will not allow themselves to join the novice experience.        Whatever the reasons, the outcome was that the newer
members were socialized into an existing situation rather than taking an active part in developing that situation.    The

                                                             781                                                 ICLS 2006
end result was that they stayed within their expertise and therefore, for the moment at least, on the periphery of the
team.

Professional Development as integral to Organizational Learning
          Learning,   change  and  development   are   terms   used  in both   individual  and    organizational spheres.   The
processes  in   these  two  spheres   are not  identical   but  they   support  each    other.    Previously   the question  of
simultaneously changing and maintaining identity was raised and it was proposed that this is what occurs when the
novice and the expert co-exist.    Perhaps some answers about facilitating that process can be found in the way the
ACE team views learning, knowledge and expertise.          Once again, Ruthi provides a cogent perspective on the effect
that ACE had on her approach to knowledge and learning.

          "There's a different type of thinking here.    In my first year I was very confused and I felt I wasn't
          working.    It took me a long time until I started to see how things were done and that's exactly
          what I think parallels to a certain extent the difference between the perception that says that your
          knowledge is your personal knowledge.          You acquire it or create it, build it, whatever.     But it's
          yours.   It's personally yours. You control it.   There's a difference between that approach and the
          creation of group knowledge that doesn't turn into the exclusive possession of one person.            In this
          sense it's a completely new experience, completely new.            It took me a long time to understand
          what's   going on,  to  understand  that  it's okay  ­   I don't have  to  be  the sole  possessor   of  this
          knowledge and it doesn't have to stay only with me.         It's out there and everyone needs to use it.
          That is, all of us together own the knowledge."

          This quote illustrates how the approach to knowledge, to expertise, to learning within ACE differs from the
approach that many academics are used to.       As much as possible, members each place their individual dowry into
the collective pot and everyone else is free to, and expected to, use it.     But use refers to something more than passive
use.  Using knowledge, becoming part of the collective ownership of knowledge, implies changing that knowledge,
adding  to it,  making   it personal.   Although    it may   seem    like  a contradiction   in   terms, making    learning and
knowledge "personal" also exists on the group level.           In other words, individual learning is diffused among the
whole team and becomes both individually owned by each team member and collectively owned by the group.                     The
person who is most open to the process of learning is the one who has adopted the novice state of mind.

          On   the individual  level,  professionals   are expected     to   continually   learn  and obviously,   professional
development means learning.       In addition, just as there is professional development on the individual level, there is
professional   development   on   the group   level and   this collective  process   is  a crucial element   in  organizational
learning.  But the question is "what are we learning"?      We can learn how to do what we do in a better way ­ that is,
we can "improve" what we are doing.       This type of learning, what Argyris and Schön (1978) refer to as single-loop
learning,  does not raise the question of whether what we are learning to do better is the thing we should be doing at
all.  Single-loop   learning  is  instrumental, adaptive    learning    that changes    strategies of  action  or  assumptions
underlying those strategies in ways that leave the values of a theory of action unchanged.            Although we may keep
improving, we can easily fall into what Levitt & March (1988) term a "competency trap" ­ continuing to do what we
are doing because it works although there may be something much better that we could be doing..              In much the same
way, Tucker et al, (2002) argue that organizational learning can be prevented by problem-solving behaviors that
focus  solely  on  remedying   or  overcoming   immediate      obstacles   in  part because    short-term  success  diminishes
motivation to remove underlying causes of problems.

          On the other hand, the learning process can be one in which everything we have done in the past is open to
examination    and  re-evaluation.    Double-loop   learning   (Argyis    &   Schön,   1978)   is anticipative  and generative
learning that occurs when underlying norms, policies, and objectives are examined and modified if they need to be.
The basic assumptions concerning the connections between actions and outcomes are re-evaluated.

          The learning organization has to deal with various paradoxes including the tensions inherent in having to
slow  down   in  order to   speed up  (action versus   reflection),  and   the use  of  conflict  and confrontation  to  enable
collaboration (Laiken, 2001).     Organizations tend to be conflict-adverse (Laiken, 1994 in Laiken, 2001) but in the
learning organization, problems and differences of opinion are viewed as opportunities for learning.               Mistakes can
be admitted because the culture is one of problem solving and not one of assigning blame.

                                                               782                                                    ICLS 2006
        What is the role of the novice state of mind in this process?      Individuals in the novice state of mind view
questions as a   necessity, see everything   as requiring explanation,  regard      nothing as sacred and   know  that   the
possibility of making a mistake is always lurking in the background.       Novices in this situation are allowed to make
mistakes, something   real  novices fear (Daley,   1999).  In  short, the  novice    state of mind  fosters the conditions
conducive to double-loop learning.

The Importance of the Novice State of Mind
        The present state in which not all of the staff members are fully integrated into the team is not the ideal
situation to be in. Each year there are some changes in membership, consequently, there are always newcomers.
Therefore it is  important   to ask how   the   team  can improve    their processes:      What  can  the team   do   to let
"newcomers" voice their opinions, their doubts, their expectations and desires?       How can the team enable/encourage
newcomers to experience the situation of being a "novice" as the veteran team members did?          How can the image of
what it means to be a "novice" be made into a positive, crucial position that newcomers will not shy away from?

        There are no easy answers to these questions and they have formed the basis of several discussions over the
past two years.  The first step towards changing the situation has been taken - the issue has been acknowledged.        The
next step is still to be built and it forms a central focus of the team's learning.

        ACE focuses on helping its students learn to "read the situations" they are in.       This approach is based on the
idea that educational situations are complex situations composed of actors, settings, institutions, behaviors, thoughts,
emotions, and so on in addition to the interactions between these elements.     Therefore, it is usually ineffective to just
pick a solution out of a learned repertoire and implement it "as is" in a given situation.    Reading a situation involves
asking oneself   what is known   and   what  needs to be  learned about    it, what  I already  know  about    being in  this
situation and what I have to approach with fresh eyes - that is, to be a novice.     In the beginning this is easy because
the students are novices in the truest sense of the word.   But ACE would like them to see the value in becoming
experts while retaining the novice spirit in the future also.  By this we mean "reading the situation" by integrating
the expert who is self confident enough to approach the "unknown" situation with the fresh eyes of the novice who
faces each situation as new.    The field is always novel in some way therefore learning the experience is always
necessary and that means always retaining the novice experience in some sense in spite of the temptation to rest on
expertise alone.

        Looking at these two foci, the novice state of mind the team hopes their students will develop and retain
long after they leave the program and what goes on within the team itself, it can be seen that both cases refer to the
same thing - learning.   The    novice state of mind  is what  allows  the learning    process  to continue -  both  on  the
individual and on the group level.     It allows for true dialogue based on the premise that there is always room for
what I can learn from others and with others.

        The novice state of mind, trust, sharing, individual and group learning - all these are critical components of
true professional development and enablers of the double-loop learning necessary for real change to occur.

References
Argyris, C. & Schön, D. (1978)   Organizational Learning: A theory of action perspective.        MA: Addison-Wesley.
Cochran-Smith, M. & Lytle, S.    (2001). Beyond certainty: Taking an inquiry stance on practice.      In A. Lieberman &
        L. Miller (eds.).    Teachers  Caught   in the Action:  Professional    development    that matters.   New   York:
        Teachers College Press.
Commission    on    Applied  and  Clinical   Sociology    (undated).    Glossary.      Retrieved   March.   5, 2006   from
        http://www.sociologycommission.org/docs/GLOSSARY-%205-16-03.htm.
Daley, B.  (1999).   Novice to expert: An exploration of how professionals learn.          Adult Education Quarterly. 49,
        133-147.
Fullan, M., with Steigelbauer, S. (1991). The New Meaning of Educational Change (2nd ed.). New York: Teachers
        College Press.
Katzenbach, J. & Smith, D. (1993).     The Wisdom of Teams.    Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Laiken, M. (2001).   Models of organizational learning: paradoxes and best practices in the post industrial workplace.
        NALL Working Paper #25.          Toronto, Canada: The Research Network on New Approaches to Lifelong

                                                           783                                                    ICLS 2006
       Learning, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the University of Toronto.   Retrieved March. 5,
       2006 from http://edu.oise.utoronto.ca/depts/sese/csew/nall/res/25MarilynLaiken.pdf.
Laiken, M. (1994).     Conflict in teams: Problem or opportunity?   Lectures in Health Promotion      Series No. 4.
       Toronto, Canada: Centre for Health Promotion, University of Toronto.
Levitt, B. & March, J. (1988).  Organizational learning. American Review of Sociology, 14, 319-340.
Schön, D. A. (1973)    Beyond the Stable State. Public and private learning in a changing society. Harmondsworth:
       Penguin.
Tucker, A., Edmondson, A. & Spear, S. (2002).  When problem solving prevents organizational learning.   Journal of
       Organizational Change Management, 15, 122-137.
Villegas-Reimers, E.   (2003).  Teacher Professional Development: An international review of the literature.  Paris:
       UNESCO - International Institute for Educational Planning.

                                                         784                                                ICLS 2006
