              Does an Interface with Less Assistance Provoke More
                                          Thoughtful Behavior?

            Christof van Nimwegen, Herre van Oostendorp, Utrecht University, Padualaan 14, 3584CH
                                                 Utrecht, The Netherlands
                                            christof@cs.uu.nl, herre@cs.uu.nl
          Daniel Burgos, Rob Koper, Open University of the Netherlands, Valkenburgerweg 177, 6401DL,
                                                 Heerlen, The Netherlands
                                         daniel.burgos@ou.nl, rob.koper@ou.nl

        Abstract: This paper investigates effects of interface style and cognitive style on problem solving
        performance. It is often assumed that performance improves when information is externalized onto
        the interface. Although relieving working memory this may discourage planning, understanding
        and knowledge acquisition. When information is not externalized, it must be internalized, stored
        in  the   user's   memory,    requiring    more  planning  and   thinking,     perhaps  leading    to better
        performance and knowledge. Another variable influencing behavior is the cognitive style of users.
        We     included  "Need   for  Cognition"   (NFC),    the  tendency   to  engage   in  cognitive  tasks.  We
        investigated    the effects  of  interface style and  NFC     using planning   tasks.  The   internalization
        interface   led  to  more    planful  behavior    and  smarter   solutions,    but  NFC    had  no    effect.
        Understanding      reactions  to interface  information    is crucial   in  designing  software    aimed   at
        education and learning. To facilitate active learning and provoke better performance, designers
        should take care in giving users (too) much assistance.

Introduction
        Computers are indispensable in many working environments and multimedia are nowadays omnipresent in
education, training and cultural institutions such as museums or science parks. A recurring issue in software design
guidelines to  assure   some degree   of usability  is minimizing     "user memory     load", referred  to as   computational
offloading  (Scaife &   Rogers,  1996).  The  working    memory    of a  user  has  to be  relieved  so that  a maximum     of
cognitive  resources  can   be devoted   to  the task.   Externalization of   information,   providing  information    on   the
interface to structure and guide problem-solving, often is thought to be a means by which user memory load can be
minimized.  The  need   to  plan is  reduced and   externalization can   limit  the possibilities in a  given   situation, thus
reducing the problem space (Zhang & Norman, 1994). A way to implement some degree of externalization is to
make parts of the interface context-sensitive, e.g. by hiding or disabling inapplicable functions. The user is "taken by
the  hand"  by limiting   choices    and providing  feedback     (Van  Oostendorp    &   de   Mul,  1999;  De   Mul   &    Van
Oostendorp, 1996). This is related (but not equivalent) to the concept of scaffolding (Soloway, Guzdial & Hay,
1994), adopted in research on technological supports for learning. It refers to interface support to assist learners in
mindfully participating in work that would otherwise be too complex. The difference is that scaffolding is meant to
provide structure and guidance during learning a new task that a user cannot do alone. However, externalization as
we use it here (and others), is not meant to specifically motivate mindful participation, but is rather supposed to free
up cognitive resources to eventually smoothen task execution. Examples where externalization of information is
applied are software    installation wizards or  grayed-out  menu-items     that don't  permit using    them  thus offering  a
context-sensitive interface with only "possible" actions. For example, in Word you cannot select "paste" from the
menu when nothing is copied first. "Paste" shown in gray color indicates its presence and its (temporary, situation
dependent)  unavailability.  It  informs  users    about the  applicability  of  operators   and  makes    remembering     this
unnecessary. Zhang and Norman (1994) found that relieving working memory by externalizing information could be
useful for cognitive tasks: the more is externalized, the easier it is to solve the problem. But one could also argue
that externalization  may   have negative   consequences   for   task performance    and   knowledge    acquisition.  There  is
research in the context of externalization and feedback depicting current states of objects and changes of objects. For
a discussion in the light of cognitive load theory (CLT) (Sweller, 1994) concerning the effects of different external
visualizations on   the acquisition  of  problem   solving skill, see  Scheiter,   Gerjets and    Catrambone    (2006).    They
showed that use of certain animations (meant to explain) led to a substantial increase in learning time and a decrease
in performance. The animations used to visualize solution procedures were more harmful than helpful for conveying
problem-solving skills. They state that these visualizations may reduce learner activity and induce a passive style of
processing. This could prevent learners from performing effortful cognitive processes required for understanding.

                                                             785                                                     ICLS 2006
          There is   a general    notion  that learning  is more    effective  when   people   experiment  and   discover    for
themselves and exploratory learning as a whole has been a subject of research in many domains. Carroll (1990) for
example, already more than a decade ago propagated minimalism in design and instructions. When the design of a
system is "incomplete" on purpose, users must explore the system actively, make guesses and learn from mistakes.
Kerr and Payne (1994) pondered why active learning with the target system would be more effective than with
reading instructions. Is it because the user is free to set his own goals, or to use their own words, "is it that the
learner has  to attempt    to  solve problems   himself, actively   choosing  or inferring   the next  command,    rather than
merely reading and applying potted solutions?". In their experiment different types of training for MS Excel were
compared, using active (problem-solving) and passive (tutorial-like, prompted interaction) learning contexts. They
found that in training versions where users had to actively perform problem-solving, already during training users
had a clear learning advantage. One can imagine situations in which performing skills in the long term is more
important than performing well immediately after training. Charney and Reder (1986) found that a condition that
provided added difficulty for learners (problem-solving) resulted in poorer initial performance than other conditions
(e.g. "guided practice"), but to better delayed performance. An explanation could be that the more difficult condition
perhaps instigates a deeper level of cognitive processing which eventually results in more effective learning.

          What  will   be   the   influence  of  externalization    on  learning?   Perhaps   knowledge    gained    using   an
externalization-based interface is more volatile and difficult to transfer to other situations. This is undesirable when
learning or gaining insight itself is the aim or when making errors is costly. Payne, Howes and Reader (2001) state
that when information is externalized on the screen, users are reluctant to store relevant information in memory and
are more inclined to use the external representation. O'Hara and Payne (1998, 1999) showed that dependence on
exploration-support may indeed have a negative effect. Having to internalize information on the other hand may lead
to more planning, better task performance and more knowledge acquisition. They distinguished between plan-based
and display-based problem solving. In plan-based problem solving one uses detailed problem strategies from long-
term memory.    Display-based      problem   solving   makes   little use of  acquired   knowledge    but relies  on  interface
information. Plan-based activity leads to shorter solution routes, because steps are planned, and no unnecessary steps
are taken, while a display-based strategy involves more steps because of more searching. Plan-based behavior was
provoked by varying the operator cost in the interface of a puzzle, which existed in a low-cost interface and a high-
cost interface. The    latter imposed   a  longer  lockout  time  (system    response time)   on subjects  than  the  low-cost
interface after an   action,   which   made  the  system  harder   to  use.  The high-cost   interface induced   a  plan-based
approach which led to better performance, and the task knowledge acquired was more easily transferred to problems
within the same domain. From a CLT point of view (Sweller, 1994), provoking plan based behavior is comparable
with increasing "germane load". It refers to the degree of effort involved in processing and construction schemas,
and is associated with motivation and interest. In CLT, extraneous load should be minimized. Extraneous load takes
up valuable working memory resources away from the task and could be compared with effects of "externalization".

          The design of problem-solving environments should not discourage planning. Strong reliance on the visual
display may result in less transfer of skills and less planning. Externalizing information may not be beneficial when
the goal is to achieve better, transferable task performance and knowledge. Besides better transfer to other situations,
one could imagine that possessing better internal knowledge-elements, leads to better performance when one has
worked with the application some longer time ago. Van Nimwegen, van Oostendorp and Tabachneck-Schijf (2004)
studied this  using  an   abstract version  of the    "Missionaries   and Cannibals"  puzzle.    They  investigated  effects of
internalization vs. externalization on task performance, knowledge, and transfer to a different problem in the same
domain.   The  puzzle,    called Balls  &  Boxes   existed  in two    interface  styles: externalization  and  internalization.
Externalization  was   realized   by   graying out inapplicable   (momentarily    unavailable)   buttons  needed   to perform
certain operations. In the internalization condition this support was absent. To their surprise, not ever and not on any
measure   did externalization     subjects  perform   better. Moreover,      internalization subjects  had better   knowledge
afterwards,  and   8   months    later the internalization  subjects   still had  better  knowledge    and    now  also better
performance. In addition these subjects performed better at transferring acquired rule-knowledge to a different but
similar task. In a follow up study Van Nimwegen et al. (2005) investigated whether possible differences in attitude
to problem solving were of influence. Besides interface style it was tried to influence task conception or attitude by
giving instructions encouraging plan-based behavior in one group and encouraging display-based behavior in the
other group. They used specific instructions to change the affective state of a user. It could be either a low-planning
instruction ("solve    as fast as  possible, mistakes   are   not a   problem")  or a high-planning    instruction  ("solve  as
economically    as  possible,  it  will  pay   off"). Again   internalization   subjects  performed    better and   had better

                                                              786                                                    ICLS 2006
knowledge. The instructions had no effect on externalization subjects: there was no difference in behavior between
subjects that received high-planning vs. low-planning instructions. Upon being confronted with the externalization
interface, subjects ignored or even forgot the planning instruction altogether. However, instructions did have effect
on internalization  subjects. With  a  low-planning    instruction, they made  twice  as many   illegal moves    and more
unnecessary moves, as compared to those with high-planning instruction.

The Current Research Problem
         A drawback from the tasks used in the experiments above is that findings may not be relevant in realistic
tasks. We argue that in problem-solving situations where people need to learn the underlying rules of a system, or
make as little mistakes as possible, the use of a plan-based approach is preferred. If a using plan-based approach is
preferred, as can be the case in learning situations, we should find out how people can be persuaded into using that
approach. We will again investigate our assumptions, but now with a more realistic, more life-like task.

Interface Style
         We will investigate the influence of interface style on performance on a problem-solving task. We define
the externalization of the underlying rules as visualizing the result of applying a set of constraints onto the interface.
Externalization shows which actions are allowed, comparable to grayed out menu items in for example Word, where
it is shown that the current situation does not permit a function to be used because the constraints are not met.

Cognitive Style
         We included subjects' differences in attitude to problem solving, because it could have an influence on
behavior and  performance.    We   used   "need   for cognition" (NFC),   a psychological  construct    that measures   the
tendency of  individuals to   engage   in and enjoy   effortful cognitive tasks (Cacioppo,  Petty   &   Kao,  1984). Both
persons high and low on NFC need to make sense of their world, but tend to do this in different ways. A person with
a high NFC    loves to seek,  reflect  on and reason    about  information, whereas   someone   on  the other  end   of the
continuum only thinks as hard as (s)he has to and is inclined to rely on others. Crystal and Kalyanaraman (2005)
demonstrated that NFC can influence perceived system usability and responses, or as they put it: "If, in a particular
HCI context, individuals high in NFC exhibit significantly different behavior than individuals low in NFC, usability
could likely be improved by providing interfaces optimized for each group." Also other literature on adaptation and
learning systems emphasizes the importance of adapting the external representation to the emotional state of learners
(Kort, Reilly and   Picard,   2001),   or proposes    adapting  to  various constant  and  volatile  user    characteristics
(Brusilovsky, 2001). In this context, this could perhaps mean that a person with a high NFC in the externalization
condition might still exercise a high amount of planning, as opposed to a low NFC subject, who is reluctant to plan.

Hypotheses
         H1: Internalization leads to a more plan-based strategy and better performance than externalization.
Externalization, providing assistance, tempts users not to form plans, but to rely on the interface. The internalized
condition lacks this guidance and encourages planning. This planning involves spending effort on activities such as
studying relevant   elements  of   the situation, and  construction  and  application of  strategies  based   on elements
retrieved from memory. We expect that requiring internalization will lead to better task performance and knowledge.
         H2: High NFC leads to a more plan-based strategy than low NFC. People with high NFC have high
intrinsic motivation to think and engage in cognitive tasks, will show more plan-based behavior. Consequently, we
expect the subjects with a high NFC to have better task performance and knowledge.

Method
DESIGN AND SUBJECTS
         The  experiment  had    a 2X2    design  with  two independent   variables:  interface style (internalization   or
externalization) and cognitive style (low or high NFC, based on median). 43 university students (aged 19 to 32
years) participated, and received a five  reward. The experiment took an hour at most.

                                                            787                                                  ICLS 2006
Material

NFC questionnaire
We used a Dutch translation of the 18-item NFC scale (Cacioppo, Petty & Kao, 1984). Subjects rated each statement
(e.g. "Learning new ways to think doesn't excite me very much") on a Likert-scale ranging from one to seven. A
score of one meant `strongly disagree' and a score of seven meant `strongly agree'. We averaged the scores on the
18 items, and split the groups on the basis of the median in "low-NFC" and "high-NFC" groups.
The Conference Planner Application
       A  software application called  "Conference   Planner"    was developed  by    The Open   University  of     The
Netherlands and funded by the European UNFOLD Project. It simulated the planning of speakers for a conference,
and consists of different components. The first one is the dynamic interface that shows every set of demands for a
conference and allows the user to solve the problem based on drag & drop movements. The second one is the core of
the application, the set of rules and related algorithms. Here the permitted actions and subsequent consequences are
defined. The third one is the set of tasks with all the scenarios (there were 5 different scheduling situations). The
conference speakers (each with different demands) had to be scheduled in one of three rooms (each with its own
facilities and availability). The tasks are not difficult, but a certain approach is necessary to solve the situation in an
economic manner.  Without   planning, the scheduling    will  not be optimal  and   extra (superfluous) moves       are
necessary. An adequate strategy is to look for speakers with many constraints and schedule them first. It can also be
effective to first identify slots that are hard to fill and then assign speakers to those. Less smart would be to start
from the top and work your way down, because at some point remaining speakers cannot be placed anymore and
speakers have to be moved around. The latter strategy and also approaches such as "trial and error" do not involve
much planning. The list of speakers with  their constraints  was  shown on  the left. The task  was to place all    the
speakers on the timetable. The difference between externalization and internalization was implemented by showing,
in the externalization condition where speakers can be placed (see Figure 1). When clicking on a speaker, the "legal"
time slots (satisfying the constraints and being available) turned green. It however does not show the best slot, only
legal ones. To move a speaker from left to right an icon in front of the speaker's name had to be "picked up" and
"dragged" to its destination with the mouse. Some timeslots where always unavailable, indicated with light-gray.
Empty available timeslots were white, and those occupied by a speaker would display the name of a speaker in it.

      Figure 1. The externalization condition                      Figure 2. The internalization condition

       In the internalization condition this feedback was absent (see Figure 2) and the legality of moves had to be
inferred. A solution where each speaker was scheduled always existed. There were 5 tasks, with varying constraints:
·  Amount of hours they will speak (1 or 2, in Dutch: uren)
·  Whether a beamer* is needed (yes/no, in Dutch: ja/nee) (*Dutch/German pseudo-anglicism meaning "projector")
·  Number of expected listeners (in Dutch: toehoorders)
Our quantitative measures can be divided in time-based measures (durations of actions) and move-based measures
(solution paths). All the sessions were captured, and for each of the 5 tasks we analyzed whether or not subjects
started solving the problem with the best strategy (first moving the speakers with the most stringent constraints).
Post-experimental questionnaire
       After the 5 tasks subjects completed a   questionnaire   assessing knowledge   of  the problem. We   assessed
declarative knowledge and procedural knowledge. Mostly the questions explicitly asked for explanations ("why?"),
besides "yes" or "no". A picture of a situation accompanied most of the questions.

                                                         788                                               ICLS 2006
·   Declarative knowledge: Essay questions about situations that were either legal or illegal given the constraints. It
    had to be decided whether or not situations could occur, and why (or why not).
·   Procedural knowledge: Essay questions concerning solution procedures. Parts of situations were given and the
    questions were formulated as "how would you do this?" and "is this a smart move?"

Procedure
        The experiment was conducted in the Usability Lab of the Center for Content and Knowledge Engineering,
Utrecht University. It started with the NFC questionnaire, followed by a textual introduction and a small video-clip
showing how the application and its controls worked. After this, subjects started to work on the 5 problem solving
tasks. Finally the electronic post-experimental questionnaire had to be completed.

Results
        We analyzed the results using ANOVA (p < 0.05). All subjects eventually solved the 5 tasks correctly (see
Table 1). The minimum and maximum average score on the NFC-scale were 2.39 and 6.50. The mean score was
4.89 (SD 0.83), with the median at 5.06. There were no interaction effects.

Time and moves
Table 1: Time (sec) and moves for each condition

                                               Internalization                   Externalization
            Average for the 5 tasks      Low NFC            High NFC        Low NFC        High NFC
                                        Mean       SD     Mean     SD      Mean    SD      Mean   SD
            Total time needed           155.2     33.4    124.3   28.7     136.2   33.9    129.5  34.4
            Time before first move       21.6      2.1     16.0    2.1      14.3   2.2     14.5    2.1
            Time between moves           5.3       1.7      4.3    1.0      4.2    1.4      3.7   1.1
            Superfluous moves            2.9       2.8      2.1    2.3      4.1    2.1      4.4   3.9
            Correction moves             1.1       0.3      1.0    0.3      1.8    0.4      1.6    0.3
            Reconsidered moves           0.5       0.5      0.4    0.5      1.7    0.5      2.4    0.5

Total time: time needed to complete a task
        There were no significant main effects of interaction style or cognitive style on the average total time for
the tasks. However,  we  did find  the  tendency  that  low-NFC   subjects tended  to need more  time,  F(1,39)=3.58,
p=0.07, (M=146, SD=34 vs. M=127, SD=31). There was no effect of cognitive style.
Time before first move: time between facing/studying the problem and placing the first speaker
        There was a significant main effect of interface style on the time before the first move in each of the 5
tasks, F(1,39)=4.34, p<0.05. Internalization subjects took more time than externalization subjects, M=18.9, SD=1.5
vs. M=14.4, SD=1.6. There was no significant effect of cognitive style.
Time between moves: time between placing one speaker and starting to place the next
         There was   a  main effect of  interface style on  the average time between   moves, F(1,39)=4.82,  p<0.05.
Internalization subjects took more time between moves than externalization subjects, M=4.8, SD=1.4 vs. M=3.9,
SD=1.3. There was no significant effect of cognitive style.
Superfluous moves: all unnecessary moves (attempted, actually done, reconsidered etc.)
         There was a significant main effect of interface style on the amount of superfluous moves, F(1,39)=4.17,
p<0.05. Internalization subjects made fewer superfluous moves than externalization subjects, M= 2.46, SD=0.61 vs.
M=4.27, SD=0.63. For cognitive style, there was no significant effect.
Correction moves: all legal moves that were actually done, minus the ideal amount of moves
         The  effect of interface style on the number    of correction  moves was  nearly  significant, F(1,39)=3.80,
p=0.06. Externalization subjects made more correction moves than internalization subjects, M=1.70, SD 0.25 vs.
M=1.1, SD=0.24. There was no significant effect of cognitive style.

                                                          789                                                ICLS 2006
Reconsidered moves: moves that were started, but reconsidered and put back during dragging
          The  effect of interface   style on the   number  of reconsidered    moves   was significant too,  F(1,39)=9.59,
p<0.01. Internalization subjects reconsidered their moves less often than externalization subjects, M=0.46, SD=0.36
vs. M=2.05, SD=0.37. There was no significant effect of cognitive style.
Strategy analysis
         Subjects who were required to internalize showed a tendency to use the `most constraints first' strategy
more  often  than subjects   in  the externalization  condition,  but  it was   just a tendency  (F(1,39)=3.21,    p=0.08).
Internalization subjects used that strategy 2.4 times (SD=1.76) out of 5 (tasks) whereas externalization used it 1.5
times out of 5 (SD=1.5). There were no effects of cognitive style.

Knowledge
          The effect of interface style on answers to declarative knowledge questions, was practically significant at
F(1,38)=3.73,  p=0.06.   Internalization   subjects answered   more   of  those questions  correctly  than  externalization
subjects (M=8.0,  SD=0.2     vs. M=7.7,    SD=0.7).  The scores  on procedural     knowledge   showed  no  differences  for
interface style. No effects of cognitive style were found.

Conclusion and Discussion
         Our first hypothesis stating that internalization leads to more planning and better performance is supported.
Internalization resulted in longer thinking times before starting to work on the problem and to more time between
moves. It indicates that when information has to be internalized, more contemplation is provoked and users ponder
longer before acting. With the move-based measures the issue was not so much "can they solve it?" but "how smart
or economical do they solve it?". Internalization subjects solved the problems with fewer superfluous moves, thus
with greater   economy.   These    moves    included   self-correcting   moves  after  being   stuck,  illegal moves    and
reconsidered moves (changing your mind while making the move). We infer that this stems from better planning,
confirming O'Hara and Payne (1998) who found that a plan-based approach resulted in fewer moves than a display-
based approach, and that "backtracking" (undo a move and return to the previous situation) occurs more during
display-based  behavior.  Our    results suggest  that  internalization   provokes   more  "thinking  before   acting" than
externalization. Regarding the strategy that subjects chose to use, a qualitative analysis of the results also indicated a
more plan-based approach by internalization subjects. They filled the timetable by first scheduling speakers with the
most constraints more often. This strategy suggests planning, because people think about whom they are going to
schedule before starting with the task. It will be interesting to examine strategy choice more deeply in the future.
Declarative knowledge was tested afterwards by giving subjects questions in which they had to judge situations
where rules   (sometimes)    were  violated.  The   effect  of interface  style on   declarative knowledge     was  almost
significant; internalization subjects  gave   more  correct answers.   Perhaps  the  fact that they  planned   more  in the
previous tasks caused a training effect that made them more accurate. The procedural knowledge questions focused
on insight on solving the problem. Here, interface style had no influence, perhaps not surprising, since the problems
were not so difficult and all subjects solved them eventually. This confirms earlier findings of Van Nimwegen et al.
(2004, 2005): a positive effect of internalization on declarative knowledge, and not on procedural knowledge. The
second hypothesis was rejected. Pre-existing attitudes towards problem solving along the dimensions of NFC had no
effect on performance or knowledge. Only interface style predicted problem solving behavior.

         To sum up conclusions, not at any measure, externalization resulted in better performance. Once more we
found positive effects of internalization on problem-solving behavior: it led to more plan-based behavior, smarter
solution paths and better declarative knowledge. Externalization led to a more display-based approach resulting in
less economic solutions and shallower thinking. It is worthwhile to reflect on what was externalized and visualized.
The interface showed legal actions, the outcome of the application of the rules, a common feature in a broad range
of software applications. We showed that this had undesirable effects. One has to be careful with providing interface
cues that give away   too much    and  must   design in such   a manner   that the   way users think  and act  is optimally
supported. Designers could consider making interactions "less assisted" to persuade users into specific behavior.
This issue is beyond plain usability issues and focuses on more meta cognitive aspects of interface-induced behavior
such as planfulness and user engagement. Also Guttormsen Schar, Schluep, Schierz and Krueger (2000) recognize
the importance of other interface design standards than only those suggested by common usability guidelines. They
stated that "the user-interface can play a major role in the success of learning by supporting or inhibiting certain
strategies". They do not recommend less user-friendly interaction design, but propose to extend usability guidelines

                                                            790                                                   ICLS 2006
with extra cognitive factors, because usability (including user satisfaction) should not be optimized at the cost of
learning performance. It is a challenge to understand how people react to interface information (based on cognitive
findings). Our work    contributes to  building bridges  between cognitive   science,   human   computer  interaction and
educational practices and can be valuable in the development of applications in the realms of education, multimedia
learning or game based learning. Tweaking a small part of the interface had impact on behavior, but externalization
and internalization were not extremes on a continuum. It refers to the amount of externalization. In the future it will
be interesting to adaptively varying the level of externalization, depending on performance (Brusilovsky, 2001).

References
Brusilovsky, P. (2001). Adaptive hypermedia. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 11, 87-110.
Cacioppo,  J.T.,  Petty, R.E. &    Kao, C.E.   (1984),  The   efficient assessment   of  need  for   cognition. Journal  of
         Personality Assessment, 48, 306-307.
Carroll, J.M.  (1990).   The  Nurnberg   Funnel:  Designing    Minimalist    Instruction  for Practical  Computer    Skill.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Charney,   D.H.,   & Reder,  L.M.   (1986). Designing    interactive tutorials for   computer   users.  Human-Computer
         Interaction, 2, 297-317.
Crystal,  A.  &    Kalyanaraman,    S.  (2005),  Personality   variables  and  information     processing  on    the web:
         Methodological    issues  and  empirical   evidence.  Paper    presented at  the  International  Communication
         Association Annual Meeting, New York, NY.
De Mul, S. & Van Oostendorp, H. (1996). Learning user interfaces by exploration. Acta Psychologica, 91, 325-344.
European UNFOLD Project: http://www.unfold-project.net
Guttormsen   Schär,  S., Schluep,  S., Schierz,  C. &  Krueger,  H.  (2000).   Interaction for  computer-aided    learning.
         Interactive Multimedia Electronic Journal of Computer-Enhanced Learning, 2(1).
Kerr, M.P. & Payne, S.J. (1994). Learning to use a spreadsheet by doing and watching. Interacting with Computers,
         6, 3­22.
Kort, B.,  Reilly, R.  &  Picard,  R.  (2001).  External representation   of learning   process and   domain    knowledge:
         Affective state as a determinate of its structure and function. Paper presented at the 10th International
         Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education. San Antonio, TX.
O'Hara, K.P. & Payne, S.J. (1998). The effects of operator implementation cost on planfulness of problem solving
         and learning. Cognitive Psychology, 35(1), 34-70.
O'Hara, K.P. & Payne, S.J. (1999). Planning and the user interface: The effects of lockout time and error recovery
         cost. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 50(1), 41-59.
Payne S.J., Howes, A. & Reader, W.R. (2001). Adaptively distributing cognition: A decision-making perspective on
         human-computer interaction. Behaviour & Information Technology, 20(5), 339-346.
Scaife, M. & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: How do graphical representations work? International Journal
         of Human-Computer Studies, 45(2), 185-213.
Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P. & Catrambone, R. (2006). Making the abstract concrete: Visualizing mathematical solution
         procedures. Computers in Human Behavior, 22 (1), 9-25.
Soloway, E., Guzdial, M., & Hay, K. E. (1994). Learner-centered design: the challenge for HCI in the 21st century.
         Interactions, 1(2), 36-48.
Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difficulty and instructional design. Learning and Instruction, 4,
         295­312.
Van Nimwegen, C., Van Oostendorp, H. & Tabachneck-Schijf, H.J.M. (2004). The over-assisting interface: The role
         of support in knowledge acquisition. In Proceedings of HCI2004: Design for Life (pp. 133-136). Bristol,
         UK: Research Press International.
Van   Nimwegen,    C., Van   Oostendorp,  H.   &  Tabachneck-Schijf,    H.J.M.  (2005).   The   role of interface  style in
         planning during problem solving. In Proceedings of The 27th Annual Cognitive Science Conference (pp.
         2771-2776). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Van Oostendorp, H. & De Mul, S. (1999). Learning by exploration: Thinking aloud while exploring an information
         system. Instructional Science, 27, 269-284.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122.

Acknowledgments
We thank Hermina Schijf (Utrecht University) for her involvement and assistance during this research project.

                                                           791                                                    ICLS 2006
