                             Is Neuroscience a Learning Science?
                              Sashank Varma, Daniel L. Schwartz, Stanford University
                               450 Serra Mall, Building 160, Stanford, CA 94305-2055
                                    sashank@stanford.edu, danls@stanford.edu
                        Bruce McCandliss, Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology
          Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, Box 140, New York, NY 10021
                                              bdm2001@med.cornell.edu

          Abstract: Should education and neuroscience be connected? We review eight arguments against
          and eight arguments for connecting the two disciplines. We conclude that ultimately, whether
          education and neuroscience have anything to offer one another is an empirical question ­ one that
          is worth engaging.

Introduction
          In an early appraisal of the prospects for connecting education and neuroscience, Bruer (1997) pronounced
it "a bridge too far." This was particularly noteworthy because at the time, Bruer was director of the McDonnell
Foundation and was actively funding research in both disciplines. Even though it was in his best interests to find
connections between them, he found few. Eight years have passed since Bruer's cautionary evaluation. In the
interim, the maturation of functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) has brought an exponential increase in
the data on the neural bases of cognition, including those complex forms most relevant to education, such as
language comprehension and mathematical reasoning. The time has come once again to ask whether education and
neuroscience should be connected.

          This question is addressed in two complementary sections. The first offers eight reasons against bridging
between education and neuroscience. The second section counters these with eight reasons for bridging between the
two disciplines. To preview our conclusions, we believe that reasoning against and reasoning for will only get us so
far, and  that it is an empirical question whether   combining   education  and neuroscience   will yield important
empirical, theoretical, and practical advancements. Furthermore, we believe this is an experiment worth undertaking,
and  that its success  will depend critically on educational   researchers and neuroscientists collaborating across
disciplinary boundaries.

Reasons Against Connecting Education and Neuroscience
          A number of reasons against connecting education and neuroscience have appeared in the literature and
have been shared with us in conversations with colleagues. The issues are real, although space constraints prohibit
us from drawing all implications and listing supporting examples here.

Scientific: The Differences Between Brain and Behavioral Data
          (1) Neuroscience data will never have anything to offer education. Even if the mind is in the brain, and
therefore cognition is the product of neural computation, this does not mean that the particular neural locations of
cognitive competencies are relevant for educational researchers, whose goal is to foster these competencies in
children (Mayer, 1998, p. 394). For example, does it matter to curricula for teaching sentence structure whether
syntax is localized in left Inferior Frontal Gyrus (IFG), the hippocampus, or striate cortex? Does this inform the
pedagogy in any way? And of course, the mind as we find it in the classroom is not just in the brain. Behavior is
profoundly shaped by context. Neuroscience methods, however, demand highly constrained and artificial contexts.
For example, in fMRI experiments, participants lie inside a large and noisy cylindrical magnet and, in the vast
majority of cognitive paradigms, are shown projected screen images and only permitted to press a button, which
they must do for hundreds of trials to generate signals that rise statistically above the noise. In contrast, when
collecting behavioral data in educational settings, context becomes the most important variable because it is what
can be manipulated to change large-scale behaviors.

Philosophical: The Differences in Vocabularies and their Reduction
          (2) The vocabularies of education and neuroscience are incommensurable. Education and neuroscience
are different disciplines, and have evolved vocabularies appropriate for the different phenomena they study. The
vocabulary of education belongs to social science and includes mental terms like meaning and understanding. The

                                                          792                                                ICLS 2006
vocabulary of neuroscience belongs to biological science and includes material terms like hemodynamic response
and neural pathway. It is possible that these vocabularies are fundamentally incommensurable because one is about
mind and one is about body. The Cartesian dualism will preclude any dialogue between the disciplines (Byrnes &
Fox, 1998, p. 299). Moreover, even if the vocabulary of education could be reduced (i.e., translated) to that of
neuroscience, there would be no value in substituting neuroscience terms for proven educational terms (Byrnes &
Fox, 1998, p. 299). For example, consider a child having difficulty mastering the indirect object construction.
Nothing is gained by calling this "syntactic deficit" a "left IFG deficit" instead.

          (3) Even if education can be reduced to neuroscience, reductionism is a disservice to those we educate.
The significant parameters of education occur at the level of classroom dynamics, and these cannot be adequately
reduced to brain function. The norms that regulate classroom interaction, for example, cannot be described as
patterns of activations. Moreover, even if we could reduce the whole of education to neuroscience, this would not
help pedagogy (just as reducing education to physics ­ translating educational theories into the language of fermions
and bosons ­ would not help either). In fact, given the cumbersome nature of the lower-level terminology, the more
likely consequence would be negative. We would lose sight of the lives we educate, because the reduction would
force us to consider educationally-irrelevant details such as the statistics of neural spike trains.

Pragmatic: The Timeline of Research Developments
          (4) We don't know enough about how the brain works at the current time to inform any educational
topics. The study of how the brain performs the complex forms of cognition of greatest relevance to education is still
in its infancy. We do not yet know enough about the neural localization of language comprehension, mathematical
problem solving, or scientific reasoning to inform reading, mathematics, or science education (Bruer, 1997, p. 4).
Cognitive neuroimaging is, after all, a relatively recent development. The number of neuroimaging studies of
cognition has exploded over the past fifteen years. It still remains for cognitive neuroscientists to make sense of
these data and to deliver theories of brain function at a level of abstraction appropriate for educational behaviors and
changes.

Historical: Dissemination of Findings
          (5) Too often in the past, neuroscience findings have become neuromyths. Several times in the recent
past, neuroscience   findings   have  been  inappropriately  extrapolated  into     educational advice    of  dubious value
(Goswami,     2004,  p. 11).   For   example,   based on  animal   studies of   synaptogenesis,      critical  periods,  and
environmental enrichment, claims have been made regarding the "neuroscientifically appropriate" sequencing of
instruction for young children (Bruer, 1997). One still hears educational researchers speaking of the left and right
hemispheres as if they are distinct organs with nothing in common. Educational researchers become frustrated when
neuroscientists fail to derive from their laboratory research clear lessons that can be straightforwardly transferred to
the classroom. Conversely, neuroscientists become frustrated when the precision and scope of their work are ignored
in over-zealous   educational    applications,  however   well-intentioned.  The     general   lesson    appears to be   that
neuroscience findings must be unduly stretched, distorted, and over-simplified to make contact with educational
topics.

Institutional: Requirements for Training Teachers
          (6) We  cannot   expect  teachers  to master neuroscience.   Teachers     are already asked    to master  multiple
disciplines during   their training: education, cognitive  and  developmental   psychology,     content   domains,  cultural
analysis, etc. They  do    not have  the additional time to learn enough   about    brain  function   to make  sense  of the
neuroscience   literature. Brain  anatomy   alone requires  weeks  (if not months)      of sustained  study.   For example,
different papers refer to the same brain tissue as Broca's area, left IFG, pars triangularis, Brodmann area 45, and
voxel   (­44, 3, 29) in Talairach    space. Teachers-in-training  do not have   the   time  to master    these multiple  and
redundant brain geographies, let alone the details of the networks of brain areas that implement different cognitive
competencies.

Financial: The Cost of Research
          (7) It is too expensive to conduct neuroimaging studies in education. The research funding available for
educational research is fixed (or perhaps even shrinking). It costs hundreds of dollars per hour to run participants in
neuroimaging experiments versus a few dollars per hour to run them in behavioral classroom experiments. A cost-

                                                            793                                                    ICLS 2006
benefit analysis does not support spending two orders of magnitude more money on neuroscience studies, and
thereby reducing educational studies in proportion.

Disciplinary: Ownership of the Research Agenda
          (8) If education cedes control to neuroscience, it will never get it back. In the "decade of the brain" just
ended, neuroscience exploded. The first casualty was cognitive psychology, which went from (a) a standalone
discipline known for exquisite behavioral demonstrations and decompositions of human competencies to (b) an arm
of neuroscience    ­ so-called cognitive     neuroscience. Debates     in cognitive   psychology  increasingly   turn on
neuroimaging   data,  with behavioral  data   given  short-shrift. A generation    of cognitive  psychologists has   been
rendered  second-class    citizens in their   own  discipline.  Educational   researchers   will face a  similar fate   if
neuroscience is allowed to enter.

Reasons for Connecting Education and Neuroscience
          The eight reasons against connecting education and neuroscience, though compelling, do not constitute an
ironclad case. Here, we present eight corresponding reasons for connecting the two disciplines.

Scientific: The Differences Between Brain and Behavioral Data
          (1) Neuroscience data can be used to generate new educational hypotheses. Neuroscience data can be
used to generate novel educational theories (Byrnes & Fox, 1998, p. 337). They are often counter-intuitive, and
reveal different "joints" in cognition than are visible at the behavioral level. For example, neuroimaging studies find
that the multiplication of one-digit numbers (4x2=?) activates brain areas where one would expect the "mental
multiplication table"  to be stored   (i.e., angular and supramarginal     gyrus). Surprisingly,  subtraction  exhibits a
different pattern of activation, even though subtraction facts are also well-known. Specifically, the subtraction of
one-digit numbers (4-2=?) activates areas known to perform visuospatial processing (i.e., intra-parietal sulcus and
superior parietal lobule). One interpretation of this difference is that one-digit multiplication problems are solved by
verbally retrieving the relevant arithmetic facts whereas single-digit subtraction problems are solved by constructing
and scanning a "mental number line" (Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen, 2003). This dissociation at the brain level is
invisible at  the behavioral level,   and demands    new   conceptions    of multiplication  and  subtraction. One   new
hypothesis is that subtraction of natural numbers differs from multiplication in that it is open, not closed, and
therefore requires use of a mental number line to check whether the result crosses zero into the range of negative
numbers (2-4=?), whereas multiplication does not. In this way, counter-intuitive neuroscience results can force us to
carve phenomena at different joints (e.g., whether a mathematical operation is open or closed) than we would expect
based on the behavioral theories of education.

          Although the contexts and behaviors permitted within fMRI experiments are restricted, it is still possible to
examine   the effects of  context  and complex    behaviors.    For example,   participants can  be separated   into  two
conditions where they complete a month of lessons on a mathematical topic. In the `memorization' condition, people
can memorize the solutions to problems. In the `hands-on' condition, people can work with physical manipulatives
to learn the solutions to the problems. Participants in both conditions can learn to ceiling, so they are able to
complete a set of 50 problems from memory. They can then be scanned during a posttest that includes two types of
problems ­ those they memorized and new problems they have not studied. The patterns of brain activation should
be different for the two conditions on the problems they have memorized, even though all participants should be
able to solve these problems perfectly. Participants in the memorization condition should show activation in verbal
(i.e., temporo-parietal) areas whereas participants in the hands-on condition should show activation in motor (i.e.,
fronto-parietal) areas. Moreover, when solving new problems, participants in the memorization condition should
show diffuse activation and perform poorly, whereas those in the hands-on condition should recruit the same motor
areas to  successfully solve the   problems.    This would  be   true, even   though  their only  overt behavior  in  the
impoverished context of the scanner would be pressing a button to indicate their answers.

Philosophical: The Differences in Vocabularies and their Reduction
          (2) Neuroscience may help resolve incommensurabilities in vocabulary. As neuroscience theories appear
that address those cognitive competencies of greatest interest to education, there is every reason to believe that some
will make contact with educational theories of how to teach those competencies (Byrnes & Fox, 1998, pp. 300, 329,
337). If one is skeptical of this claim, it is important to realize that pointing exclusively to the incommensurables
between education and neuroscience is to ignore incommensurables within education itself. For example, within

                                                            794                                                 ICLS 2006
education,   different  methods   are  used   to study  the  cognitive,   motivational,    and  emotional   dimensions   of
performance, and the results of such studies are published in different journals. By contrast, neuroscience provides a
common   biological    vocabulary  for describing    cognitive,  motivational,  and   emotional  phenomena.    In fact,  the
overlapping and intertwined networks of brain areas associated with these phenomena are a burgeoning area of
research (as  evidenced   by  journals such as   Cognitive, Affective,   &  Behavioral   Neuroscience).    For this reason,
neuroscience has the potential to overcome some of the incommensurabilities within education.

         Educational researchers use constructs like `conceptual knowledge', `understanding', `hands-on learning',
`constructivist activities', `exploration', and `inquiry' in ways that are not always consistent with one another.
Neuroscience allows us to go beyond the vagueness of constructs and to also organize results in a place-based
manner. A current push in some cognitive neuroscience journals is to require authors to provide a table of the brain
coordinates that showed activation during a task. This permits other researchers to identify common patterns of
activation across different studies, tasks and constructs. In other words, rather than anchoring findings to ambiguous
labels, they are anchored to precise locations. Another important development in cognitive neuroscience is the use of
meta-analyses based on these tables. For example, the preceding finding that subtraction and multiplication activate
different areas was found by analyzing the data from many different studies that varied on a number of dimensions
(e.g., presentation mode), but that reported their results in a place-based manner (i.e., by brain coordinates).

         (3) Reductionism in not bad if it is not eliminative reductionism. Eliminative materialism is the doctrine
that neuroscience explanations should not just anchor, but replace educational explanations (Byrnes & Fox, 1998, p.
300). Except   in large   paradigm shifts, eliminative   reductionism    has  not been  the natural course  of events.  For
example, neuroscience     has  embraced   the terminology   and  findings   of information   processing  and   behaviorism.
Biology provides a nice example of maintaining levels of analysis within a reductionist paradigm. Biology attempts
to make  a   corridor  of explanation  from   cellular  processes  to  ecosystems.   The   explanations  at each  level  are
consistent with one another, but they cannot a priori predict one level from the other. Similarly, reduction from
education to neuroscience does not presuppose elimination.

         At the same time, it is naïve to believe that all educational phenomena, such as the norms of classroom
discussion, will be addressable by neuroscience in the near future. In connecting the disciplines, we need to select
cross-over regions carefully. One general principle is that when neuroscience has reduced a complex cognitive
ability to a set of component processes and mapped each process to a distinct brain area, then remediation programs
for the ability can be developed that strengthen each component process in turn. An example of this principle is
given in the next section.

Pragmatic: The Timeline of Research Developments
         (4) There are already signs of success. A number of educational topics have already been informed, or are
in the process of being informed, by neuroscience data. The canonical example comes from reading (Byrnes & Fox,
1998, p. 322;  Goswami,     2004,  7-8).  Neuroscience   identified  the brain  areas associated   with reading  disability,
mapped   them  to  the  processing of  sounds    corresponding   to  letters, and  was  poised  to investigate the  role of
experience in modifying activity in these areas. At this point, education provided tried-and-true (though perhaps
theoretically  limited)   methods  for   remediating   phonological    difficulties  in  kids. This  partnership  between
neuroscience and education has informed our understanding of normal reading development, reading disability, and
why   some interventions    are effective for some    individuals, and   is expanding   in interesting ways,   such as  new
investigations that   leverage  these  insights  to investigate  the early  roots of  dyslexia in  infants  (McCandliss  &
Wolmetz, 2004). Another example comes from mathematics education, where neuroscience research is informing
the design of diagnostic tests and remedial programs for dyscalculia, i.e., problems in reasoning mathematically
(Landerl, Bevan, & Butterworth, 2004). On the horizon is guidance for the teaching of second languages from the
neuroscience data on bilingual language comprehension (Petitto & Dunbar, 2004, pp. 2-10). And if education is
defined broadly enough to include the special populations that are increasingly being mainstreamed into regular
classrooms,   then it  will surely be  informed     by the rapidly   expanding    neuroscience  literature  on ADHD     and
Asperger's syndrome (Petitto & Dunbar, 2004, p. 1).

Historical: Dissemination of Findings
         (5) Although     neuroscience   findings   cannot  be  safely extrapolated   to make   contact  with  educational
topics, they can be interpolated. Although neuroscience findings have been inappropriately applied to educational

                                                             795                                                  ICLS 2006
topics in the past (Bruer, 1997, pp. 4-5), this does not have to be the case in the future (Geake & Cooper, 2003, p.
13). The lesson here is not that neuroscience has no implications for education, but rather that useful implications
are more likely to be drawn when neuroscience data are interpolated, not extrapolated. To continue the example of
the previous section, it was not until neuroscience had painstakingly documented the    brain areas responsible for the
letter-sound mapping that a bridge could be built to educational research on dyslexia. As our understanding of the
neural bases of other forms of complex cognition grows, so will the likelihood that this understanding will make
contact with educational topics in a way that results in new pedagogy.

Institutional: Requirements for Training Teachers
       (6) Properly abstracted findings from neuroscience might be easier for teachers than current models.
The fact that teachers and the public at large readily embrace neuroscience theories suggests they might be more
comfortable models with which to reason about cognition. The alternative we favor is that people are especially
facile with spatial models of phenomena. Educational theories are abstract, typically taking the form of linguistic
assertions. As a result, it is difficult to imagine how their components interact over time. Neuroscience theories, by
comparison, make heavy use of spatial models ­ visual depictions of brain areas, the pathways that connect them,
and their engagement during task performance. These models might be a powerful way for would-be-teachers to
organize their understanding of cognition ­ which is typically presented piecemeal on a domain-by-domain basis ­
into a coherent whole. The challenge for teacher training, then, is to exploit the affordances of the spatial models of
neuroscience to distill the literature in a way that is comprehensible to interested novices.

       Although neuroscience is a complex subject, there are several ways to make it tractable for teachers-in-
training. One is to focus on those aspects of brain function ­ learning and memory ­ most relevant for education,
which is concerned with the acquisition, organization, and application of knowledge (Geake & Cooper, 2003, p. 14;
Goswami, 2004, p. 1). Another strategy is for education to adopt the same stance towards neuroscience as medicine
does toward biological science. We do not expect doctors to conduct research in biological science, but we do
expect them to make sense of its literature. Analogously, the goal should not be to turn teachers into neuroscientists,
but rather to prepare them to be intelligent consumers of reviews of the neuroscience literature.

Financial: The Cost of Research
       (7)  Educationally-relevant neuroscience will         bring more   money    into  educational     research. That
neuroimaging experiments are more expensive than behavioral experiments on a participant-by-participant basis is a
problem only if we assume that educational funding is fixed. There are two reasons why this assumption is likely to
be incorrect. The first is that, generally speaking, scientific grant proposals that promise social applications are
ranked more highly than those that do not. In particular, neuroscience grant proposals are more likely to be funded if
their results are relevant for education (Geake & Cooper, 2003, p. 17). Therefore, if educational researchers partner
with neuroscientists on projects of mutual interest, these projects can be supported by neuroscience funding without
cannibalizing educational funding. The second reason is that if education and neuroscience prove to be a fecund
combination, this will attract new funding for all educational research. If the 1990s was the decade of the brain, then
perhaps the 2010s will be the decade of the educable brain.

Disciplinary: Ownership of the Research Agenda
       (8) Ask not what neuroscience can do for education, but what education can do for neuroscience. A
common assumption in discussions about the relation between education and neuroscience is that influence runs in
only one direction: neuroscience can inform education, but education has nothing to offer neuroscience. This
assumption is incorrect. Education is well-positioned to make important contributions to neuroscience (McCandliss,
Kalchman, & Bryant, 2003). Early neuroimaging studies targeted low-level forms of cognition, such as visual
search. Current neuroimaging studies are targeting higher-level forms of cognition, such as language comprehension
and mathematical reasoning. What phenomena will the next generation of neuroimaging studies target? One place to
look is education (Byrnes & Fox, 1998, p. 333; Mayer, 1998, p. 395). Educational researchers have documented and
analyzed the acquisition of complex forms of cognition. These analyses can contribute to the framing of the next
questions for neuroscience to address. For example, neuroscientists are currently documenting the neural bases of
mathematical competencies such as enumeration, magnitude comparison, estimation, arithmetic, and place-value.
They are poised to connect with math educators, who have been researching these topics for many decades. Math
educators have invented representations and designed        activities and    instructional    sequences to foster their
development. They  have  documented  the  misconceptions        and    errors that arise      and developed appropriate

                                                        796                                                      ICLS 2006
remediation strategies. Over the next few years, we expect these two research communities to cross-pollinate and the
result to be a better understanding of the development of mathematical competence during the early elementary
grades (and its derailment in dyscalculia).

Conclusion
        We conclude with three observations that have been useful to us in thinking about research at the border
between education and neuroscience.

Domains, not Disciplines
        There exists a natural tension between disciplines that must be resolved for interdisciplinary research is to
occur. One way to do this is to stop focusing on the different disciplines from which we come and start focusing on
the common   domains   which  we  are  interested   in studying. If  one's goal  is to conduct research   within math
education, for example, then it is natural to defend one's discipline against incursions by neuroscientists and other
outsiders. However, if one's  goal  is instead   to understand   the nature  of  mathematical  reasoning,  then  many
disciplines potentially offer insights: the history of mathematics, the development of mathematical cognition, the
mathematical abilities of other species, neuroimaging studies of normal young adults, neuropsychological studies of
patients with brain lesions ­ and of course the math education literature. When we define ourselves by the domains
we study, then other disciplines become useful sources of information.

Collaboration, not Competition
        Educational researchers and neuroscientists do not have to view themselves as competitors for the same
knowledge. It is more fruitful for them to view themselves as collaborators (McCandliss et al., 2003). This is
particularly true in light of the first observation: that educational researchers and neuroscientists should focus on
common domains rather than disciplinary differences. Such collaborations can potentially leverage the strengths of
each discipline's methods and theoretical frameworks.

An Empirical Matter, not a Logical Matter
        Ultimately, the relation between education and neuroscience is an empirical matter (Mayer, 1998). Logical
arguments that neuroscience should be ignored and counter-arguments that it should be embraced are moot in the
long run. The question is whether the collaborative research of educational researchers and neuroscientists on
domains of mutual interest yields interesting new insights. We believe this question is worth engaging.

References
Bruer, J. T. (1997). Education and the brain: A bridge too far. Educational Researcher, 26, 4-16.
Byrnes, J. P., & Fox, N. A. (1998). The educational relevance of research in cognitive neuroscience. Educational
        Psychology Review, 10, 297-342.
Dehaene, S., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Cohen, L. (2003). Three parietal circuits for number processing. Cognitive
        Neuropsychology, 20, 487-506.
Geake, J., &  Cooper,  P. (2003). Cognitive     neuroscience:   Implications for education?  Westminster   Studies in
        Education, 26, 7-20.
Goswami, U. (2004). Neuroscience and education. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 1-14.
Landerl, K., Bevan, A., & Butterworth, B. (2004). Developmental dyscalculia and basic numerical capacities: A
        study of 8­9-year-old students. Cognition, 93, 99-125.
Mayer, R. E. (1998). Does the brain have a place in educational psychology? Educational Psychology Review, 10,
        389-396.
McCandliss, B. D., & Wolmetz, M. (2004). Developmental psychobiology of reading disability. In B. J. Casey
        (Ed.), Developmental psychobiology of reading. Washington, D. C.: American Psychiatric Publishing.
McCandliss, B. D., Kalchman, M., & Bryant, P. (2003). Design experiments and laboratory approaches to learning:
        Steps toward collaborative exchange. Educational Researcher, 32, 14-16.
Petitto, L.-A., Dunbar, K. (2004). New findings from educational neuroscience on bilingual brains, scientific brains,
        and the educated mind. Paper presented at the Conference on Building Usable Knowledge in Mind, Brain,
        & Education, Cambridge, MA.
Pugh, K. R., Mencl, W. E., Jenner, A. R., Katz, L., Frost, S. J., Lee, J. R., Shaywitz, S. E., & Shaywitz, B. A.
        Neurobiological studies of reading and reading disability. Journal of Communication Disorders, 34, 479-
        492.

                                                           797                                               ICLS 2006
Acknowledgments
We thank Minna Hannula, Robb Lindgren, Janet Go, Jammie Chang, John Bransford, John Geake, Paul Howard-
Jones, Sue Pickering, and Usha Goswami for comments on these ideas. This material is based upon work supported
by the National Science Foundation under Grants No.!REC 0337715 and SLC-0354453.!Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

                                                         798                                                ICLS 2006
