                Designing an Online Service for a Math Community

  Martin Wessner1,3, Wesley Shumar1, Gerry Stahl1,2, Johann Sarmiento1,2, Martin Mühlpfordt3, Stephen Weimar1
                                           Virtual Math Teams Project, a collaboration of:
                                              1Math Forum @ Drexel, Philadelphia, USA
                     2College of Information Science & Technology, Drexel University, Philadelphia, USA
                                               3Fraunhofer IPSI, Darmstadt, Germany
                                                  martin.wessner@ipsi.fraunhofer.de

        Abstract. In the Virtual Math Teams project an online service for groups of people to discuss
        and    collaboratively   solve  mathematical     problems     is being  developed.    The   paper   takes   a
        qualitative approach to looking at the design-based research process of developing the platform
        for   a synchronous    math   problem   solving   environment.     We   sketch the  transition  from  early
        experiments with commercially available tools to a series of studies conducted with a research
        tool finally to the design of a platform which provides the technical basis to a scalable public
        service.  For   this design   we   had to take  into account     requirements  from   students, tutors, the
        service   provider   as  well   as researchers   from  various    disciplines. We   discuss  some    design
        decisions    which   lead  to a platform  which   addresses    the diverse   requirements   of  the various
        stakeholders. The paper underscores the value of a design-based research process and a self-
        reflexive process as we develop insights about online math problem solving.

Enabling and Supporting an Online Math Community
        So much math done by students is done at the individual level. Even when students work on math problems
together they are often doing the work individually. The goal of the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) project is to provide
an online service, as part of The Math Forum's regular suite of interactive math education services, that would allow
students the opportunity to work together collaboratively in a synchronous environment in order to talk about math
and  solve  math  problems.    The  idea   of the VMT     project is  to  bring together  students,  teachers,  designers   and
researchers all in a collaborative way to help design, develop, test, and use an online collaborative math chat service.

        The ultimate goal of the VMT project is to create a self-sustaining system that would allow individuals to
join a chat,  become    part  of  a well-working     group,  and  make    progress   together  toward   increasing  their math
knowledge and problem solving skills. But this ultimate goal raises several important challenges. First, are there
specific dynamics of a good online group. There is some conflicting literature regarding the work of collaborative
groups that is unclear about whether similar ability groups work best together or if mixed ability groups work best
(Ireson and Hallam, 2001). Also, should there be specific roles in the group of online problem solves and should
those roles be arbitrarily pre-assigned to students or should the system pick people with different characteristics to
assign them to a group together. Perhaps the most challenging issue is how to support a group as they attempt to
make progress in problem solving and what to do if the group gets stuck at some point in their problem solving
activities.

Theoretical Considerations
        The   VMT     project  has  taken  a  design-based  research     perspective (Stahl et al., 2006,   The Design-Based
Research    Collective, 2003;   Hoadley    2002). As   Stahl  et  al. (2006)   describe, the   project  involves  the  iterative
development    of the   online synchronous     math  chat service.    That iterative design   process  involves   a number   of
collaborators: research team, students, and math teachers. Here we will discuss the role of the research team a bit
and talk more about the students and the teachers later in the paper. The research team is collaborative group of
researchers  from  a  number   of   different fields and  math educators    who  meet   weekly  to  develop   and   discuss the
evolution of the online synchronous math chat system. The research team has done everything from collaboratively
designing services to working on the analysis of data from a number of different perspectives. The research group
also includes a number of off-campus collaborators who follow the research progress of the team and some of whom
become on-site visiting researchers for periods of time.

        For the purposes of this paper we are taking a more ethnographic perspective to talk about the overall
design development process in the research team. Barab et al (2004:254) define critical design ethnography as "...a

                                                              818                                                     ICLS 2006
process that sits at the intersection of participatory action research, critical ethnography, and socially responsive
instructional design." From  their perspective  their goal was  to effect social change    through a   process of being
immersed in a community and at the same time providing for that community educational design work that was
developed in collaboration with the community.     Porpora (1999) has suggested that action research is the highest
stage of service learning because it is a form of educational opportunity where students learn from real life service
opportunities in living communities, a truly inquiry and experience based process. Reason (2004:270) makes some
similar points reflecting Barab et al. (2004). He suggests that action research is at the intersection of "knowledge in
practice" and "participation and democracy". Barab et al. are describing a kind of parallel process to both Porpora
and Reason where the immersion of the design team in the life of the community enriches the work of both groups.

        The VMT is not a critical design ethnography project.    However it shares several features of that work and
involves an ethnographic component to the self-reflection that the research group engages in. The work in the VMT
is a highly collaborative and reflective process. The research team works through all design issues and research
issues together as they think about what effects changes in the chat environments are having on student participants.
They also think about the nature of the math problems and which problems are best suited to collaborative online
work as well as the nature of the mathematical conversations the students are having in the chats. The research team
also has engaged in problem solving themselves in the chats as they attempt to get a feel for the experience of the
participants in math chats. Finally the research team has involved students in the process encouraging them to tell us
about what worked in the chats and what they would like to see changed in future versions of the chats. Recently we
have also begun to work with a group of teachers on the project as well.

        The   current  paper attempts to take   an ethnographic  perspective in  that   it is a  large overview   of the
development of the chat environment and it critically reflects on the progress that we have made so far and the
challenges we face. As such the data for the current paper comes from the notes that we have taken on our own
process as we have in part become the subjects of our own analysis.

First Phase: Experimenting with Diverse Tools
        In our   design-based  research  at the Virtual  Math   Teams  project   (Stahl et  al., 2005),  we started  by
conducting chats in a variety of commercially available environments: AOL Instant Messenger (AOL IM), Babylon,
Blackboard, WebCT. Most of the early work concentrated on the use of AOL Instant Messenger for a set of math
chats that we called PoW-wows after the Math Forum's Problem of the Week (PoW) on which the chats were based.
The choice of AOL IM was a simple one, it was a piece of technology that most students had on their computers and
could be used to self organize math chats very quickly. Further in our informal conversations with students they
liked AOL IM very much and saw it as a "cool" medium in which to construct the math chats. Finally AOL IM is a
very basic piece of synchronous chat technology and so it was a good place to start from in order to see what other
features we might need to enhance math chats.

        The early experience with the PoW-wows was very interesting. There were many interesting things that we
began to see about the math chats themselves and several researchers on the project undertook an effort to code the
chat data to look for patterns of interaction in the conversation. The chats were also analyzed from a conversation
analysis perspective (Stahl 2005a; 2005b; Stahl et al., 2006; Zemel, Xhafa, F,   Cakir, 2005; Zemel, Xhafa, & Stahl,
2005).

        But beyond the content based research that was taking place in the project there were a number of critical
design issues that began to clearly emerge from the chat process. An interesting feature of chat is that it is a medium
that moves very quickly. People often do not write whole sentences and ideas flow very rapidly. This is especially
true if there are more than two people in a chat. It has become very clear that one thing that was needed was a place
where a group could save some ideas that they developed through the chat. They needed a place to store established
ideas and a way to organize those established ideas and math facts.

        It was also the case that students often missed ideas that others in the group articulated. This is a funny kind
of "shunning" that goes on in online chats. On the one hand it may be that an idea is articulated by a member of the
group and the rest of the group does not see the idea. On the other hand the idea may fall outside of the main flow of
the conversation and because the conversation is moving so fast people do not take the opportunity to respond to the
person who's posts fall outside of the main focus of the conversation. Another related process that goes on is that

                                                          819                                                  ICLS 2006
sometimes   in these chats two   or more   conversations  would  occur   in parallel  at the same   time. This  meant   that
participants needed to let the others know which conversation thread s/he was posting a response to.

         Due to the complexity of the problem or time restrictions of participants in many cases the problem solving
involves several chat sessions. In later sessions groups would like to review the conversation they had in previous
sessions. Thus, they could easily identify the state of the problem solving in their group. This would be especially
helpful when group membership changes between sessions as it was the case in our experiments due to coordination
problems or drop outs. It would also allow late-comers or participants who missed one session to catch up with the
other group members quickly. To support changing membership and multi-session processes a persistent storage of
the chat conversation is needed by the students.

         Finally it became clear that with many of the math problems the student were doing it was helpful to have a
shared graphical representation of the problem and the problem solving. When they did the problem solving together
in AOL IM they often drew on a sheet of paper and talked about their drawing on IM. They also began to upload
drawings to the Math Forum site so they could share drawings with each other while they talked about the problem.

         All of this interaction made it clear that there were some very specific features that such a math chat needs.
First it was clear that students need a space where they could put ideas. They need a text box where the questions
they wanted to address could be listed, or the ideas they had could be listed or formulas used could be listed etc.
Related to this kind of listing function, it became very clear that it would be useful for students to have a place
where they could draw or place drawings in order to facilitate the problem solving process. In addition, they need a
persistent storage of chat logs to allow late-comers or new group members to fully participate in the group and to
provide bridges between different problem solving sessions. Finally the students needed a "referencing" function
where they could point to posts in the chat or place in the drawing and bring other participants attention to specific
places. These  four  functions,  listing, drawing, storage and   referencing  became     the core of the  next  phase  of a
specific chat development.

         There were some additional problem solving issues that the team is continuing to think about even as the
design of phase two was going ahead. One thing we found in the problems is that there were two dominant modes of
discourse in the problem solving. We've labeled these modes expository and exploratory (Stahl et al, 2006). In the
expository mode one or more participants are explaining how to do the problem to the others in the group. The
others may or may not know how to do the problem solving that the explainer is talking about at that point. In the
exploratory mode, all participants are exploring together how to solve the problem and that exploration may or may
not be successful. These patterns of interaction have raised the question of whether groups should be mixed or same
ability, and then how those groups ought to be scaffolded if they need scaffolding. The research team is continuing
to think about  these issues  as they involve   some   teachers  in the  project and  plan   deeper,   more   context based
explorations of how the kids are thinking about the problem solving.

Second Phase: Using ConcertChat Rooms
         The   VMT   project decided  to   use ConcertChat,  a  research chat  environment     with  a shared  whiteboard,
persistent storage  and  special referencing   tools  (Mühlpfordt   &  Wessner,   2005).   In  collaboration   between  the
software developers and the educational researchers several versions of the environment have been tried out by the
researchers as  well  as with groups  of    students. In response   to the  analysis  of the  chat  logs  as  well as other
information  gathered from   the  moderators,   service  providers, and  the  students   the  environment     was  gradually
modified.

         To address the above mentioned four requirements (listing, drawing, storage and referencing) ConcertChat
provides a variety of features supporting math chats (see figure 1 for a screen view):

·   Listing and  drawing:  A  shared  whiteboard   allows  chat  participants to list ideas,  formulas   etc. and  to create
    drawings using circles, squares, lines, free-forms, text-boxes etc. In addition, participants can place pictures on
    the whiteboard taken from a gallery, the file system or from any part of the screen using the screenshot feature.

·   Storage: All chat messages, editing activities on the whiteboard and all systems messages (e.g. about joining or
    leaving participants) are stored persistently in the chat environment. Late-comers or new group members can

                                                            820                                                    ICLS 2006
     load all previous messages from the room's history. This also allows asynchronous participation in the problem
     solving process.

·    Referencing (1): When someone types a new chat message, they can select and point to a rectangular area or an
     object on the whiteboard. When that message appears in the chat as the latest posting or as a selected posting, a
     bold line appears connecting the text to the area of the drawing (see figure 1).

·    Referencing (2) Similarly, a chat message can point to one or more earlier textual postings or parts of postings
     to indicate for example a response to a previous posting. ConcertChat also includes a threaded view of the chat
     postings that, based on the explicit references between postings, displays them like a typical threaded discussion
     with responses indented under the posting that they reference.

  Figure 1. Screen view of a ConcertChat room. One of the messages provides a graphical reference to an area
  on the whiteboard.   The whiteboard  also contains textboxes  to   present the problem     and to  list ideas and
  formulas.

         In May 2005,   a series of chats using ConcertChat   have   been conducted.    Five virtual math   teams were
formed, each containing about four middle-school students selected by volunteer teachers at different schools across
the USA. The teams engaged in online math discussions for four hour-long sessions over a two-week period. They
were given a brief description of a non-traditional geometry environment: a grid-world where one could only move
along the lines of a grid (Krause, 1986). The students were encouraged to come up with their own questions about
the grid-world, such as questions about shortest paths between points A and B in this world.

         Technically, the students received a URL for each session where they accessed their group's chat room.
From the administrator's point of view a web page provided a list of all available chat rooms and the functionality to
create new rooms.

                                                         821                                                   ICLS 2006
         The chats were facilitated by a member of our research project team. The facilitator welcomed students to
the  chat, pointed them    toward  the task,  briefly demonstrated the use    of the system  focusing on  the  graphical
referencing tool and then kept generally quiet until it was time to end the session.

         The new functionality, the shared whiteboard and the graphical referencing functionality were accepted by
the  students. However,    the degree  of  usage  varied between   different  groups. Reasons  include the  lack  of an
exhaustive manual as well as some usability issues as we learned from the chat logs (some usability issues were
mentioned and discussed by the students during the sessions) as well as from our own experiments with the tool.

         The instructional design for the experiments with the students included gathering ideas in the individual
groups in the first session. In the second session students were asked to reflect on all ideas gathered by all groups
and to select those ideas they want to work on. This required some preparation on the side of the moderators in order
to collect and prepare the groups' results. Also the initial assignment of students to groups, the distribution of the
problem and the handling of drop-outs had to be done by the facilitators. In general, it became clear that an ideal
environment should not only provide support for (multiple) chat rooms but also provide support the formation of
groups and help to bridge different groups and sessions to allow (self-) organization, awareness of other groups and
their problem solving activities and results.

         As mentioned above, the ultimate goal of the VMT project is to provide a self-sustaining system which
offers a maximum of flexibility to engage in joint math problem solving. For this additional issues have to be taken
into account.  One  critical issue is  to support the  communication  between    the  groups and a tutor. This includes
submitting a solution, requesting feedback on the problem solving process or asking for help if a problem occurs.
Another issue is how to communicate the "state" of a chat room to other groups and individuals. This includes
questions like: Am I allowed to join that room? Does this group need additional group members? Is the problem
already solved? Do they plan to continue this problem solving? From the legal point of view there must be a way to
handle rude or even illegal behavior in chat rooms. As a default all activities are stored in the chat history including
pictures posted to the whiteboard etc. Questions of ownership, of personal accountability arise (not only) from this
legal perspective.

From Multiple Rooms to a Math Community
         As a third phase we are currently extending the ConcertChat environment to address the above mentioned
issues. As  a  new component    of the  system a  "Lobby"   has  been designed    and implemented  which   provides  the
starting point for all problem solving activities in the math community. Here, students find a list of problems they
can work on and all chat rooms they can enter to jointly work on a given or self-defined problem. They also can
create new rooms either for new groups or to work with the same group on a new problem. A chat in the lobby
supports communication between all students, across groups as well as self-organized group formation. Students can
explore all other rooms including rooms where they already have participated and rooms of other groups as long as
these are  not restricted. This  allows   communication   and   collaboration between  groups  and exchange    of ideas,
material and group results. For each room a number of fields exists which communicate the state of the room. All
online and offline members, the owner, the related problem and other information such as room name or planned
session times can be seen for each room. In addition, it is clear from the system's room organization which rooms
can be accessed by whom. See figure 2 for a screen view of the Lobby.

         With respect to the rooms different types of rooms have been designed in order to meet the different kinds
of problems and groups. This ranges from rooms where the problem and the participants are assigned by a facilitator
in advance, rooms with a given problem but open to self-organizing groups to rooms which can be used by all
students to work on arbitrary problems. Thus both self-forming of groups and tutor-formed groups can be supported.
Inside each room the room topic and problem description is available as well as communication facilities which
allow the group and the tutor to communicate not only via chat but also asynchronously via email.

                                                            822                                                ICLS 2006
  Figure 2. Screen view of the ConcertChat Lobby. On the left side the rooms are organized by access rights (see
  tabs "Welcome", "My Rooms", "Open Rooms", "Limited Access") and topics (listing of rooms in each tab).
  For each room additional information on participants and their online-status, scheduling etc. is displayed. The
  small window presents the view of one topic, here: a collaborative Sudoku.

Conclusions and Outlook
       In the process of  designing and using the Concert     Chat environment  we  have made     many  important
realizations about math problem solving and math problem solving online. Math is a subject that is challenging for
many students. Using chat takes advantage of a medium that is very popular with kids and one where it is possible to
lose oneself a bit in the interaction process. These are potentially good things for the math student. But chat can also
be so dissipating that one may not only lose oneself but lose sight of where one is in the problem solving process.
And so to that end we have attempted to outfit a chat environment with many of the tools one will need to engage in
successful collaborative math problem solving. This includes listing, drawing, storage and referencing to improve
the math collaboration in a group as well as various organizational aids to facilitate group formation, access rights
and community building.

       Further we have begun to work toward a whole community of online problem solvers and problem solving
activities. Our experiments with different kinds of math problems have shown us that perhaps some problems need a
more structured group in order to fruitfully get through the problem. While other math problems can casually be
explored by groups that come together just to talk about a little math. And finally for those groups that want to
develop continuity over time they can do so. ConcertChat will provide an environment where individuals might find
very different kinds of groups and different kinds of problems. This evolution is very in keeping with the tradition of
The Math Forum where different kinds of learners can find the level of support they need in order to improve their
ability to engage in fruitful mathematical conversation and become deeper mathematical thinkers.

                                                        823                                                ICLS 2006
References
Barab, S., Thomas, M. K., Dodge, T., Squire, K., Newell, M. (2004). Critical design ethnography: Designing for
        change. Anthropology and Education Quarterly 35(2)254-268.
Design-Based Research Collective (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educational inquiry.
        Educational Researcher 32(1)5-8.
Hoadley, C. P. (2002). Creating context: Design-based research in creating and understanding CSCL. In G. Stahl
        (Ed.), Computer support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 453-462).
        Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2002, Boulder,
        USA. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ireson, J. & Hallam, S. (2001). Ability grouping in education. London: Sage Publications.
Krause, E. (1986). Taxicab geometry: An adventure in non-euclidean geometry. New York, NY: Dover.
Mühlpfordt, M., & Wessner, M. (2005). Explicit referencing in chat supports collaborative learning. In T.
        Koschmann, D. Suthers, & T. -W. Chan (Eds.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2005: The
        Next 10 Years. Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL)
        2005, Taipei, Taiwan. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Pimentel, M., Fuks, H., & Lucena, C. (2005). Mediated chat development process: Avoiding chat confusion on
        educational debates. In T. Koschmann, D. Suthers, & T. -W. Chan (Eds.), Computer Supported
        Collaborative Learning 2005: The Next 10 Years. Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Support for
        Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2005, Taipei, Taiwan. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Porpora, D. V. (1999). Action Research: The Highest Stage of Service Learning? In Ostrow, J., Hesser, G. and
        Enos, S. (Eds), Cultivating the Sociological Imagination: Concepts and Models for Service Learning in
        Sociology. Washington, DC: American Association of Higher Education in association with the American
        Sociological Association.
Reason, P. (2004). Critical Design Ethnography as Action Research. Anthropology and Education Quarterly
        35(2)269-276.
Stahl, G. (2005a). Sustaining online collaborative problem solving with math proposals. Paper presented at the
        International Conference on Computers and Education (ICCE 2005), Singapore, Singapore.
Stahl, G. (2005b). Group cognition in chat: Methods of interaction / methodologies of analysis. Paper presented at
        the Kaleidoscope CSCL SIG Workshop on Analysis of Interaction and Learning (NAIL 2005),
        Gothenburg, Sweden.
Stahl, G., Weimar, S., Fetter, A., & Sarmiento, J. (2005). Virtual Math Teams: Studying and supporting online
        collaborative problem-solving. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Council of Teachers
        of Mathematics (NCTM 2005), Anaheim, CA.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT
        Press. Retrieved from http://www.cis.drexel.edu/faculty/gerry/mit/.
Zemel, A., Xhafa, F., & Cakir, M. (2005). What's in the mix? Combining coding and conversation analysis to
        investigate chat-based problem-solving. Paper presented at the 11th Biennial Conference of the European
        Association for Research on Learning and Instruction (EARLI 2005), Nicosia, Cyprus.
Zemel, A., Xhafa, F., & Stahl, G. (2005). Analyzing the organization of collaborative math problem-solving in
        online chats using statistics and conversation analysis. Paper presented at the CRIWG International
        Workshop on Groupware, Racife, Brazil

Acknowledgments
The Virtual Math Teams Project is a collaborative effort at Drexel University. The Principal Investigators are Gerry
Stahl, Stephen Weimar and Wesley Shumar. A number of Math Forum staff work on the project, especially Stephen
Weimar, Annie Fetter and Ian Underwood. The graduate research assistants are Murat Cakir, Johann Sarmiento,
Ramon  Toledo and Nan    Zhou. Alan  Zemel is a post-doc.   The following   visiting   researchers have spent 3  to 6
months on the project: Jan-Willem Strijbos (Netherlands), Fatos Xhafa (Spain), Stefan Trausan-Matu (Romania),
Martin Wessner  (Germany),   Elizabeth  Charles (Canada).     The ConcertChat        software was  developed  at the
Fraunhofer Institute IPSI in Darmstadt, Germany, by Martin Mühlpfordt, Martin Wessner and colleagues. The VMT
project is supported by grants from the NSDL, IERI and SoL programs of the US National Science Foundation. The
perspectives in this paper are those of the authors, not necessarily NSF or others.

                                                        824                                                   ICLS 2006
