                             Communication through the Artefact
                        by Means of Synchronous Co-construction

                                     Astrid Wichmann, Markus Kuhn, Ulrich Hoppe
                        Collide Group, Institute for Computer Science and Interactive Systems,
                       University of Duisburg-Essen, Forsthausweg 2, 47057 Duisburg, Germany
                                        {Wichmann, Kuhn, Hoppe}@collide.info

         Abstract:     This  paper  examines   the  collaborative features   of a   tool environment    called  Cool
         Modes. Cool Modes provides different modelling environments allowing learners to co-construct
         representations of domain-specific models. These systems range from curriculum topics such as
         stochastic to subjects with a non-standard character such as astronomy. In the current study we
         focus upon the Stochastic palette and the Moon palette, which both provide visual languages to
         support modelling activities specifically in the subject matter area of mathematics. These visual
         languages     are embedded    in the  Cool  Modes    Framework    providing     tools for  annotating  and
         enriching the co-constructive modelling process. Both palettes have been tested and adapted for
         learning scenarios taking place in formal and informal learning environments. In this paper we
         report the findings from observational material collected from 3 classes in Germany using Cool
         Modes.     The    observation concentrates   upon   assessing    the   effectiveness  of   supporting  co-
         constructive modelling activities in a synchronous learning setting.

Introduction
According   to the  socio-cognitive  perspective   learners construct knowledge     by   actively  engaging  in collaborative
activities  such   as   formulating    arguments    and  sharing   ideas.   We      aim   to  support   the  socio-cognitive
argument/hypothesis that learning is grounded in participating in an activity. The social aspects that enable students
to  create knowledge    are  triggered through   using  computational     artefacts to   stimulate collaborative knowledge
exchange by communication through the artefact (Dix, Finaly, Abowd & Beale, 1997). In order to support students
to  not  only  participate,  but actively    engage  in  the  knowledge    construction      process, we  develop    learning
environments that allow collaborative manipulation of scientific artefacts. In face-to-face settings, allowing learners
to frame the learning activity using "computational objects to think with" can facilitate this collaborative knowledge
construction   process  (Hoppe,  2004).    Inspired  by Jonassen's    (2000)  notion   of mindtools    we   develop  learning
scenarios to establish a reciprocal environment that engages students to co-construct representational objects.

Collaboration
Communication through an artefact is characteristic of co-construction in shared workspace environments, in which
the  artefact-based communication      complements   natural language-based     exchange     (Hoppe,  2005).  From   a design
point of view, the emphasis is on increasing awareness of collaborators' actions, whereby the artefact is treated as
the  mediation    device.  A peer-to-peer    group  can manipulate    representational    objects  establishing  control  and
feedback   and    thus communicate     through   the learning  object.    Both  can  observe    each  other's   actions. This
communication is necessary to improve and re-adjust the decision making process that is represented by the artefact.
While this feedthrough communication is important for both asynchronous and synchronous learning settings, it is
also the   direct communication     within   and across groups   that can  be   facilitated  when  co-constructing   models.
Observing the direct communication in synchronous classroom and informal lab settings is critical when evaluating
the learning process. Different dynamics of communication can be noticed during a modelling session: Question
asking  (often to  the instructor), peer-to-peer  discussions and  knowledge     exchange    on a  group  level (across  peer
groups).   The communications    differ   in content depending   on   the problems   that  occur.  In a computer-supported
environment the communication that concerns the functionality of the learning environment is a thread that can be
observed, in addition to task-related and further non-task-specific communication. This tool-related information is
necessary. Conversely this can take up limited cognitive recourses that could be otherwise used for the task when
constructing a scientific model.

During the scenarios that have been analysed here, students conducted scientific experiments by constructing models
using an inquiry approach (de Jong & Joolingen, 1998). During this study we focus on the direct communication

                                                             825                                                    ICLS 2006
within and across groups using observation as an instrument of assessment. The feedthrough communications were
assessed  using log files containing   time stamps  indicating  the evolvement     of models   created by   students. The
learning objects are stored   and retrieved in a Learning   Object  Repository     called LOR    (Pinkwart, 2005).    This
software logging method was used as a complementary evaluation method for observation.

Learning Environment
The learning environment CoolModes (Pinkwart, 2003) is a framework for various visual languages with domain
specific semantics  that  support  modelling  activities. Representations   with   different semantics   (e.g. Petri Nets,
System Dynamics, Concept Maps) can serve as either operational or conceptual models, which can be enhanced
through annotating these models using visual languages to support argumentations and scientific inquiry. The Cool
Modes framework allows the learner to mix different modelling languages including annotation tools in the same
workspace. Discrete palettes indicate the domain to what the modelling activities are related to.

The  Stochastic  palette  (Kuhn,  Hoppe,    Lingnau &     Wichmann,    2005)   for example    is related to  probabilistic
experimentation activities. It is an open modelling environment where students are required to solve the task of
probabilistic problems   such as  the "Birthday  Problem".     The task is  not only  to  adjust parameters,   but also in
constructing  a  model   to select and   combine    elements   of  the  visual  language   "stochastic   experiments"   in
collaboration with peers, to represent as well as run and analyse an experiment within the field of stochastics (see
Figure 1).

                Figure 1. Model of a stochastic experiment with hypothesis note

The Modelling activities in Cool Modes are the results of selecting and linking elements of a visual language that
includes random generators, simulation controller and displays. Every element has its own meaning and semantics,
which  are represented   by its visual appearance.  Appropriate    elements can    be linked according   to the dataflow.
These elements are generated as a subset from the model of a probabilistic experiment. The control element repeats
the simulated experiment. A "collector" allows storing the experiment results, displayed as either a list or diagram.
Another palette, the Moon palette (Hoeksema, Jansen & Hoppe, 2004) allows learners to load and measure distances
on the moon using modelling and calculation tools. Students can make astronomical observations by taking photos
using small telescopes or utilizing available pictures that can be displayed in the Cool Modes workspace (see Figure
2). Students calculate the height of lunar craters by determining the radius of the crater and calculating the shadow
length using the intercept theorems.

                                                           826                                                   ICLS 2006
To be able   to measure   lunar heights learners can   model   calculation trees to visualize  mathematical    operations.
Collaborative features such as a voting activity and visualization of arguments accompany the modelling activities.
These framing activities can be attached in the same workspace as the modelling activities taking place using either
the voting palette or the discussion palette. Even though the extra-curricular character of Astronomy has a non-
standard aspect  to it, the modelling  activity itself requires students to work    with standard  mathematical   topics;
namely Sentence of Three, and Theorems of Similar Triangles.

                      Figure 2. Calculating lunar heights with the Cool Modes Moon palette

The feature in both palettes described above uses multi-modal representations. Self-generated hypotheses are to be
represented within the capabilities of the Cool Modes environment. The students have a set of model representations
available that can help to make useful decisions within the choice of collaboratively constructing an appropriate
model that   leads to solving a problem.   During the    Cool  Modes  modelling   activities a feature   for collaboration
support is available through a communication server called "MatchMaker". Through MatchMaker learners can share
objects in a joint real-time session. Shared representations can be individually annotated by coupling workspaces.

Besides  the synchronous    object sharing capabilities, Cool   Modes comes   with  an   interface to  a Learning Object
Repository (LOR) that allows for the index, storage and retrieval of specific learning objects for immediate or later
re-use. The uploading mechanism includes semantic indexing that autonomously stores contextual information of
the artefacts to facilitate the students' active learning, rather than spending time on indexing artefacts themselves.

Focus of Study
The study was carried out as part of the final evaluation of the EU funded project COLDEX (IST-2001-32327). The
activities were integrated in the rich context of remote and face-to-face scenarios developed to support scientific
experimentation activities in formal as well as informal learning settings. The face-to-face settings for this study
allowed us to intensively observe the collaborative behaviour of students engaging in scientific activities such as
constructing models,    measuring  distances and  interpreting  simulation  data. The  focus   of  the study  was on   the
technological development whereby the basis was in assessing to what extent students were really supported by the
environment to engage in effective collaboration.  Based on the work by Grudin (1988) we decided to conduct field
evaluation to be able to assess social-psychological and anthropological effects of the environment appropriately.
More specifically we were interested in the effectiveness of the learning scenarios adapted to run in both formal and
informal learning settings. The focus of observation was the level of interaction that took place during the scenario.
One goal of the COLDEX scenarios was to allow technology immersion by supporting scientific practice (Reiser,
Tabak, Sandoval, Smith, Steinmuller & Leone, 2001) through co-constructing knowledge using features of the tool
environment CoolModes.

                                                           827                                                   ICLS 2006
Method

Study Setting
The  evaluation  study   with 3  classes took  place   in two   computer labs   and one  outside   of the  formal   school
environment.    The  participants  consisted  of  complete  school  classes, while  the  teachers  were    responsible  for
delivering both the theory and the student activities. Two researchers assisted with the technology. Only one palette
of CoolModes was assessed at a time. The palette "Stochastic" was tested with two classes. The palette "Moon" was
used by one class. All three classes were participating for the duration of 1 day in a computer lab at university. In all
cases the teacher introduced the students to the topic of Stochastic in previous lessons.

Participants
The students were 9th grade and from German high schools.        All three classes had no prior experience of using the
Cool Modes environment. Scientific Inquiry skills such as hypothesis building and collecting data were introduced
as elementary methods in science classes. Autonomous student activities as well as teacher-centred instruction were
part of all lessons. The theoretical introductions to subject matter and the short introduction to Cool Modes tended to
be more teacher-centred. During the Cool Modes activities students were working on one table of 4-8 people to
allow different modes of collaboration (e.g. peer-to-peer, small group, whole group). Two students shared a single
computer.

Data Source
Participant observation techniques were chosen to observe the students' mode of interaction. A category system was
developed  to   specifically  capture interaction patterns  in  connection   toward  whether   the    type of instruction
encouraged using the learning technology or not. The assessment of teaching / instruction styles in conjunction with
technology integration seems necessary because in synchronous learning settings the teaching methods can affect
the level of   technology  integration (Painter,  2001).  The   category system   developed   for  that   observation  was
translated into a rating scale that identified four discrete levels (1 = low, 4 = high) of interaction. The focus of
observation was the students' interactions and teaching styles. The categories regarding students' interactions (see
Table 1)  aims   at helping   to  assess the  level and   type  of  collaboration (e.g.  peer-to-peer   collaboration   vs.
collaboration across groups vs. knowledge sharing), support of arguments (visualising arguments, using discussion
threads  etc.) and  type of  communicated     content. To  further  analyse the  quality of communicated      content,  we
distinguished  between   tool-related communication    and  task-related communication.     Tool-related   communication
included content that was related to the functionality of the Cool Modes software. Task-related content refers to
communication regarding the task itself, e.g. constructing a model in Cool Modes. The coded instructional styles
concentrate upon the overall teaching method (learner-centred vs. teacher-centred) and level of teacher involvement
in student activities. During the course of observation a list of program related bugs and interface problems that
students  encountered    were generated.  Additional   material  to observation:  Additionally   to   the  interaction and
annotations,   student artefacts  were   used for convergent    validation   and  pictures  were   taken   throughout   the
instructional learning unit.

Table 1: Excerpt of 4 (out of 12) Interaction Patterns for Coding

Every   Observer   was   briefed about  the observation    material and  methodology     to attain the    highest level of
standardization across each test. The observational material that consisted of rating scales was explained beforehand

                                                            828                                                   ICLS 2006
and the appropriate method of recording observations was introduced. Since the rating scales that were developed
for this observation are considered complex, a legend (including schemes) was attached to the rating scales and
openly discussed with each observer. Every item of the scale was explained, and its specific meaning agreed upon in
order  to achieve  a  high comparability    of the  observed   data. Observation  of  all students   who  are  involved   in an
activity was considered to be too resource intensive, therefore we decided upon an appropriate sampling method.
According to Baber (2005) taking the sociological approach by seeking to collect data from a smaller sample group,
but over a comparatively longer duration of time, can control extraneous variables and better reflect real practice in
real environments. Four experienced evaluators were selected as observers, choosing one or two peer-to-peer groups
to observe   them  throughout  one    learning unit.  In total 11  groups  were  observed.     The students were informed
beforehand   that  an observation would     take  place. Permission   was  gained    from the  students  via   the appropriate
method    of informed  consent. The      samples  for  observation   were selected   depending    on   their activeness in   the
activity. This decision of disregarding generalisability was made in favour of capturing rich descriptive results.

Analysis and Results
After the observation took place, the observers shared and discussed their observational material. This consisted of
the annotated scales as well as rich descriptions of content and activity that the students were working with during
the observation.   The  different material     was  discussed  to  ensure equality    of  initial conditions   and context   of
activities. The reviewed results of the scales were aggregated. This was done for every unit. The aggregated results
of every unit were then compared with other units.

In summary, three units were observed. The unit Stochastic took place twice, with different classes and teachers; the
unit Moon took place once. Categories were determined depending on type of instruction and content. We compared
the level of collaboration and interaction within the following sessions that are applicable throughout the classes:
Introduction to the theory/ task, Introduction to the environment Cool Modes, Cool Modes Practice Session I, II and
III, and LOR (Learning Object Repository) session. During the LOR session, students uploaded and retrieved their
artefacts to the LOR via an interface in Cool Modes.

A   comparison   between   theory-related    instruction and   Cool  Modes    related  instruction  mode     showed  expected
differences in the level of student interaction. We observed that theory-related session engaged students to a smaller
extent in collaborative activities across groups than within peer groups. It was observed that little communication
took place during theory-related instruction. During the Cool Modes session, more communication took place. Here,
students  actively exchanged   information.     Furthermore,   it was  observed   that learners   shared ideas   across group
members and requested information related to the tool as well as task-related question. Besides comparing different
modes of instruction, we compared the change of collaborative behaviour during one mode of instruction over a
period of time. It could be observed that quality and intensity of collaboration changed during one Cool Modes
session.  In Cool  Modes   Session    I, students collaborated  only  in  small  group   settings  (peer-to-peer)  within peer
settings. Little or no collaboration was observed across groups and therefore little knowledge exchange took place in
the whole class.   In Cool Modes Session II, and III group structures softened and students exchanged information
across  peer-groups.   In  particular the   quality of information   exchange    increased  and    the learning  objects  built
included   more    annotations  such     as formulating   hypotheses     etc. First,  we  observed     more    one-directional
communication in the sense that students requested small pieces of information. After working with the Cool Modes
environment for a while, sharing of ideas and small discussions could be observed. In Cool Modes Session III,
students exchanged ideas freely across groups, exchanging problems about the functionality and sharing experiences
of choosing appropriate objects to construct a model. While the collaboration across groups and level of knowledge
exchange increased over the day when working with Cool Modes, the peer-to-peer group collaboration maintained a
strong performance from the first until the third Cool Modes session.

Students discussed content-related issues (task-related) and issues regarding the functionality of Cool Modes (tool-
related). Tool-related communication included for example how to resize tables in the Cool Modes workspace, how
to save files, where to find other palettes, how to scale nodes and how to open a file. This type of communication
was addressed using the term tool-related. Task-related content on the other hand, addressed communication about
subject  matter,  such as  discussions   about a  given  task, problems   with  understanding     instruction. Comparing     the
results of both, theory-related and Cool Modes-related, instruction mode, we observed more task-related discussions
within the Cool Modes sequence than in the theory-related sequence. Tool-related content was only applicable in the
Cool  Modes    Sequence    and was    therefore   only observed   there.  In  a second   step, we   analysed   the  change   of

                                                             829                                                     ICLS 2006
communication during Cool Modes sequences over the course of the whole lesson. In the beginning of the Cool
Modes session, we observed some task-related communication and much tool-related communication.

                    Figure 3. Change of communicated content over time during Cool Modes Session

Towards the end of the Cool Modes activities students discussed more task-related content, even though tool-related
communication only slightly decreased (see Figure 3). Students created operational models in all three Cool Modes
sessions. Only in the second Cool Modes session and especially in the last session students annotated these models
by adding explanations and hypotheses. Also then students autonomously tried out other palettes and integrated
them in the existing workspace.   During the LOR session tool-related communication prevailed. The interface for
uploading artefacts includes   section where  artefacts can  be   described   by the authors. Especially   then, students
discussed in   peer groups  how   to   distinguish  between    the  models    that have  been  created.   However   most
communication took place between the students and the teacher about how to use the LOR interface properly.

Conclusions
We conducted observations over two different scenarios of the EU project COLDEX to gain insights into the way
the Cool  Modes   software supports    interactive behaviour   with an emphasis    on observing   collaboration  between
students within and across group behaviours. Our results indicate that both, the scenarios of Stochastics and Moon
within the Cool Modes learning environment engaged students in rich collaborative behaviour. During theory-based
discussions that took place without involving Cool Modes, students collaborated very little. This was expected due
to the teacher-centred nature  of instruction during  the theory    session. The   Cool Modes    sessions allowed  for an
enhanced opportunity to interact with peers and to discuss problems as and when they arose. It appeared that the
more the students became familiarised with the software and the more they were able to open up to other groups in
order to share ideas within the class community the more they engaged with the task itself.

When   looking at the  content that was  communicated     in discussions,  it became    apparent that the learners initial
reactions to the Cool Modes software was that the students' primary focus was centred on the functionality rather
than on the subject matter itself. Furthermore, it appeared that in the beginning, students expelled the majority of
their cognitive resources to cope with the software. After getting accustomed to the software we observed a change
of behaviour towards more task-related discussions, and thus the software tool became transparent, allowing for the
learner to allocate a greater cognitive load to the actual subject matter. Students spent more time with for example
discussing and rethinking hypotheses.

Collaboration has been assessed on a behavioural level using observational data. Log-data was used to support this
observed data on a more formalised level. Results showed that the Cool Modes software enabled students to engage
in different types of collaboration. Students worked on models and rule-sets within peer groups as well as across
groups. Cool Modes seemed to support and enhance collaboration, especially after students overcame the basic task
of familiarising with the software. We observed that in the initial phase of working with Cool Modes, students used
their cognitive resources to collaboratively explore the tools while neglecting the task (e.g. building a model) itself.
After this initial phase, students constructed models using the Cool Modes software while actively discussing and
planning the learning process. Students did not only exchange ideas with their peer group but also with the whole
class in its entirety, within both informal and formal settings.

Discussion
It is a commonly accepted and discussed phenomenon (Kalyuga, Chandler & Sweller, 1998) that when students
perform a new complex task, more cognitive resources are needed and a higher cognitive load is associated with it.

                                                           830                                                  ICLS 2006
The fact that  we found  that students  allocated   more  cognitive  effort towards    the task at the end  of the  learning
sequence could suggest that the students became more and more experts in using the software and therefore the
cognitive load reduced. This is in line with Van Merriënboer et al. (Van Merriënboer, Kirschner & Kester, 2003)
who describe that learners at a certain level of expertise can perform routines without investing extra mental effort.
Future  design efforts  should  have  the goal   to   speed up  this process   of turning   complex    processes  related to
functionality into automated schemata and thus allowing the learner to concentrate on the task and the subject matter
content related to it. Cognitive load theorists distinguish between extraneous cognitive load and intrinsic cognitive
load. It is the extraneous cognitive load that we can affect by developing an environment that reduces unnecessary
working load.

References:
Baber, C. (2005). Evaluation in Human Computer Interaction. Evaluation of Human Work: A Practical Ergonomics
         Methodology, 3rd Edition. London: Taylor and Francis
Dix, A. J., Finaly, J. E., Abowd, G. D., & Beale, R. (1997). Human-computer interaction. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle
         River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Grudin,  J. (1988),  Why  CSCW      Applications Fail:   Problems    in the  Design    and  Evaluation   of Organizational
         Interfaces, in Proceedings   of  ACM    CSCW'88     Conference     on Computer-Supported      Cooperative   Work,
         Perspectives on Evaluation, pp. 85-93.
Hoeksema,    K., Jansen, M.,    Hoppe  H.  U   (2004).   Interactive  Processing    of  Astronomical   Observations    in  a
         Cooperative Modelling Environment. In: Kinshuk, Chee-Kit Looi, Erkki Sutinen e.a. (eds). Proceedings of
         the 4th  EEEE   International   Conference    on   Advanced    Learning  Technologies,    ICALT    2004,  Joensuu,
         Finland, pp. 888-889
Hoppe, H. U., Pinkwart, N., Oelinger, M., Zeini, S., Verdejo, F., Barros, B., & Mayorga, J. I. (2005). Building
         Bridges within Learning Communities through Ontologies and "Thematic Objects". In Proceedings of the
         International  Conference   on   Computer    Supported    Collaborative    Learning.   Mahwah      (NJ), Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates, pp. 211-220.
Hoppe,  H.U.   (2004).  Collaborative  mind    tools. In Tokoro,   M.   &   Steels, L.  (Eds.): The  Future    of Learning.
         Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Jonassen, D.H. (2000). Computers as Mindtools for Schools: Engaging Critical Thinking. Columbus, OH: Prentice-
         Hall.
Jong, T., de & Joolingen, W.R. van (1998). Discovery learning with computer simulations of conceptual domains.
         Review of Educational Research, 68, 179 ­ 201
Kalyuga, S.,  Chandler,  P. and  Sweller, J. (1998).   Levels   of expertise and    instructional  design. Human   Factors,
         40(1), 1-17.
Kuhn, M., Hoppe H. U., Lingnau A., Wichmann (2005): Computational Modelling and Simulation Fostering New
         Approaches in Learning Probability. Innovations in Education and Training International Journal (IETI)
Painter, S. (2001). Issues in the observation and evaluation of technology integration in K-12 classrooms. Journal of
         Computing in Teacher Education, 21-25.
Pinkwart, N. (2003). A Plug-In Architecture for Graph Based Collaborative Modeling Systems. In U. Hoppe, F.
         Verdejo & J. Kay (eds.): Shaping the Future of Learning through Intelligent Technologies. Proceedings of
         the 11th Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, pp. 535-536. Amsterdam, IOS Press.
Pinkwart, N., Malzahn, N., Westheide, D., & Hoppe, H. U. (2005). Community Support Based on Thematic Objects
         and Similarity Search. In L. Aroyo & D. Dicheva (Eds.), Workshop proceedings of the 12th International
         Conference on Adaptive Hypermedia (p. 57-60). Amsterdam (The Netherlands), University of Amsterdam.
Project     COLDEX      (Collaborative     Learning      and    Distributed     Experimentation).        Download     from
         http://www.coldex.info
Reiser, B.J., Tabak, I., Sandoval, W.A., Smith,B. K., Steinmuller, F., & Leone, A.J. (2001). BGuILE: Strategic and
         conceptual   scaffolds for scientific inquiry   in biology  classrooms     in Carver,  S.M.   &   Klahr, D. (Eds.),
         Cognition and Instruction: Twenty-five Years of Progress: 263-305. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Van Merriënboer, J. J. G., Kirschner, P. A., & Kester, L. (2003). Taking the load of a learners' mind: Instructional
         design for complex learning. Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 5-13.

                                                            831                                                    ICLS 2006
