                      An Initial Characterization of Engagement in
                        Informal Social Learning Around MIT OCW

           David Wiley, Shelley Henson, Utah State University, Center for Open and Sustainable Learning
                                                david.wiley@usu.edu

         Abstract:    Open     Learning  Support    is   a  social   software     system    integrated  with   MIT
         OpenCourseWare     that  allows users to   find each   other  in order   to ask and  answer   each other's
         questions. This  paper  presents a   snapshot   of activity  within  the   system   eighteen  months  after
         launch, utilizing   descriptive  statistics,  social   network   analysis,    and  discourse  analysis   to
         characterize learner   engagement.   Future   directions  for the  software   based  on  this analysis are
         discussed.

Study Context: MIT OCW and Open Learning Support
         In September    of 2002   MIT   launched   a  website  in support    of  an   ambitious  OpenCourseWare     (OCW)
initiative to make the course materials used in all of its approximately 2000 courses available online in an open
access format. The new website contained lecture notes, syllabi, and other materials for thirty-two courses taught at
MIT, ready to be downloaded, used, and reused in a variety of ways in support of teaching and learning.

         MIT sees the OCW initiative in many lights, and frequently highlights the connection between OCW and
MIT's mission to "advance education and serve the world" (Potts, 2005). Some critics, however, have argued that
freely sharing educational content will not have the desired educational and service impact. And indeed, MIT OCW
staff readily admit that  the  offering  does not   include   some   of   the pieces   necessary  for  an effective  learning
experience, such as the opportunities to exchange views, ask questions, and receive feedback afforded by social
interaction with faculty and peers.

         In 2003, we established a relationship with MIT OCW and entered into an agreement to provide a social
software "wrap around" for the MIT OCW courses. Based on research in informal learning interactions around open
access resources carried out under an NSF CAREER award, and with financial support from the William and Flora
Hewlett Foundation, we designed a system called "Open Learning Support" (OLS; http://mit.ols.usu.edu/).

         Because there is no guarantee of faculty involvement and no financial support for moderators of any kind
through MIT OCW, the design of the OLS system would have to support self-organization by its users. The site
users would have to ask and answer all the questions; they would have to help each other find the particularly useful
messages within the system; they would have to police the spam and pornography out of the system. From previous
analyses of successful online social systems (e.g., Slashdot circa 2001) using self-organization as an analytical lens
(Wiley and Edwards, 2002) we knew two things: the first key to enabling the emergence of intelligent behavior is
sustaining  a sufficient number     of interactions   among   a  sufficient   number     of users   (Bonabeau,  Dorigo,  and
Theraulaz, 1999), and the second key is preparing an interaction space that affords the right kinds of interactions.

         Two philosophies guided the initial design of the system. We take the minimalist perspective of Antoine-
Marie-Roger de Saint-Exupery: "Perfection in design is achieved not when you have nothing more to add, but when
you   have nothing  more    to take away."  Second,    and  perhaps    more   importantly,   we   view  our  work   from the
perspective of "research as design" as explicated by Kelly, in which we attempt to work with "the results of active
innovation  and  intervention"  to  "address, simultaneously     and   iteratively,  the scientific processes  of discovery,
exploration, confirmation, and dissemination" (Kelly, 2003, p. 3). We hoped that, through the integration of OLS
into the MIT OCW web site, learners would find each other and provide informal, social support to one another in
their learning and use of the MIT OCW materials.

         As   launched,  OLS    has four  primary     features. First,  OLS    is   an asynchronous,   threaded   discussion
environment, including the "new post" and "reply" functionality common in such systems. Second, OLS contains a
"kudos" features that enables users to identify high quality contributions and say thank you to each other. This is
implemented as text appended to the bottom left of each message reading, "Did you find this helpful?" followed by

                                                            832                                                     ICLS 2006
a hyperlinked word "Yes." Third, OLS contains a "fire alarm" feature by which users can flag messages that violate
the terms of service such as unsolicited email or spam. This is implemented as text appended to the bottom right of
each message reading, "Report an inappropriate message" with the word "Report" hyperlinked. This takes users to
another screen in which they describe the reason they believe the message to be in violation of the terms of use. This
message is then sent to a system administrator who, if need be, can delete the post and send the offending user an
email warning. Finally, OLS includes a very basic reputation management system. Users can thank one another for a
useful post by giving "Kudos."  A high number of Kudos for a user would indicate that several others felt that user's
messages had been useful.   The number of kudos awarded to a post are shown in the kudos solicitation message as
follows: "X other people found this message helpful. Did you?" followed by a hyperlinked word "Yes." Figure 1
shows these features in the context of a typical thread.

                                Figure 1. Screenshot of a typical OLS thread.

Methodology and Findings
        In characterizing the structure of the informal, social interactions within OLS, we have relied upon several
methodologies. These include basic descriptive statistics with regard to the messages themselves, social network
analysis of the structure of the communications and relationships among OLS users, and discourse analysis, always
paying special attention to the way in which individuals       use the special features of the site that facilitate self-
organization.

Descriptive Statistics
        The OLS system and its integration with MIT OCW launched in mid-2004, approximately eighteen months
prior to this analysis. Forums are now available for 424 (or just over one third of) the MIT OCW courses. Of these
424 forums, only 56 of these have any messages posted within them, and 22 of those 56 forums contain only one
post. All told, 2120 people have registered to use OLS and have posted 504 messages. The top ten countries of
origin for OLS users are the US, India, China, Canada, Taiwan, Pakistan, the UK, Greece, Brazil, and Korea. The
most active forum has been that attached to the Linear Algebra course, one of MIT OCW's most popular courses
(due largely to its inclusion of video lectures). 145 of the total 504 messages were posted in the Linear Algebra
forum.

                                                           833                                                ICLS 2006
Social Network Analysis
        Social network analysis reveals a young community: 243 actors in the network (meaning only about 1 in 10
site registrants have posted), network density of .04%, and reciprocity levels of 14%. As density is defined as the
sum of the existing links divided by the number of possible linkages, we are unsurprised to see a lower density
number given the large number of actors in the network, and the portioned nature of the site as very few users post
in multiple forums. Figure 2 is a visualization of the social network, in which nodes represent OLS users with at
least one connection in the social network. Nodes (circles) represent people and edges (arrows) represent messages
sent from one person to another; nodes are scaled relative to the number of connections between them and other
nodes.

                   Figure 2. A visualization of the OLS social network including
                          all users connected to at least one other user.

Discourse Analysis
        Analysis of exchanges like those in Figures 1, 2, and 3 indicate that the system is to some degree serving its
intended purpose ­ helping users of MIT OCW find each other to ask and answer questions. The topics of discussion
vary from content-related questions (see Figure 1 on page 2), to technical questions (see Figure 3), to more cultural
questions (see Figure 4). The use of emoticons, as demonstrated in Figure 2, points to the emergence of friendlier,
more social interaction between users, another indicator of community health.

                                                        834                                                ICLS 2006
    Figure 3. A portion of a thread in which users discuss accessing video content from MIT OCW.

Use of Special Features
       We hypothesized that providing the opportunity for users to give each other kudos would encourage users
to make more posts and make more useful posts. This hypothesis has proven difficult to test without engaging users
in conversation directly. However, a few pieces of evidence suggest that kudos are being awarded in a thoughtful
way. First, if kudos were awarded randomly across all messages, then the correlation between the number of posts
made by a user and the number of kudos they had received would be 1.0. In the current data, this correlation is only
.603. This indicates that kudos were not awarded randomly. Adding strength to the argument that kudos are awarded
thoughtfully as opposed to randomly is our finding that the overwhelming majority of kudos have been awarded to
"answer" posts, indicating that individuals value the support provided by their peers.

                                                        835                                                  ICLS 2006
               Figure 4. A portion of a thread in which users discuss a Halloween prank
                             occurring within a video lecture from MIT OCW.

       Preece (2001) provided several metrics for judging the degree to which a person is engaged in an online
community. To  her suggested  metric of number      of posts  made by   a person, we add   number of kudos received,
degree of the individual in the social network, and usefulness, a metric we calculate by dividing the number of kudos
received by the total number of messages posted. Though all these measures are clearly related, examining the users
with the top ten ratings in each category is instructive. As shown in Table 1, ordering of users in Posts and Degree
are closely correlated, and these are somewhat related to Kudos. Usefulness is less correlated with any of these three
measures. In fact, there is no cross over at all between users who posted the most and users who scored highly on
the usefulness measure.

Table 1. Top ten OLS users ranked by number of Posts made, number of Kudos received, Degree in the
social network, and Usefulness (Kudos / Posts)

             Posts               Degree                      Kudos                 Usefulness

             michael             david                       lerman                bart_
             david               michael                     Frodo                 lerman
             tristanreid         tristanreid                 michael               antreality
             agenor              mishooax                    mishooax              Gaborphy
             govsocgrad89        agenor                      tristanreid           Martin
             sean_mcilroy        sean_mcilroy                david                 milind
             KP123               lerman                      antreality            villate
             zuyaoteoh           Ionas                       agenor                bchadek
             mishooax            zuyaoteoh                   bart_                 brent
             Ionas               Frodo                       bchadek               Frodo
             Vikranth            Vikranth                    brent                 senya72

       Also of interest is how the kudos measure appears to be central to all 4 categories, with the most users in its
top ten list who also appear in other categories. Users who received the most Kudos were also more likely to cross
over and score highly on the measures of degree, posts, and usefulness.

       Finally, the Fire Alarm mechanism as worked as intended, allowing users to flag inappropriate content
(mostly spam). The Fire Alarm has been pulled on fewer than ten users.

                                                          836                                                ICLS 2006
Conclusion and Future Directions
         OLS is a relatively young community struggling to grow into its potential. Analyses at the eighteen-month
point indicate that growth in registrations and activity is slow but steady. For the community to achieve its potential
­ for site users to be able to more successfully self-organize to support one another ­ the system must facilitate
interactions between many more people until the participation passes a tipping point.

         Because the rate at which users will discover OLS through MIT OCW is unlikely to grow dramatically in
the near future, the system must change in order to connect more of the people who are arriving at the site to each
other. The system  is  currently being redesigned   to facilitate these interactions by aggregating forums at higher,
topical levels (so that learners coming from Linear Algebra and Calculus courses at MIT OCW end up in a common
Mathematics forum). We are also exploring the possibility of combining forums currently integrated with other open
access content repositories (e.g., OLS is also used by Rice's Connexions initiative), so that users from multiple
origins arrive at the same discussion destination.

         Finally, as a result of  this analysis we   are able to   identify community   leadership  from a variety of
perspectives (as measured by the metrics in Table 1). We will work with willing individuals from this group to
expand reputation management features in OLS in order to provide meaningful incentives to greater participation by
existing users.

References
Bonabeau, E., Dorigo, M., & Theraulaz, G. (1999). Swarm intelligence: From natural to artificial systems. Oxford
         University Press: New York, NY.
Kelly, A. (2003). Research as Design. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 3-4.
Potts,  J.  P.    (2005).  MIT      OCW     Quick      Fact    Sheet.    Retrieved    November     11,   2005   from
         http://ocw.mit.edu/NR/rdonlyres/E44B238B-5108-4E9D-BA14-83CF4C227BF9/0/QuickFactSheet.pdf
Preece, J. (2001) Sociability and usability: Twenty years of chatting online. Behavior and Information Technology
         Journal, 20(5), 347-356.
Wiley, D. A. & Edwards, E. K. (2002). Online self-organizing social systems: The decentralized future of online
         learning. Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 3(1), 33-46.

                                                          837                                                 ICLS 2006
