                                              Ways of Working:
               A Three-tiered Interpretive Model for Video Research

Donald W. Wortham , Sharon J. Derry, Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
                                         1025 W. Johnson St., Madison WI 53706
                               Email: dwortham@gmail.com, derry@education.wisc.edu

         Abstract:  In   this "ways   of  working"   paper, we    describe    a  three-tier interpretive model   for
         analyzing video data of social interaction. Since members of a research team often work from
         different theoretical perspectives, individual members' analyses of "what happened and why" are
         not   always  congruent.     The  model     and  process   described     here  require    making  explicit
         methodological   (and    technological)   links between   layers   of   interpretation.  Individual  group
         members   benefit    because the connections    between   their   analyses  and    data can be  effectively
         warranted;  the larger   group   benefits because  the   location    of interpretive differences  is more
         precisely exposed.

Introduction
         The method described in this paper may point to the solution of a problem that confronts much current
research on social interaction, especially research that captures this interaction using rich media. Conceptually, a
consumer of video research should be able to trace a path from data highlighted by analysis, down through any
interim representations (such as transcripts), to the raw data. This capacity to trace a path from highest level of
analysis down   to raw   data would   allow the  consumer   to  better  understand   both   nomothetic   generalizations and
ideographic  particulars of   the social interaction being  studied.    In practice, these  connections   are almost  always
absent, and our field's current reliance on print media for publication passively discourages these connections. The
situation is exacerbated when video research investigates subjects' taken meanings (emics) rather than structural
features of social interaction (etics). Since researchers regardless of methodology agree that an important goal of
social science is the uncovering of subjective meaning (c.f., Angelillo, Rogoff & Chavajay, in press; Nystrand, Wu,
Gamoran, Zeiser, and Long, 2003), this opacity regarding the connections between data and analysis is worrisome.

         In  our own   lab,   we  have   been confronted    by    these same     problems,   since a  variety of  theoretical
perspectives are represented among our group's members. Working from a particular theoretical viewpoint, one of
us will  "see" something  in   data and  construct   an  analysis based    on this apperception.   To build   a case for this
perspectival viewpoint, and more importantly to help others see what they might otherwise not, we have begun to
explore a number of interrelated practices. First, we have put forth a model of interpretation, and come to basic
agreement about what can be known (and what cannot) from each of the three layers in our model. Second, we make
explicit linkages between our analyses and the various forms of data we study. These linkages are both conceptual
and technical, so that we can now trace an interpretive path from highest layer of analysis, down through interpretive
representations such as transcripts, to our raw video data. Since we believe that these efforts, while still provisional
and in an early stage of development, may be instructive for other researchers working with video, we connect our
discussion to a broader discourse within the learning-science community about the establishment of standards for
video research (e.g., Derry, in press).

The Three-Layer Interpretation Model
         Let us begin with a very simple visual analogy: our Three-Layer Interpretation Model is like a three-ring
toddler's toy. The toy consists of a wooden base, a spindle, and three rings of decreasing size. Our model consists of
a base (the event stream...especially social interaction captured in rich media), and three interpretive levels: a large
layer (raw data), a medium layer (observed events), and a small layer (analytic statements). Each of these layers has
certain epistemological and technical constraints, and results in specific work products.

                                                            845                                                     ICLS 2006
                                          Figure 1. Three-layer interpretive model.

        The toddler's toy differs from our model in two important ways: first, rather than being discrete from the
layers, the spindle in our model is instead a contiguous set of relations among the layers. Secondly, the top ring is of
two parts, corresponding to two different goals for research. In the sections below, we describe our model in brief,
working from the bottom up.

The Base: Event Matrix
        The toddler's toy has a base, a ground. The base referred to in our three-level model corresponds to an
"event matrix" that appears to particular observers as event streams. Since, ontologically, the event matrix exists
whether or  not we as observers   make   any inferences about  it, the event  stream   itself is not per   se part of our
inference model.

        An  event  matrix  is comprised  of  the multiple causal chains  that transpire in    a particular location:  in a
classroom, or in the vacuum of space, or inside a paramecium. Event streams are available to sensory experience,
but in practice unknowable in their entirety. The actions of teachers and students, the movements of planets and
stars, or the functions of the paramecium's organelles are indeed occurring, but the full scope of this activity is never
available to us as observers. Nonetheless, our research efforts are directed toward investigating aspects of this event
matrix and making warrantable statements about it. The belief that we can succeed in this effort is grounded in the
notion that video analysis is  a social meaning-making    process, with  an  aim towards      achieving intersubjectivity
among researchers, irrespective of their differences. For certain phenomena, we expect intersubjectivity to be high
enough so that at least some kinds of statements about what is happening in the event matrix can be made with a
high degree of  confidence (often  etic statements, discussed later). For other  sorts of statements,   we    assume  that
intersubjectivity will be lower (most often emic statements, also discussed later). In fact, the point of the method
outlined here is precisely to identify where and why intersubjectivity is low, so that our group's understanding is
stretched or even changed through alternative interpretations of events.

Layer 1: Raw Data Layer
        The first interpretive layer of our model is the "raw data" layer, which most often takes the form of digital
video recordings of social interaction. This pseudo-tangibility of digital video is a fantastic asset. We can move
digital video around, share it, take it apart, observe discontinguous segments contiguously, and so forth, yet it is also

                                                         846                                                    ICLS 2006
has the properties of being fixed and permanent, unlike our recollections about what happened, which are subject to
both degradation and importations of meaning. This "captured" aspect of videotaped social interaction allows us to
later make public what was transitive and ephemeral in the event stream.

          Even though we can regard the material stuff of the raw data layer to be a high-fidelity, fixed accounting of
social interaction, it must be regarded as limited in two important ways. First, the raw data layer is itself interpretive,
and not an exact rendering of social interaction; something is always left out. When we videotape a classroom, we
capture   only certain  aspects    of  social  interaction. We   further  acknowledge    that  interactions  off-screen,  and
cognitions "in the head" of participants have an impact on the very things we are filming. The upshot is that raw
data always has a point of view, and furthermore that our point of view is never privileged, and is always imperfect.

          Sometimes this is obvious, as when one participant's movement occludes our camera-eye view of a second
participant. But there are more subtle ways in which we leave things out. When our cameras focus on one part of an
interacting whole, we miss out-of-view interactions that may dynamically change the very interactions that are our
focus. Our situation is no different from other scientists who observe phenomena in situ: when astronomers monitor
the position of stars in our expanding universe, they focus on a small sector of the sky, all the while knowing that the
movements of other heavenly bodies are both "out of the picture" and affecting the movements of those objects
"within   the picture." For   us, this means   we  must always    regard  our statements  about  what  is  happening   in our
video...the   descriptions that   become   our   "observed  data layer,"  discussed  at length below...as   tentative, and as
circumscribed by the fact that we simply have not captured everything that was happening. This is necessarily the
case even if levels of intersubjectivity are high regarding what is occurring in the event stream.

          This recognition allows researchers to carry out a set of research actions that are fair game with respect to
the raw data layer. These include selecting, rejecting, expanding, and focusing raw data. These actions are very close
to their common-sense meanings: selecting raw data is the action of noticing something interesting and setting it
aside for purposes of further analysis; rejecting means eliminating raw data from further consideration (most often
because the video has been spoiled in some way, or records "dead time"); expanding means bringing multiple data
sources together to understand a particular sequence of events, such as multiple video views, stills of particularly
interesting actions or artifacts, and written artifacts; focusing means limiting our field of vision on the raw data to
particular aspects of the social interaction (or other behavior) occurring on screen.

          Before leaving this discussion, we must note that issues at the raw data layer span both the epistemological
and the technological: certain technical processes can positively affect epistemological problems. If what Jordan and
Henderson     (1995) say   is true...that  "video  recordings   replace  the bias of the  researcher  with  the  bias  of  the
machine," then making improvements to mechanical aspects of video capture is likely to lessen this unintentional
but still real bias. For instance, the knowledge that our raw data cannot capture everything nonetheless inspires us to
capture in our raw data as much of the event matrix as is practically possible. Our model is in essence a trickle-up
model, so information excluded from raw data is likewise excluded from all subsequent interpretation. Like many
other research labs in the learning sciences, ours has, over time, developed strategies and techniques to mitigate
some   of practical  concerns  related  to  videography.    For instance, we  know   through   experience  that we   get more
complete renderings of the event matrix when we use multiple cameras.          However, our focus in this paper is not the
mechanics of raw data capture, nor the placement of recording devices, nor the storing of digital information, nor
even the techniques for making links between the raw data layer and other layers of interpretation. Rather, our goal
here is to share  our   model  and    outline the  processes we   are  exploring, so we  will  say little more  about  purely
technical considerations, even while acknowledging their importance.

Layer 2: Observed Events Layer
          The focus of this section is the second data layer of our three-tier model, what we call the observed events
layer. This   layer depends    upon    the existence of raw     data, and the previously-mentioned    allowable    operations
performed on it...selecting, rejecting, expanding, or focusing.

          The  end-product    of  this layer  is a document   that re-renders  what  we   as observers    "see" in a selected
segment of raw data. As the graphic in Figure 1 above shows, not all aspects of the raw data trace are included in the
observed events layer. The point is not that aspects are excluded, but that researchers can, with high degrees of
intersubjectivity, agree about the nature of what is included. This requires that we have a shared "observed event
syntax." The key to developing an observed event syntax is to come to agreement about the level of description. In

                                                              847                                                   ICLS 2006
practical terms, this may not be as difficult as it sounds; research suggests that humans recognize a "basic" level of
events, similar to Roschian perception of basic-level categorizations of objects (Zacks and Tversky, 2001). When
building a record of observed events, the focus is on what early ecological psychologists (e.g., Barker and Wright,
1954) considered molar actions, those "observable by the naked eye," which conform to basic-level events. We refer
to this basic unit of description as the action. An action is an observable event that conforms to a subject-mediator-
object syntax where the subject is an individual. According to this perspective, "Caroline watered Pot One with a
pipette" and "Robert held the sample up to the Munsell chart" are actions.

          Our research group typically studies inquiry-learning environments, where multiple subjects interact with
each  other, with   various representations,  and with physical  objects  in the environment.   Our   model  handles  this
complexity   by  employing   focal-subject  observation techniques   borrowed    from  ethology  (Lehner,  1996;  Lorenz,
1981). When using this method, we "track" each participant in a selected segment, and describe (using short, direct
statements) what the participant is doing and saying. These observations are recorded in a contiguous row of cells in
a matrix. Once one subject has been observed and his or her actions recorded, a second subject is taken up, until all
interacting participants have been followed over the course of the segment.

          After all participants have  been   observed and their  actions (including   speech  acts) recorded,  individual
records are aligned according to time codes and intersecting actions, the entire record is reviewed against the raw
video data   to ensure that  all observable  actions have been   noted, and  sequence   indicators   are assigned to each
subject's action. This way,   the  record of  social interaction can be  followed   as if it were a  typical one-channel,
vertical transcript, even though it is multi-channel and horizontal. Once complete, the resulting product is not unlike
a digital animation score, where characters occupy particular horizontal "channels" and the entire sequence can be
followed by reading left-to-right, and within a particular column according to a sequence indicator in each cell.
Ideally, each segment is directly linked back to raw video, so that researchers can continually check to make sure
that this re-rendering of   activity captures the common-sense,    "observable   to the   naked eye"  view   of the reality
captured on video. This linkage is part of the "spindle" (discussed more fully below) that connects each layer in our
interpretive model. The record in Figure 2 below is an example of one of these products (from the first author's
dissertation):

                        Figure 2. Observed-events record from an inquiry-science classroom

                                                           848                                                   ICLS 2006
         As a practical matter, we should note that the building of observed-event records depends critically on the
capacity of digital video to be slowed down, stopped, and re-played, and on the observers' patience. The capacity to
"see" what each individual in a social group is doing, and to describe it so that it is intersubjectively available, are
critically dependent upon having a syntax of description that specifies the level of observation, being able to slow
things down, and having the wherewithal to go over and over short segments of raw data.

Layer 3: Analysis Layer
         A product like the record of interaction shown in Figure 2 above serves up working data for the top tier of
our three-layer interpretation model. The uppermost interpretive layer is where analytic (if probabilistically hedged)
statements are made regarding what has happened in the event stream...as it boils up through raw data and into
observed events; and why or how these events have transpired.

         Here's an example of how this works in practice. One of our ongoing research projects (the first author's
dissertation work) involves studying how students in inquiry science classrooms develop the ways of working of
scientists. Borrowing ideas from Charles Goodwin (1994), we are viewing video of students and teachers conducting
heredity experiments  to  see   if and   where they "create"   data by  coding  aspects    of the plants that  they are
experimentally manipulating. This interpretive process occurs in several steps. To begin, we work with raw data to
look for instances of the category of interest, in this case students' creating data by coding. Once these segments are
selected (one of the allowable research maneuvers at the raw data level), we can review the raw video data, focus on
participants and their actions, and build an observed-events record (Figure 2). This record allows us to probe the
sequences, and ask questions such as, "Who is participating?" "What is the pattern of interactions in the segment of
interest? We find that questions about "what" and "who" can be answered in a reasonably straightforward manner, if
we follow the observed-events syntax discussed above.

         Of course we must ask how and why questions as well: "How did the students know what `mattered' in
terms of coding?" "Why did Max ask the question about leaf color that he did?" In accordance with our working
model, we explicitly distinguish between questions of the first sort and questions of the second, calling them etic and
emic respectively. This acknowledges epistemological differences in the sorts of statements that we can make from
our data. Since this distinction is crucial to our model, we review it in some detail.

         More than fifty years ago, Kenneth Pike introduced the terms etic and emic to social science (Pike, 1954).
Pike, a linguist, suggested that the distinction between phonetics (physiological patterns resulting in sounds) and
phonemics (the meanings that humans assign to speech behavior) could be profitably applied to the study of human
behavior beyond language. Pike recognized that with phonetics, language could be studied and understood at arm's
length from the people that speak it. One need not understand what a speaker is saying to distinguish performative
aspects  of speech, such  as   differences  between an   aspirated [p] phonetic and     a non-aspirated [b] sound,  nor
distributional aspects (that, for instance, pathologies such as velopharyngeal frictive speech often co-occur with cleft
palate). Pike saw the study of phonemics as different, requiring the observer to access the meaning system of the
speaker. Pike's critical test for  phonemic  difference   was  to determine if exchanging     one phoneme   in a string
changed the meaning for the speaker (Pike, 1954). For instance, substituting r for l as the first sound in the string //ip
changes the meaning of the string (/r/ip versus /l/ip).

         Extrapolating from this, Pike's use of the terms etic and emic in social and behavioral research refers to
making a distinction between analysis of a behavior stream from a perspective other than that of the actor (etic) and
a rendering of the same behavior from the perspective of the actor (emic). For instance, to describe an action as "the
subject used an overhand motion with an inward turn of the wrist to propel a solid sphere toward its target" is to
employ an etic (if ungainly) description. Etic statements make minimal (if any) reference to a particular cultural
meaning  system; in  principle,    they can be understood   by  anyone  with basic     communicative competence     (c.f.
Habermas, 1981). To make the distinction clear, we can experiment with the statement concerning the sphere and its
target. If we reformulate it to say "the pitcher threw a slider, it missed the strike zone," we are making an emic
statement that is only meaningful if one participates in the language of baseball. This is made particularly salient if
we change the sentence, so it reads "the pitcher threw a slider at the batter's head." For those knowledgeable about
the game, throwing a pitch at a batter's head has a very different meaning than merely failing to deliver a strike...it
is seen as an aggressive act.

                                                           849                                                 ICLS 2006
          One of  the reasons   for making   the etic/emic  distinction is that  it forces   us to acknowledge    that we   are
adopting a specific perspectival frame when we make emic statements in an analysis. Leander's (2002) excellent
study of  "silencing"  in  classrooms   provides  a useful   example.   In this  work,   Leander   investigates  four  special
categories of social  interaction   in classrooms: students  can be   active  participants,  they  can be  "silent," they can
"silent and being silenced," or finally they can be "speaking while being silenced." While the first of two of these
categories can be readily observed by anyone with basic communicative competence, the latter two require that the
observer  participate in   the meaning   system  developed   by Leander    in his   article, and   presumably shared   by   his
subjects. These are therefore emic descriptors. By no means does this make them invalid; quite the opposite. To our
way  of thinking,   social science  progresses to  the degree   that new   understandings...such    as what   it means   to be
"silenced"...develop and diffuse through the community of researchers.

The Spindle
          We now come to the discussion of our three-level interpretive model's spindle: the relations that connect
statements at one level with statements at another, like the central spindle of a toddler's toy. The spindle in our
model is a conceptual entity that becomes manifest as links between various data documents and our raw digital
video. By allowing researchers to traverse these connections, the spindle ultimately grounds interpretation in raw
data. This proves particularly valuable when team members' interpretations are novel, or develop out of a theoretical
perspective not shared by the group.     In a sense, the spindle helps research teams like ours to keep track of "fissures
of interpretation."

          At the very onset of this paper, we stated that interpretability gaps caused by weak links or even holes
between what individuals "see" and what others in a group see are a central problem for research teams. To resolve
this problem, we    have   been experimenting    with  ways  to ensure  that  theoretical    concepts and  categories...when
applied through analysis...are traceable to actions in transcripts (at the observed events level), and one tier down, to
the video of the raw data corpus. We surmised that when connections among levels of interpretation are explicit and
direct, they can be followed more easily by others who may not share a particular theoretical perspective, or who are
simply  less familiar with  video   data projects  (peripheral  participants  in research,   such  as practitioners  and even
scholars-in-training). These connections constitute our spindle.

          Other researchers seem to be moving in similar directions; Leander's (2002) study on "silencing" again
provides a useful example. In his own musical score-style transcripts (which bear structural resemblance to our own
example shown in Figure 2 above), Leander embeds codes derived from his theory of social silencing directly into
his transcript. This is invaluable for the reader, since it allows us to "see" exactly where Leander "sees" the action of
silencing occurring in the classrooms he studies. To embody the three-tier model we discuss here, all that remains is
for the author to directly connect this annotated transcript up to his analysis, and down to the raw video data he
captured in the classrooms. Of course, neither of these steps is technically possible in the medium of paper-based
print, so we can hardly blame Leander for not making these connections. Indeed, our working model begs many
questions about the adequacy of current academic norms for conducting and reporting video research in the learning
sciences.

The Problem that the Three-Layer Model Solves
          Let us sum up. We believe that the three-layer model and the processes that follow from it hold potential
for solving a key problem for research groups: by explicitly naming layers of the model, by concretizing interpretive
processes, and by demanding that interpretations must "link down" to raw data, the model can illuminate opaque
connections among categories and codes used in research, empirical data, and analysis. In practice, this helps to
effectively channel subjectivity--or better, creativity--so that any private or closely-held meanings have a fighting
chance  of   becoming   intersubjectivity  held.  The  model    and  process  require  making      technical (in  addition  to
methodological)   links  among    layers  of interpretation: video   researchers    need  methods     for explicitly showing
connections among analytic statements, records of observed events, and raw data. Using off-the-shelf data-handling
tools, we are exploring these practices in our work. To date, they have proven useful for us. As we share them with
the larger community, we ask if...perhaps...we should all consider making these connections explicit.

                                                            850                                                      ICLS 2006
References
          Angellio, C. & Rogoff, B. (in press). Examining shared endeavors by abstracting video coding schemes
with fidelity to  cases. In R. Goldman,   R., Pea,  B. Barron,  &  S. Derry  (Eds.),  Video Research    in the Learning
Sciences. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
          Barker, R.G. & Wright, H.F. (1954). Midwest and its children. Evanston, IL: Row Peterson.
          Derry, S. J. (in  press). Video research  in classroom  and teacher learning:  Searching   for standards in a
complex terrain. In R. Segall, R. Pea, B. Barron, & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Video Research in the Learning Sciences.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
          Goodwin, C.A. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist 96(3), 606-633.
          Habermas,  J.  (1981). The  Theory  of Communicative    Action: Reason    and  Rationality of Society, Vol. 1.
Boston: Beacon.
          Jordan, B. and Henderson, A. (1995). "Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice." The Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 4(1): 39-103.
          Leander, K.M. (2002). Silencing in classroom interaction: Producing and relating social spaces. Discourse
Processes 34(2), 193-235.
          Lehner, P. (1996).   Handbook   of Ethological  Methods   (2nd  edition). Cambridge: Cambridge     University
Press.
          Lorenz, K. (1981). The Foundations of Ethology. New York: Springer-Verlag.
          Nystrand, M., Wu, L.L., Zeiser, S., and Long, D.A. (2003). Questions in time: Investigating the structure
and dynamics of unfolding classroom discourse. Discourse Processes 35(2), 135-198.
          Pike, Kenneth  L. (1954).   Language   in relation to a unified theory of  the structure of human    behavior.
Glendale, Calif., Summer Institute of Linguistics.
          Zacks, J. M., & Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in perception and conception. Psychological Bulletin,
12, 3-21.

                                                           851                                                 ICLS 2006
