The Role of the Backchannel in Collaborative Learning Environments

Sarita Yardi, UC Berkeley School of Information, 102 South Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720, yardi@sims.berkeley.edu

        Abstract:   Students at UC  Berkeley's   School of   Information   have participated  in a persistent,
        online  "backchannel"   chatroom during  class  since the   Fall of 2004.   This paper   describes the
        affordances offered by this technology for enhanced peer-to-peer and teacher-student interactions
        in a collaborative learning environment.

Introduction
        Over the past year, leaders in education, academia, and mainstream media have discussed the role of the
backchannel in presentations, conferences, and the classroom. Internet Relay Chat (IRC) is an online, synchronous
chat environment that enables groups of people to collaborate and chat from any physical location in the world
(Harris, 1995; Dewes, Wichmann, & Feldmann, 2003). The definition of the term backchannel varies with context
and usage. To some it suggests an intangible, clandestine community. To others, it suggests an empowering toolkit
for participation, collaboration, and interaction. The central function of the backchannel is its use as a secondary or
background complement to an existing frontchannel, which may consist of a professor, teacher, speaker, or lecturer.
It offers a unique communication medium, a novel toolkit through which students can create, identify, and filter new
modes of learning.

        The recent surge in interest has generated a number of conference-based case studies that attempt to study
the implications of backchannel chats. Participants in these conferences expressed a wide range of opinions about
the usefulness of the backchannel in context of the frontchannel discussion. A number of educators have similarly
considered the effects of unrestricted wireless access in the classroom, some of whom have attempted to incorporate
these technologies into their lectures and lesson plans (Anderson, Anderson, VanDeGrift, Wolfman, & Yasuhura,
2003; Campbell    & Pargas,  2003;  Franklin  &  Hammond,     2001;  Karabenick,    2003;  Ratt,  Shapiro,  Truong, &
Griswold, 2003; Hembrooke & Gay, 2003, VanDeGrift, Wolfman, Yasuhara, & Anderson, 2002). However, little
research has been conducted on how chatrooms affect learning experiences and environments. Chatrooms could
transform how students learn, course content, learning behaviors and practices, and interactions between students
and teachers,  fundamentally   changing the ways  in which    teachers   and  students create and  disseminate   ideas,
knowledge and understanding.

        This paper presents a study of a real backchannel community in a natural academic setting, located at the
University of California at Berkeley's School of Information (iSchool)1. It will first describe the physical and virtual
community. It will then analyze the characteristics of the chatroom and users' interactions and behavior. Finally, it
will suggest hypotheses and implications for the role of the chat in educational communities. What sort of new
virtual communities does it enable? What types of interactions occur in this backchannel and how do they contribute
to the academic learning community? How does this communication medium change techniques for information and
knowledge sharing? Is there a compelling story to be told or is it simply noise ­ wasted bandwidth that distracts
participants from  the face to face environment  they  are   in? In  light of  the increasing role of technology   and
computer-mediated   communication    as ubiquitous  tools  in  our   everyday   lives, there  is a need    for a better
understanding of how these tools can be incorporated into the classroom environment to facilitate enhanced teaching
and learning.

        This study analyzes the iSchool IRC chat logs from October 2004 to October 2005. The logs contain over
200,000 user entries, with an average of over 400 user postings per day. Software visualization tools are use to plot
chat statistics over time in order to highlight trends in adoption and usage within the classroom. In Figure 1, user
count is plotted versus the first six weeks of the Spring 2005 academic semester, showing a general increase in user
participation. This suggests that students become more engaged in the chatroom community over time. Figure 2
shows total  user entries by user. The  curve shows  a  power    log trend  in behavior,  indicating that  a few  users
participate most often. Educators will need to facilitate and construct a classroom environment that enables equal
access and participation.

                                                         852                                                   ICLS 2006
     Figure 2. Number of Chat Entries Over First Six                Figure 1. Total Chat Entries By User Between Oct
     Weeks of Spring 2005 Academic Semester                         2004 and Oct 2005
Implications for Education
         The use of technology in education and learning has been discussed at length by educators, instructional
designers, and technologists (Haythornthwaite & Kazmer, 2004; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994; Hoadley & Kilner,
2005;  Barab   et al., 2004). The   field  of Computer   Supported   Collaborative   Learning  (CSCL)    describes   how
scaffolding can support students' learning through a number of different methods, including situated learning (Lave
& Wenger, 1991), peer-to-peer learning, and constructivist learning (Vygotsky, 1978; Bruner, 1996). These theories
are based on the same underlying assumptions that individuals are active agents who are purposefully seeking and
constructing knowledge within a meaningful context. The collaborative affordances offered by IRC chat suggest that
learning can be enhanced through interactions between participants in the chatroom. A primary function of CSCL
software is to promote reflection and inquiry, which the chatroom enables through unrestricted participation and a
minimally  rule-based   environment   that encourages   intentional  knowledge   creation  and sharing.  The  following
sections highlight the salient factors in developing an effective tool for learning and theorize how an IRC chatroom
might be incorporated successfully into an education environment. Hoadley (2004) states that "if we find out how
people learn in natural situations, we can create educational environments more conducive to learning." The goal of
this case study is to provide useful guidelines for future implementations of chatrooms in the classroom.

Situated Learning and Communities of Practice
         Situated learning describes learning as a function of the activity, context and culture in which it occurs
(Lave & Wenger, 1991). This contrasts with many classroom learning environments that are abstract and out of
context, in which a teacher may structure a lesson plan based on an activity which is not personally relevant or
meaningful to the students. Social interaction is a critical component of situated learning. Learners become involved
in a  "community   of  practice" that embodies   certain beliefs and  behaviors   to be   acquired. As  the beginner  or
newcomer moves from the periphery of this community to its center, he becomes more active and engaged within
the culture and assumes the role of expert, a process described as "legitimate peripheral participation" (Lave &
Wenger,  1991).   Brown,  Collins, &  Duguid    (1989)  describe the need   for a new   epistemology   for  learning that
emphasizes  collaborative  social  construction of   knowledge  over rote memorization    of facts  and concepts. There
exists an immense potential and opportunity for incorporation of this backchannel into the classroom to enhance
situated learning. The social cohesiveness among students increases in proportion to their levels of communication
and interaction within the group. iSchool students affirm that one source of great value in their iSchool education
arise in their interactions   with other   students. In this light, incorporating  the  backchannel    into the iSchool
community augments and enhances a student's ability to actively and intently learn from his peers in a positive
manner   (Rogoff,  Paradise, Arauz, Correa-Chavez,    &  Angelillo,  2003). The   section below elaborates   on ways  in
which this peer-to-peer learning can occur.

Peer-to-Peer Learning
         Peer-to-peer learning in the backchannel describes a type of collaborative learning in which students share
knowledge through self-motivated participation and engagement. Mercer and Fisher (1997) describe three kinds of
peer-group discussions: disputational, commutative, and exploratory, and argue that exploratory discussion has the

                                                           853                                                 ICLS 2006
highest   educational   value. Successful   exploratory   peer-to-peer    discussions    are characterized   by brainstorming,
challenges, hypotheses testing, consensus, and decision-making. For example:
          Jan 25 10:48:10 <Student1> so whats non-repudiation?
          Jan 25 10:48:21 <Student1> tracing back to source?
          Jan 25 10:48:39 <Student2> it means not being able to deny your own messages
          Failed exploratory peer-to-peer discussions may occur when ideas are accepted unchallenged or because
continuous   disputation  leads   to  a breakdown    of  communication    within   the   group. Exploratory   peer-discussions
rarely broke down in this manner in the iSchool community. As a graduate student community, the learning context
of the iSchool is different than that of K-12 or undergraduate classrooms. Failed peer discussions might occur far
more frequently in younger learning environments where students are more susceptible to competition or immature
group    behaviors. In  these  environments,  it  would  be    important  to have  rules  to minimize breakdowns      in group
communication. These might include guidelines that describe the information, assumptions, tasks, and evaluative
criteria for constructive collaborative group work. This could be implemented through the presence of a teacher or
teaching assistant within the chatroom or a post-mortem review of the chat logs on a regular basis in which the
dynamics of the group could be studied and improved for future classes.

Constructivist Learning
          Much of the potential success of peer-to-peer learning in a chatroom is rooted in the theory of constructivist
learning. According to this theory, learning is an active process in which learners construct new ideas or concepts
based upon their current and past knowledge. The learner selects and transforms information, constructs hypotheses,
and makes decisions, relying on a cognitive structure to do so (Bruner, 1966). Classes in which students participate
in discussions encourage them to go beyond merely plugging numbers into formulas or memorizing terms (National
Research Council, 1997). Educational researchers argue that students learn best when given the opportunity to learn
skills and  theories  in the   context  in which    they are   used, then construct   their  interpretations of a subject  and
communicate those understandings to others (Brown et al., 1989). Students are creating their own knowledge by
having the freedom to direct the backchannel discussion in ways that are relevant, contextual, and instructional for
their  own  learning   purposes.   The   ways    in which   students  use  chatrooms     emulates their culture   of  learning,
communicating,      and  interacting.   Peer-to-peer  interactions   support   flexible, learner-centered    designs in  which
learning is active and organic rather than static.

Multi-Tasking and Cognitive Overload
          Many  opponents      to the   backchannel  highlight  its  potential for distraction  (Schwartz,   2003).  Although
students have always been subject to distractions during class, in a modern wireless-enabled physical space, the
possibilities for distractions increase (Phalen, 2003). Some have suggested the term "continuous partial attention" to
describe a student's cognitive ability to pay attention to the teacher's presentation when simultaneously engaged in
the backchannel. Others, somewhat cynically, suggest that "continuous partial inattention" is a more appropriate
description (McCarthy & boyd, 2005). Regardless of how well intentioned a student may be, a backchannel is going
to elicit reactions and engagement from the students that will be asynchronous and off-topic to the teacher's lecture.
The following example took place in an iSchool class:
          Oct 25 18:42:31 <Student1> Wait, what did she say? Something about ADD. I wasn't paying attention. Oooh, a
birdy...
Students may be distracted in the classroom and find themselves processing information at increasingly superficial
levels while they attempt to juggle tasks and transfer attention across multiple domains simultaneously (Hembrooke
& Gay, 2003; Hembrooke & Gay, 2002). Multi-tasking has emerged at the forefront of discussions related to both
childrens' and adults' uses of technology (Ransford, 2005; Rideout & Foegr, 2005; Hafter, 2001). Educators need to
determine if and how the tendency towards multi-tasking can be taken advantage of through the use of technology in
the classroom rather than being given up on as an entirely negative outcome of wireless technologies. Some studies
have indicated that learners can effectively multi-task in the classroom (Kennedy et al., 2005; Kaplan-Leiserson,
2003).   At the iSchool,  multi-tasking    sometimes     provided    more insightful  backchannel   discussions   through  the
posting of links and reflective comments. For example:
          Jan 31 11:25:29 <Student1> did he conclude the difference between copyright->employer and patent->employee?
          Jan 31 11:25:33 <Student1> or did I just miss it?
          Jan 31 11:30:17 <Student2> http://www.uscourts.gov/courtlinks/
Other times, it simply provided distractions that were off-topic to the professor's lecture. For example:
          Feb 03 17:31:28 < Student1> yeah.   I had a roommate who went running with friends and ran like 10 miles.    He came
home and was eating jam directly out of the jar. It was funny.
          Feb 03 17:32:01 < Student1> I never saw anyone adult eat jam directly before.

                                                               854                                                   ICLS 2006
          Feb 03 17:32:17 < Student2> i eat pb straight from the jar sometimes
Can synchronous classroom activities be designed around conceptually related tasks to encourage deeper processing
and greater learning of classroom content? Can the connectivity and real-time discussion facilitated by chat and the
multi-tasking capabilities of students contribute to new learning opportunities in the classroom?

Emerging Guidelines and Hypotheses
          As technology becomes an increasingly ubiquitous component of everyday life, educators will be left with
little choice   but to find a way   to incorporate  technology    into the classroom.   Computer    and technology      use and
behavior is dynamic and evolving with the changing demands of the users and disciplines in which they occur.
Ethnicity, gender, experience, and personality are all variables that factor into technology use. This paper is not an
attempt to prescribe blanket statements or predictions about how technology can be used in the classroom. Rather, it
is an effort to offer a set of hypotheses which educators, academics, industry leaders, and researchers can use to
guide   their own   future  research.  A  thorough  understanding     of the characteristics and  implications     of   how this
chatroom fits into the classroom structure will enable educators to design a better framework for learning.

Implementations of the backchannel will and should vary across different contexts and domains
          This analysis of the backchannel is unique to the iSchool graduate community. However, implementations
of the    backchannel   could exist   across  a  number  of domains,     including K-12,    undergraduate classes,      graduate
programs, law schools, business meetings, conferences, and online learning or eLearning environments. Schools, in
particular, need to incorporate the notion of communities of practice in combination with contemporary learning
theories to become more intentional and systematic for improving learning and education. For example, the ways in
which a backchannel could be used in a 5th grade classroom will differ significantly from its use in a law class.
Teachers may need to implement a more controlled and disciplined environment in younger grades whereas law
professors could assume that a Socratic teaching method will effectively command their students' full attention.

Teaching styles should take advantage of the social and educational affordances the
backchannel offers
          Technology    by   itself cannot  improve    instruction (Hestenes,   Wells,  &   Swackhamer,   1992).      However,
technology can enhance the effectiveness of a good instructional design (Hoadley & Enyedy, 1999). Many teachers
will   be more   likely to  adopt   chatroom    technology  in  their classrooms   if they  are first provided     support  and
instruction   on how   to use the   technology   (Cuban,  1993).   Teachers  may   need to  teach in  shorter    cycles to  hold
students'  attention.  They   should   adjust their curriculum   and   teaching styles  to  provide different    and  improved
environments for scaffolding than the standard lecture format. A tighter integration of the backchannel may require
their lectures to be more permeable and the right level of focus and formality will need to be determined. Students
should be enabled to continually build upon their own knowledge and use the backchannel to share and enhance
their learning process (Bruner, 1966). For example:
          Jan 23 16:17:30 <Student1> if   anyone  wants  a free stats  package thats  about 10x more  powerful     than the most
expensive version of SPSS, http://www.r-project.org/ . I'm going to be learning that, so we can pool resources.
          Jan 23 16:18:27 <Student2> i'm in Student1
          Jan 23 16:18:31 <Student3> it looks powerful, Student1, & on [professor's] list.  but unsure of ease of learning - user
manual, support community?

          A   better   understanding   of the   socially constructed   dynamics    around   the technology      is essential  to
improving its use in the classroom (DeGennaro, 2005). One option is to use two publicly-projected chatrooms: one
for comments, one for questions. In the latter chatroom, students could post questions for the teacher. A second
option is to use a chatroom robot to monitor a channel and provide basic information as well as perform a heuristic
analysis   of events    for post-analysis.   For example,   entering   the   command    "@define    constructionism"     would
automatically return a definition from nerdbox. Nerdbox, the iSchool robot, can be programmed to take a variety of
different types of commands.      A third option is to display the backchannel on the screen in front of the classroom so
that   students would   be  less inclined  to contribute   off-topic  postings and   would  instead focus on      the academic
discussion. Similarly, a teaching assistant could participate in the backchannel and help facilitate interactions by
guiding the discussion and providing scaffolding for the learners.

Chatrooms should enable teacher self-assessment
          Presenters want to be able to obtain feedback (Anderson et al., 2003; DiMicco, Lakshmipathy, & Fiore,
2002). For example, Classroom Presenter supports the ability for a student to send a question or comment to the

                                                              855                                                     ICLS 2006
professor as well as the location on the PowerPoint slide to which it relates (Anderson et al., 2003). Teachers should
be  able  to  analyze the  chat  logs of  a particular   lecture and     self-assess  their own  effectiveness. Did  students
understand their lecture? Were students engaged in the material? Did they feel comfortable asking questions either
in the classroom or in the backchannel? Were all students participating equally in the backchannel? For example:
          Oct 19 10:51:08 <Student1> Did [lecturer] ever show us the dataset and its format?
          Oct 19 10:51:30 <Student2> I don't think he did
          Oct 19 10:52:17 <Student3> but you can find it in [source]
          Oct 19 10:52:47 <Student2> Actually, I think this is the link
          Oct 19 10:52:48 <Student2> [URL to java source code]
          Researchers at MIT's Media Lab have designed a number of tools to visualize chat conversations with the
goal of  evoking   intuitive understandings    of the  nature of   the   discussion   (Mutton, 2004;   Donath,  2002).  These
visualization  tools  could  be used  to reveal   the structure  of  the  students'   discussions, and   understanding  of the
material.

A backchannel should encourage social interactions and community building
          In  the same way   that the physical    classroom environment,     as  well  as   corporate environments,  business
meetings, and conferences, all encourage moderate levels of informal chat and humor, the backchannel should also
permit the same dynamics. Students' desire to participate in the backchannel is increased if they have a sense of
community within the channel, which is most easily built through social interactions and shared experiences. Within
the iSchool community, the sense of shared context is easily increased through the daily personal interactions that
users experience in their face-to-face environment. By chatting informally in the classroom hallways, during lunch,
or in outside social settings, users establish a sense of trust that is transferred to their interactions in the online
environment.   The   more   shared context   participants  have,   the   easier it is for   them to negotiate  their sense  of
interpersonal trust and reputation and therefore facilitate discussion and conversation online. A fostered community
of learners will result in greater levels of metacognition, reflection, discourse, deep content knowledge, distributed
expertise, instruction, and assessment (Brown & Campione, 1996). For example:
          Jan 19 13:28:35 <Student1> how is social constructivism different from geist?
          Jan 19 13:28:48 <Student1> is it?
          Jan 19 13:29:26 <Student2> seems more inter-cultural than intra-cultural

A backchannel etiquette will need to be developed
          Is a socially acceptable intellectual dialogue better than no engagement at all? How about if the dialogue
includes an occasional off-topic or rude comment? For example:
          Jan 19 13:27:32 <Student1> i think we should have a goal this semester
          Jan 19 13:27:53 <Student2> to get [student3] a girlfriend?
          Wireless   technologies  change   how   people  interact  with   one  another and   etiquettes will need   to evolve
around these technologies. However, it will be difficult to construct a one size fits all set of rules. Rather, etiquette
will be contextual and evolving, based on environment, users, and needs (White, 2005; Cox, 2005).

Future Work
          We are currently developing a visualization tool2 of a standalone chat client as part of our iSchool Master's
Final Project. This visualization will be developed and tested in iSchool classes throughout the Spring of 2005. We
hope to complete a prototype of this tool, which will serve as a proof of concept of the possibilities in providing
such a   tool to  teachers and  professors  in academic    environments.    The    eroding  distinction  between the  cultures
surrounding   education,   work,  play,  and   technology  poses    new    methodological    challenges  within  the learning
environment. What are learners' rights with regards to wireless use in the classroom? Designing for new educational
environments using these technologies requires the use of iterative and reflective design methods to explore what
works, what is important, and how it enhances learning. This nascent subject offers a rich opportunity for growth
and exploration.

Endnotes
(1) Since the original paper submission, the school changed it's name from the School of Information Management
     & Systems (SIMS) to the Information School (iSchool)
(2) This tool is under ongoing development at http://dream.sims.berkeley.edu/groups/classchat/chatviz/ and the
     group website is located at http://dream.sims.berkeley.edu/groups/classchat/

                                                             856                                                     ICLS 2006
References
Anderson, R. J., Anderson, R., VanDeGriff, T., Wolfman, S. A., & Yasuhara, K. (2003). Classroom  presentation
       from the tablet PC. In Proceedings of the 8th Annual Conference on Innovation and Technology in
       Computer Science Education (Thessaloniki, Greece, June 30-July 2, 2003), ACM Press, 238.
Barab, S., Kling, R., Gray, J. H., Pea, R., Brown, J. S., & Heath, C. (2004). Designing for Virtual Communities in
       the Service of Learning. Cambridge University Press.
Brown, J., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989) Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning. Educational
       Researcher, 18(1), 18-42.
Brown, A.L., & Campione, J.C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments:
       On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning: New
       environments for education (pp. 289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bruner, J. (1966). Toward a Theory of Instruction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bruner, J. (1996). The Culture of Education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Campbell, A. & Pargas R. (2003). Laptops in the Classroom. Proceeding of the 2003 ACM SIGCSE Technical
       Symposium, February 19-23, 2003.
Cox, A. (2005). Where are your wireless manners? Retrieved October 18, 2005 from
       http://www.cnn.com/2005/TECH/10/17/wireless.manners/index.html
Cuban, L. (1988). Teachers & machines: The classroom use of technology since 1920. NY: Teachers College Press.
Cuban, L. (1993). Computers meet classroom: classroom wins. Teachers College Record, 95(2), 185-210.
DeGennaro, D. (2005). Should We Ban Instant Messaging in School? Learning and Leading with Technology,
       32(7).
Dewes, C., Wichmann, A., & Feldmann, A. (2003). An analysis of Internet chat systems. In Proceedings of the 3rd
       ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement (Miami Beach, FL, October 27 - 29, 2003), ACM
       Press, 51-64.
DiMicco, J.M., Lakshmipathy, V., & Fiore, A.T. Conductive Chat: Instant Messaging With a Skin Conductivity
       Channel. Poster Presentation, Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (New Orleans, LA,
       November, 2002).
Donath, J. (2002). A semantic approach to visualizing online conversations. Communications of the ACM, 45(4),
       45­49.
Franklin, D. & Hammond, K. (2001). The Intelligent Classroom: Providing competent assistance. In Proceedings of
       Autonomous Agents (Montreal, Canada, May, 2001), ACM Press, 161­168.
Gay, G., & Hembrooke, Helen. (2002). Collaboration in Wireless Learning Networks. In Proceedings of the 3rd
       Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (Waikoloa, Hawaii, Jan., 2002).
Golub, E. 2005. On audience activities during presentations. The Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges. 20(3),
       38-46.
Hafter, K. (2001, April 12). Teenage Overload, or Digital Dexterity? The New York Times.
Harris, S. (1995). IRC Survival Guide: Talk to the World with Internet Relay Chat. Addison-Wesley Longman
       Publishing Co.
Haythornthwaite, C., & Kazmer, M. M. (Eds.) (2001). Learning, culture and community in online education:
       Research and practice. New York: Peter Lang Publishers.
Hembrooke, H. & Gay, G. (2003). The Laptop and the Lecture: The Effects of Multitasking in Learning
       Environments. Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 15(1).
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force concept inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30, 141-158.
Hoadley, C. (2004) Learning and design: Why the learning sciences and instructional systems need each other.
       Educational Technology, 44(3), 6-12.
Hoadley, C. M. & Kilner, P. G. (2005). Using technology to transform communities of practice into knowledge-
       building communities. SIGGROUP Bull. 25(1), 31-40.
Hoadley, C & Enyedy, N., (1999). Between information and communication: Middle spaces in computer media for
       learning. In C.Hoadley and J. Roschelle (Eds.), Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
       Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (pp 242-251).
Kaplan-Leiserson, E. (2003, December 15). We-Learning: Social Software and E-Learning. Learning Circuits,
       American Society for Training and Development. Retrieved October 29, 2005 from
       http://www.learningcircuits.org/2003/dec2003/kaplan.htm.
Karabenick, S. A. Seeking Help in Large College Classes: A person-centered approach. In Contemporary
       Educational Psychology, 28, 2003. Academic Press, pp. 37­58.

                                                        857                                                ICLS 2006
Kennedy, T., Golub, E., Stroope, B., Kee, K., Powell, A., & Zehnder, S. (2005, October). Wireless Communication
       in the Classroom: A "Back Channel" to the Learning Process? Paper presented at Internet Research 6.0:
       Internet Generations, Chicago, IL, United States of America.
Kirschner, Strijbos, Kreijns, & Beers. (2004). Designing Electronic Collaborative Learning Environments.
       Educational Technology Research and Development, 52(3), 47­66.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge, England:
       Cambridge University Press.
McCarthy, J. F., boyd, d., Churchill, E. F., Griswold, W. G., Lawley, E., & Zaner, M. (2004). Digital backchannels
       in shared physical spaces: attention, intention and contention. In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference
       on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (Chicago, Illinois, November 06 - 10, 2004). ACM Press, New
       York, NY, 550-553.
McCarthy, J. F. & boyd, d. m. (2005). Digital backchannels in shared physical spaces: experiences at an academic
       conference. In CHI '05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Portland, OR, April
       02 - 07, 2005). ACM Press, New York, NY, 1641-1644.
Mercer, N., & Fisher, E. (1997). The importance of talk. In P. Wegerif & P. Scrimshaw (Eds.), Computers and talk
       in the primary classroom (pp. 13-21). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Mutton, P. 2004. (2004). Inferring and Visualizing Social Networks on Internet Relay Chat. In Proceedings of the
       Eighth International Conference on Information Visualization (Washington, DC, July 14-16, 2004), IEEE
       Computer Society, pp 35-43.
National Research Council. (1997). Science teaching reconsidered: A handbook. Washington, DC: National
       Academy Press.
Phalen, K. (2003). Taking a Minus and Making it a Plus. Info. Technology & Communication. 7(1).
Ransford, M. (2005, September 23). Average person spends more time using media than anything else. Ball State
       University NewsCenter.
Ratto, M., Shapiro, R. B., Truong, T. M., & Griswold,W. G. (2003). The activeclass project: Experiments in
       encouraging classroom participation. In Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 2003.
Rideout, V., Donald R., & Foegr, U. (2005). Generation M: Media in the Lives of 8-18 Year Olds. Menlo Park, CA:
       The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
Rogoff, B., Paradise, R., Mejía Arauz, R., Correa-Chávez, M., & Angelillo, C. (2003). Firsthand learning by intent
       participation. Annual Review of Psychology, 54.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of the
       Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Schwartz, J. (2003). Professor Vie with Web for Class's Attention. The New York Times, January 2.
Soloway, E., Grant,W., Tinker,R., Roschelle, J., Mills, M., Resnick, M., Berg, R., & Eisenberg, M. (1999). Science
       in the Palm of Their Hands. Communications of the ACM, 42(8), 21-26.
VanDeGrift, T., Wolfman, S. A., Yasuhara, K., & Anderson, R. J. (2002). Promoting interaction in large classes
       with a computer-mediated feedback system. Univ. of Wash., Comp. Sci. & Engineering.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. (M. Cole, V. John-
       Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman, Eds. And Trans.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
White, J. (2005, October 17). Wireless technology changing work and play. Retrieved October 26, 2005 from
       http://www.cnn.com/2005/TECH/10/17/wireless.overview/index.html

                                                        858                                                ICLS 2006
