                   A Learning Journey in Problem-based Learning
                                      Jennifer Yeo, Seng Chee Tan, Yew-Jin Lee
                   National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
                            Email: acjyeo@nie.edu.sg, sctan@nie.edu.sg, yjlee@nie.edu.sg

         Abstract:   This ethnographic      case study   describes  what  happened  when    a high school biology
         teacher in Singapore adopted problem-based learning (PBL). Using activity theory, we compare
         her instructional unit with a reference PBL model derived from the literature. We found disparities
         in the motives driving these two activity systems, which we attribute to differences between the
         lived-realities of   practitioners and  academics.  As    the researchers collaborate  with practitioners
         through joint reflective practices, our goal is to work towards an equilibrium point whereby PBL
         could be implemented meaningfully and realistically in an Asian society that has long placed a
         premium on academic achievement.

Introduction
         Most educational theorists now promote "learning in context" (Driscoll, 2000), "activity in context" (Duffy
& Cunningham,     1996)  or   "authentic  activities" (Brown,   Collin   &  Duguid,   1989) to engender   more meaningful
forms of learning. Problem-based learning (PBL) is one such example whereby students work in groups to solve
"real world" problems. Popularized during the 1960s, it tries to engage students with ambiguities that prevail in
everyday situations, integrating learning across subjects/disciplines through the active construction of knowledge
(Barrows & Tamblyn, 1980). Its focus on content knowledge and metacognitive skills made it a popular choice with
school practitioners for its promised transfer to real life applications rather than acquisition of inert knowledge.

         This paper discusses an ongoing design research in which researchers and teachers work collaboratively on
a PBL curriculum. The ethnographic study was conducted in the context of an Asian society (Singapore) where
national examinations are highly valued as they are often regarded as the determinants for future educational and
career prospects.  Driven   by this goal,   an  efficiency model    towards learning   is usually adopted  by  teachers and
students  to achieve the  instructional  objectives   as defined   in the national curriculum.  Thus far, this strategy has
yielded favorable results in international tests, especially in the areas of mathematics and science (Gonzales et. al.,
2004).   However,  the   call for a shift   to developing  critical inquiry by the  local  Ministry  of Education  has  seen
schools attempting alternative learning approaches such as PBL. In part, this move was triggered by the growing
realization that innovation and creativity are the key to plugging into the knowledge-based economy. Changing to
more   progressive forms  of   instruction  requires  not  only systemic   changes  to the  learning environment   but  also
challenges prevailing beliefs and values inside and outside of school. In the process of change, teachers and students
often straddle between the theory-practice divide, which is perhaps a necessary journey towards their end goals.

         Through the lens of cultural-historical activity theory, we sought to reveal disparities and contradictions
that existed between one school-based PBL learning unit and that described in literature. For example, when PBL
was implemented in these schools undergoing change, how did it change the socio-material resources? Would some
of these conflicts between the newly introduced practices and old philosophies of learning be so entrenched as never
to effect expansive learning? The many contradictions that arose thus serve as useful nodes where we can engage
practitioners in critical reflection of their practices and develop their learning trajectory. Similarly, it caused us to
reflect and evaluate our original purposes for the research; was it transformatory, exploitative or hegemonic? Were
we mindful of the lived realities in school? The ultimate goal is to reach an equilibrium point between theory and
everyday school practices so that PBL can be meaningfully and realistically implemented in a society which long
placed  a premium    on   academic   achievement.      In  the  following   sections,  we  present  the  methodology,   our
interpretation of the PBL activity system as derived from the literature, and then contrast it with the PBL classroom
in our case study in order to uncover the numerous tensions that Singaporean teachers currently face. We conclude
with some suggestions for facilitating the learning journey in PBL.

Methodology
         The fieldsite was a public high school that adopted PBL in an attempt to achieve an integrated approach for
teaching science. This school launched an Integrated Program, which aimed to engage students in deep learning

                                                             859                                                   ICLS 2006
through problem    solving  in contrast   to the  traditional  approach   whereby    science  was separated   into  its main
disciplines. Our ethnographic case study focused on a group of four students in a class of 23 high ability and mixed
gender  students in Miss   Chen's   (a   pseudonym)     ninth  grade foundation  science   classroom.    In our sample,    the
students worked on a problem involving the protein structure of hair and went through six lessons, each of about one
and a half hours duration, to solve the problem.

        We adopted a design research approach to the design of the learning environment. Data from each phase of
the design research provided important information for us to work with the teachers in the design of the next phase
of the research cycle. It also informed us on the necessary interventions that had to be introduced into the cycle. In
this study, we looked at the implementation of the PBL approach in the classroom described above. The activity or
discourses of the students were captured on video, transcribed, and then analyzed using cultural-historical activity
theory. The components of the activities of both the actual enacted classroom and the theoretical one were compared
and contradictions were identified.

The Activity System of Problem-based Learning Environments
        Problem-based    Learning     is a  learning  approach    that was  originally  developed  for   medical   education
(Barrows, 1986). With the goal of developing both students' problem solving strategies and disciplinary knowledge
bases and skills, it is a robust, constructivist process, shaped and directed primarily by the students themselves.
Since the inception of the PBL model for medical education, it has been adapted for different levels of students for
different disciplines (see Gallagher et. al., 1995; Guzdial et. al., 1997; Maxwell et. al., 2001). However, all PBL
models  share  key features such  as   learning  initiated with   a problem,   exclusive  use of ill-defined problems,     and
collaborative learning among    the   students  with  the  teacher  as metacognitive   coach  (Savery    &  Duffy,  1995).  It
embraces both liberal education and operational curricula, with opportunities for students to construct and refine
meaning for themselves as they generate and test their hypotheses while solving real world problems.

        In general, PBL follows a process in which groups of four or five students, presented with an ill-structured
authentic problem,  work    collaboratively    to   generate   hypothesis, identify  relevant  facts  and   learning issues,
investigate hypothesis and gather information, analyze results or information, and present and analyze information.
This new level of understanding gives rise to the next cycle of the PBL process until a suitable solution is found
(Savery & Duffy, 1995). Through this iterative process, students learn to deal with the complexity that comes with
authentic problems,  and   construct  and    refine scientific meaning    inherent in  the artifacts. The   process  of PBL
resembles  the inquiry process   that    scientists use for   knowledge    creation. Furthermore,  the   potential  for deep
understanding of domain-specific concepts and problem solving skills make it a popular choice to break out from
traditional methods of instruction.

        Problem-based learning, characterized by its language, tools, explicit roles, procedures and regulations, and
implicit behaviors and rules, are well reflected within the framework of activity theory. Studying how the tools,
rules and roles mediate the activities between the subject, object and community provides a better understanding of
the forms of human activity such as cognition taking place in the PBL environment. Figure 1 below illustrates the
use of activity theory to describe the activity system of problem-based learning, based on our interpretation of the
typical descriptions in literature. We can refer to this as the reference PBL activity system.

        The activity of PBL is driven by the motive of acquiring problem-solving strategies, content knowledge
and skills. The focus of attention (object) of a group of learners (subject) is the given problem space, attempting to
find a solution (outcome) to the problem. Content knowledge is regarded as a mediating tool for the learners in
making sense of the problem and refining their hypothesis. Other mediating artifacts can include resources such as
information resources  (tools), ways     of interacting (rules) such   as collaboration  and  negotiation.  Everyone    in the
community,    which could  be   made   up   of groups   of students,   teacher and   even an  expert  in the field, is  a  co-
constructor in the learning activity.

                                                              860                                                  ICLS 2006
                                                    Tools:
                                                    Content knowledge,
                                                    resources

                             Subject: A
                             group of                                        Object: Given Problem            Outcomes:
                             learners                                                                         Solution(s)

           Rules:                               Community:                             Division of labour:
           Collaboration, negotiation,          Groups of students in the              Individual working on different learning issues,
           reaching common                      class, teacher, experts                reporting back to group members on new
           understanding                                                               information found, group reflection of learning
                                                                                       issues back to problem

                             Figure 1. The activity system of the reference PBL environment

Findings and Discussions
        In this section, we describe how PBL was implemented in Miss Chen's classroom, in terms of participants'
goals, actions and mediating tools. Contrasting that with the typical PBL activity system as discussed above, we
analyzed the contradictions and interpreted it in the context of a larger school and society-wide activity system.

The Activity System of Miss Chen's Instructional Unit
        The lesson started with an authentic problem presented by the teacher about a teenager who was seeking
help for his badly damaged hair, together with the task and assessment criteria to the class. The task was to find a
scientifically sound  solution  for     the  teenager. In  groups       of  four or  five, students   spent    around     five hours     of
curriculum time over three days to explore the problem, search information about the protein structure, investigate
their hypotheses and find a solution to the problem. They were given guiding questions to scaffold their search for
protein structure. Given that PBL was completely new to this group of students, and seemingly to allay the fear of
the students, the teacher gave the assurance, "Don't worry, I'll do damage control later". This sentence perhaps
encapsulates the numerous tensions that Miss Chen experienced as she taught this biology unit using PBL. At a
macro level nonetheless, the stages of the instructional process resembled that of a typical PBL in Figure 1.

        We     then observed    what     the students  did    after     the problem  initiation    stage.  With   the learning   issues
identified for them in the form of guiding questions, students focused their attention on searching for answers to
these questions.  They   split the     task among the    group  members,        trawled the internet    for   answers,    and  compiled
information by copying and pasting. These actions were carried out with little discussion among themselves as each
of them was working on different sub-questions. The data found was then reported back to the teacher when she sat
down with the group of students for a discussion in the next lesson. The intellectual discussion was tightly directed
by Miss Chen as she called upon each of them to report what they had found. There were some further discussions
directed to problem solving among the students until the content knowledge deemed important by the teacher was
touched on.

        In one instance, one of the group members, Eric, was trying to explain what could cause protein to be
denatured (Transcript    1). As he     was   explaining, the  rest      of the group members       were    trying to reach  a  common
understanding as they added information to make the explanation clearer or questioned him in areas which they were
doubtful. The interaction was a dialogic one, whereby students negotiated and co-constructed understanding. The
voice of the teacher was seldom heard, other than to question misconceptions.

                                                                861                                                            ICLS 2006
Transcript 1
Eric           It is also said that there are several factors that lead to protein being denatured, which include high
               temperature and extreme pH values.
Sandra         Extreme pH values mean that if the sea is too salty, you can't go in?
(another
student)
Eric           Erm, what, what?
Miss Chen      pH and salt?
Eric           It's, I mean, it's true that sometimes in shampoo -
Sandra         Your shampoo consists of acid and alkali?
May            Ya, sometimes they put in citric acid.
Eric           You know, okay, I -
Miss Chen      Don't believe advertisement.
Eric           Okay, this is extra information. You know, when you shower, you know why there's conditioner
               and shampoo? There are two different reasons, right? Shampoo is acidic lah. So when you wash
               your hair, everything, right? What happens is the hair, right, that layer layer thing you know, will
               come up and fray and your hair becomes very rough, right? Maybe guys hair is different.
Sandra         What layer layer thing?
Eric           You know your hair, right? Can I see that picture? Hair has scales, right?
Students       Scales?
Eric           Scales like these, right?

         However,  the   dynamics of this  kind of  discussion     stopped later when   the  "crux" of the  problem   was
discussed. In Transcript 2, we see Miss Chen playing a very active role in the discussion, acknowledging, expanding
and clarifying concepts,  and  emphasizing  the key   points    of the protein   structure as  Sandra  presented the  four
structures of protein.

Transcript 2
Sandra          At different levels. And basically, the first one is the primary structure, the second one secondary
                structure, the third one tertiary structure, the fourth one quaternary structure.
Miss Chen       Okay. Tell me about the primary structure.
Sandra          The primary structure
Miss Chen                             This one ah, time out. This one must know ah.
Eric            Okay.
Sandra          This is a picture of the protein structure.
Miss Chen       Okay.
Sandra          And it is made up of amino acids.
Miss Chen       Okay. Amino acids.
Sandra          And is made of a chain of peptide bonds. So if I'm not wrong, these are the peptide bonds, is it?
                (pointing to the picture on the tablet screen)
Miss Chen       Ya. They just show bonds by lines lah. Essentially, your amino acids like that right? (pointing to a
                simplified version of the protein structure on the screen which she had drawn). Primary structure
                focuses on the fact that there are amino acids connected to each other by peptide bonds. Do you
                know the structure of amino acids? (pause) Okay, you need to know.

         As the reporting back phase went on, the teacher continued to emphasize and stress the importance of the
information  that they  needed to   know  [in bold]  (as    stipulated in  the official syllabus) as   she expanded    and
summarized   the  important points. The   students were     seen to be  taking  notes   as the teacher ensured   that they
understood the content. After the session, the students organized their notes, clarified understanding with each other,
making sure that they had not left out essential information about the protein structure. During the discussion of the
protein structure, there were few other instances of sharing of understanding or co-construction among the students.

                                                            862                                                  ICLS 2006
        It is evident from the description that in working towards a solution and presentation, students adopted an
efficiency "divide and conquer" model to completing the given task. The presentation turned out to be information
giving to the classmates who seem to anticipate that the teacher would do "damage control" at the end of all the
presentation. Figure 2 shows the activity system of the enacted PBL classroom.

                                         Tools:
                                         Internet resources, texts
                                         MSN messenger, intellectual discussion

                           Subject:
                           Students &                                     Object: Doing             Outcome: Achieving
                           Ms Chen                                        PBL                       conceptual mastery

          Rules:                            Community:                          Division of labour:
          Rubrics of assessment,            Groups of students,                 Individual working on different questions, reporting
          satisfying the                    teacher, school                     back to teacher, teacher directing, one student collate
          presentation criteria             curricula planners,                 input from each student, each student present the part
                                            examination board                   they were in charge of, teacher as expert

                                 Figure 2. The PBL activity system in Miss Chen's classroom

Contradictions Between the Activity Systems
        When     we compared        the observed  activity      system  in the  classroom   with     a typical PBL        activity system,
several tensions or contradictions became apparent (in italics) (Table 1).

Table 1. Comparison of activity systems
                  The reference PBL activity system                             The observed PBL classroom
Subject           A group of 4 ­ 5 students                                     A group of 4 students and teacher
Object Æ          Object: Solving problems                                      Object: Doing PBL
outcome           Outcome: Solution(s) to the problem                           Outcome: Achieve content mastery
Tools             Resources (cognitive tools, collaborative tools,              Information resources (internet and texts), MSN
                  information resources), content knowledge                     messenger, intellectual discussion
Rules             Iterative cycle of hypothesis generation,                     Rubrics of assessment
                  information gathering as resources to solve
                  problem, investigation and reflection through
                  collaboration, multiple solution
Community         Groups of students in the class, teacher,                     Groups of students, teacher, school curricula
                  experts                                                       planners, examination board, societal
                                                                                expectations
Division of       Group search for problem space (applying                      Individual student worked on different
Labour            prior knowledge to the problem, identify                      questions and reported back to teacher.        The
                  learning issues, hypothesis generation),                      teacher also does her part of the work to achieve
                  negotiating common understanding of                           conceptual mastery by connecting the
                  information found, reflection, and                            information found by each student, and
                  investigation. Individual working on different                expanding and clarifying important concepts.
                  learning issues, reporting back to group and                  The information compiled by individual student

                                                                    863                                                         ICLS 2006
                    self reflection. Teacher acts as the                   was then compiled together into a presentation
                    metacognitive coach.                                   slide.

         From the above comparison, the main contradiction lies with the motive driving the two activity systems.
Every  activity  is  driven  by  a motive;    what  distinguishes   one   activity from    another   is the object,  which   gives
direction to the activity (Leont'ev, 1978). All actions are hence in relation to this driving "force". In Miss Chen's
PBL unit, acquiring and mastering content knowledge seemed to be the primary object whereas ideally in PBL, the
problem   is the primary    focus, with  the  content  knowledge    being    a mediating    tool  in problem    solving. This   is a
perfect instance that demonstrates the "strange reversal of object and instrument" in school learning (Engestrom,
1987, p. 74) due to the historical isolation of school from other societal activities. As a result, the primary motive in
schools is   primarily   to  learn well   and  succeed     in examinations,    rather   than to   seek  far transfer  to real   life
applications.

         The   object   of  the activity  in  Miss  Chen's    biology   PBL    class  thus   (largely)  aligned  towards    content
knowledge mastery, as she emphasized the importance of getting the content knowledge "right" by stressing to the
students that protein structure is the "crux" of the whole lesson (and through other discursive turns not reflected
here). Co-constructing     this activity is  the group  of    students whose   interaction   changed    when    they immediately
sensed the importance of knowing the protein structure (the content knowledge) from teacher talk/actions. They took
down   notes  as    the  teacher   explained   the   protein   structure  to   them,  making      clarification when     in doubt.
Metacognitive skills, problem solving skills and collaborative skills now took secondary importance that stands in
contrast to the more interactive discussion when less high-stakes content was taught in other lessons. An efficiency
model was adopted in completion of the biology task by splitting up the work and then compiling each person's
contribution  into   a  presentation.    This inadvertently     short-circuited   the   iterative  problem-solving    process      of
hypothesis   testing and   investigation, which    would   lead  to deep  understanding      of content  knowledge    as  students
applied and reflected on their new understandings. This resulted in low levels of collaboration and reflection as
students often worked individually on their assigned parts of the presentation as we observed.

         The primary contradiction here can alternatively be attributed to the tension between the exchange value
and use   value  of  the  object­­examination     grades   (Lave  &    Wenger,   1991,   p.  112).   Problem  solving    skills and
metacognition are useful and essential skills in dealing with everyday problems but may not be so crucial in getting
by in high-stakes examinations which test mainly recall and procedural knowledge. In other words, Miss Chen's
PBL  classroom    activity   is embedded     within  a larger  activity   system   that values   good   grades  in  examinations.
Although teacher and students worked through the PBL stages, they were very much constrained by the latter, and
seemingly more entrenched activity system. What Miss Chen did was to balance, as well as she could, the ideals of
"real/authentic"  education     using  PBL    versus   the demands     of a  schooling   system      slowly undergoing      change.
Underneath the observable activity system that resembles the PBL approach to science learning lay the "invisible"
activity system that ultimately drove the action of all the participants­­teacher and students alike.

Concluding Remarks
         What    really  counts  as true  PBL?    This  paper   presents  tensions   between     researchers'   and  practitioners'
perspectives of PBL in a traditional yet academically high-achieving Asian society in Singapore. In the spirit of
design research, we do not profess that our interpretation of PBL is superior. What contradictions and expectations
Miss Chen faced on a daily basis was not what the researchers encountered as part of their everyday work practices.
Rather, what is exhibited as PBL on the ground entails the on-going, contextual interpretations and negotiations of
meaning   within    the team    (researchers, students  and    teachers). Thus,    these contradictions     should   not be  taken
negatively. Although an activity system is a virtual disturbance producing machine, the contradictions can provide
impetus for change, innovation and expansive learning. It is thus crucial for the researchers and practitioners to work
collaboratively  to  find  a balance   between   theory and    practice,  between  the   ideal  and  do-able.   One  approach    we
currently adopt  is  to  engage    the teachers  in  professional   development      programs    such   as reflection and   design
experiment so that there is both vertical and horizontal increase in expertise. The ultimate goals and trajectory of
learning in PBL have to be negotiated so that there is a balance in theory (academic) and everyday (practitioner)
practices­­what we term the elusive equilibrium point.

                                                                864                                                      ICLS 2006
References
Barrows, H.S. & Tamblyn R.M. (1980) Problem-based learning: An approach to medical education. New York:
        Springer Publishing Company
Barrows, H. S. (1986). A taxonomy of problem based learning methods. Medical Education, 20, 481-86.
Brown,  J.S., Collins, A   &   Duguid,   P  (1989).  Situated  cognition and     the culture of  learning. Educational
        Researcher, 18(1), 32-41.
Driscoll, M. P. (2000). Psychology of learning for instruction. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Duffy, T.  M.   & Cunningham,       D.  J. (1996).  Constructivism:  Implications    for the  design  and  delivery of
        instruction.  In D.   H. Jonassen    (Ed.), Handbook     of research     on  educational communications   and
        technology. New York: Scholastic.
Engeström,  Y.  (1987).  Learning   by   expanding:  An  activity-theoretical approach    to  developmental  research.
       Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.
Gallagher, S. (1995). Implementing problem based learning in science classrooms.       School
        Sciences and Mathematics, 95 (3), 136-146.
Gonzales, P.,  Guzman,    J. C., Partelow,   L., Pahlke,   E., Jocelyn,  L., Kastberg,   D.,  &  Williams,  T. (2004).
        Highlights from the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS)2003. (NCES 2005-
        005). U.S. Department of Education, National Centre for Education Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S.
        Government Printing Office.
Guzdial, M., Hmelo, C., Hubscher, R., Newstetter, W., Puntambekar, S., Shabo, A., Turns, J., & Kolodner, J. (1997).
        Integrating and guiding collaboration: Lessons learned in computer supported collaboration learning
        research  at  Georgia  Tech.   Proceedings  of Computer-Support      for Collaborative   Learning  (CSCL `97),
        Toronto, Ontario, 91-100.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Leont'ev,  A.N.   (1978).    Activity,  consciousness,  and    personality.  Englewood     Cliffs,  NJ:   Prentice-Hall.
Maxwell, N., Bellisimo Y. & Mergendoller, J. (2001). Problem-based learning: Modifying the medical school model
        for teaching high school economics. The     Social Studies, 92 (2), 73-78.
Savery, J. R. and Duffy, T. M. (1995). Problem based learning: An instructional model and its constructivist
        framework. Educational Technology, 35 (5), 31-37.

Acknowledgements
This on-going research is funded by the Learning Sciences Lab, Singapore. (Project code:     LSL 1/04 TSC)

                                                           865                                                 ICLS 2006
