    Feedback and Adaptation Within a Complex Systems Approach to
 Designing for Scalable and Sustainable Professional Development

 Susan A. Yoon, Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA
                   19104, Tel: 215-746-2526, Fax: 215-898-4399, Email: yoonsa@gse.upenn.edu
    Eric Klopfer, Teacher Education Program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue,
                   Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, Tel: 617-253-2025, Email: Klopfer@mit.edu

         Abstract: This paper reports on the efficacy of a professional development framework premised
         on four   complex    systems  design  principles     of  which   two are   detailed here--feedback     and
         adaptation. The framework is applied to the design and delivery of the first two years of a three-
         year   study aimed   at improving   teacher    and  student understanding   of  computational   modeling
         tools. We    demonstrate    that  structuring   a   professional  development    program    around   these
         principles facilitates the development of important strategies such as the identification of salient
         system variables, effectively distributing expertise, and constructing curricular adaptations. We
         discuss two meta-level themes that may account for the success of the principles: attending to
         structure vs.  agency   and  setting short-term     vs.  long-term  goals.  Each  illustrates the tension
         existing  between   competing    variables    that need  to be   considered to  effectively   program  for
         professional development around educational technology with the goal of sustaining and scaling
         innovations in real world complex educational systems.

Purpose
         The complexity of implementing educational change has been a recent focus of many educational leaders
interested in understanding how curricular and pedagogical reform efforts can have a scalable, enduring impact in
educational systems. In his Change Forces series, Fullan (cf. 2003) uses complex systems theory as an organizing
framework to reveal core concepts such as non-linearity, unpredictability and multi-level agency that are important
issues to contend with in real-world educational systems. In reference to scale, Elmore (1996) writes about the
difficulties experienced by nested clusters of innovation when trying to move from local to global contexts. Coburn
(2003) reinforces the notion of complexity stating that problems of scale stem from the inability of research to
address the inherent multidimensionality between and within classrooms, schools and districts. Cuban et al., (2002)
likewise remark that changes of deeply entrenched systemic organizational and operational factors must take place
in order to move beyond simple fleeting modifications to practice. Collectively, there is ample evidence to suggest
that a complex systems approach for the design and implementation of an educational improvement program is a
prudent undertaking. This paper reports on the results of a research study in which complex systems processes are
used to  organize,    harness  and   evaluate professional     development    activities around   educational   technology.
Described in greater detail below, the proposed complex systems approach is applied to a comprehensive large-scale
NSF-funded    project  under  the  program    title Information   Technology    Experiences   for Students    and Teachers
(ITEST). The specific purpose of this paper is to reveal outcomes of two design principles in the complex systems
approach--feedback and adaptation--in the first two years of a three-year project implementation.

Theoretical Framework
         Examples of complex systems run from relatively micro levels of cellular organization to more macro
levels of companies, cities and ecosystems. Despite variation in physical components or agents, complex systems
can  be generally  defined  as   existing when any     given  number   of  interconnected  elements,   parts or individuals,
communicate in non-linear ways. The patterns of interactions form a collective network of relationships that exhibit
emergent  properties   that are  not observable     at subsystem   levels. When   perturbations  occur,  the  network  self-
organizes in, often unpredictable ways where new properties can emerge. The manner in which complex systems
communicate, respond to perturbations and self-organize is understood by studying the dynamical processes through
which they evolve over time. Acquiring information from their environment, complex systems identify regularities
in that information and use this to modify behavior in the real world (Gell-Mann, 1994). In this way, they are said to
be adaptive. To understand how a system's adaptive attributes emerge, a necessary process to consider is feedback,
i.e., how systems handle information acquired from the environment. Such complex system processes have already

                                                              866                                                  ICLS 2006
been  used  to  inform  research   with the goal   of  designing   structures and   strategies  to  improve   the  success of
organizations outside of education (cf. Senge, 2000).

Methods
The Program
         The ITEST project entitled New Mexico Adventures in Modeling (AIM), consisted of activities structured
around two modeling tools called StarLogo (Colella & Klopfer, 2000)--a desktop computer application that allows
users to  interact with agent-based     complex  systems   simulations    and  Participatory   Simulations   (Klopfer  et  al.,
2005)--handheld    computer  simulations.   Previous   research   efforts  were channeled     into creating  stable modeling
tools and developing accompanying curriculum materials (Colella et al., 2001). The focus of the present study was
to understand how the modeling tools and curriculum materials could be applied in formal school settings.

Professional Development Framework
         Using  four  design principles  (of   which  the  first two  are  reported here),  feedback,   adaptation,   network
capital and  self-organization,  a professional  development     framework    was   constructed    to inform  the   scope and
sequence  of professional  development    activities  that included:  1)   A  10-day   60  hour    intensive summer   teacher
workshop;   2)  Bi-monthly   whole   group   face-to-face  meetings;   3)   Access     to local expert  facilitators; and  4)
Communication of a shared on-line bulletin board. How the concepts of feedback and adaptation were applied is
described below.

Feedback
         The design principle of feedback was used to gather important information about how the professional
development    community   was   operating  at every   stage of   the project.  Continuous    and   multiple  data  collection
techniques such as pre/during/post-workshop surveys, video and audio-taped workshop discussions, assessment of
online community, participant interviews, focus group discussions, timelines, curriculum plans and researcher field
notes, were used to evaluate the success of the program at specific instances in time. This information was used as
starting points for the redesign of program activities to influence the alignment of system variables with program
learning goals so that outcomes were mutually beneficial to participants and the program.

Adaptation
         The   second   design  principle   in the  complex      systems   framework      was  adaptation.   In attending  to
environmental   and  individual  conditions  garnered   from     feedback  activities, the  program   sought    to respond to
context-dependent factors that influenced individual teaching experiences, and curricular and system-wide purposes.
Through continuous modifications to program structures and goals, professional development strategies evolved
toward meeting the needs of multiple constituencies.

Participants
         47 middle and high school teacher participants were recruited from school districts in a mixed urban-rural
area in the southwestern part of the U.S. Teachers were recruited to participate in either the 2003-2004 (Cohort 1) or
2004-2005   (Cohort  2) academic   school   years. Teaching   subjects    included  Mathematics,    Earth  Science,  Biology,
General   Science  Social Science,  Computers    and   English.   Computer    programming      skills and  complex    systems
understanding ranged from expert to novice. Of the 47 teachers recruited, 43% were female and 57% were male,
half had a masters degree or higher, 45% taught less than 6 years, 19% taught between 6-10 years and 36% taught
more than 10 years. The instructional team consisted of three local facilitators and three research investigators.

Data Sources and Data Analyses
         The extensive list of data sources used in the study is outlined in the section on Feedback. The intent of the
multiple data source collection was to capture as many of the implementation details as possible. The methodology
was qualitative in nature (Lincoln & Guba, 2000) with the assumption that categories and themes would emerge
from  the data. Codes,  categories  and   themes   for the data   set were,   for  the most   part, negotiated  amongst    the
investigator team (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). An external rater was used to obtain inter-rater reliability (90%) for the
topology  of affordances  and   barriers to implementation       presented in Table    1. A   categorization  manual  for  the
topology was constructed using the categories of structure, function and behavior described in Hmelo (2000). The
variables were further divided into micro, meso, and macro level variables that reflect the organization of

                                                            867                                                      ICLS 2006
Table 1. Topology of Affordances and Barriers to Implementation

Levels     Structure                          Function                              Behavior
Micro       individual teaching time          a teacher's ability to integrate    a teacher's self-efficacy beliefs
           constraints                        AIM activities with the standard      a teacher's preferred teaching
                                              curriculum                           style, e.g., student-centered vs.
                                               number of years of experience a    teacher-centered
                                              teacher has                           a teacher's level of
                                               a teacher's experience in          innovativeness
                                              previous careers e.g., being a        a teacher's complex systems
                                              computer programmer                  understanding
                                               a teacher having ready-made         a teacher's epistemological
                                              curriculum materials to              beliefs about teaching
                                              implement AIM activities              a teacher's risk-taking threshold
                                               a teacher's skill in using          a teacher's comfort level using
                                              information technology               technology
                                               the subject domain of a teacher
                                              and grade level applicability
                                               a teacher's classroom
                                              management skills
                                               a teacher's programming
                                              knowledge/skills
Meso        lack of classroom space to        a school's demographics, e.g.,      teacher envy in a school, e.g.,
           house computers within the         economically challenged, high        innovators vs. status quo
           school                             ESL                                   a school's or departments
            organization of the school day    administrator's support within a   commitment to or disposition
           within the school                  school                               toward other
            centralized control of            quality of AIM instructor          curricular/instructional programs
           computer lab, i.e., one person     facilitation, e.g., behavior, energy  school culture, e.g., beliefs or
           with the key                       level, enthusiasm                    philosophies that encourage
            location of computers in the      face-to-face AIM community         innovation
           school, e.g., computer in a lab    support and collaboration
           vs. computers in each  classroom    on-line AIM   community
            AIM facilitator accessibility,   support and collaboration
           e.g., how facilitator's have been   intensive summer workshop to
           organized or allocated             learn how to implement AIM
            one vs. several teachers         activities
           implementing AIM activities in      on-going post-summer
           a school                           workshop support
            inadequate computer hardware      one or no technology support
           in a school                        staff available
            disorganization at the school
           level
Macro       other district-wide edicts or     AIM program connections to          motivation to choose high paying
           agendas                            outside educational programs         PD workshops because of low
            insufficient technology          such as the New Mexico               teacher's salaries in the state
           funding at the district level      Adventures in Super Computing         a districts commitment to or
            district level disorganization   Challenge and Los Alamos             disposition toward other
            standardized testing             National Labs                        curricular/instructional programs
            No Child Left Behind
           legislation

                                                         868                                                 ICLS 2006
educational systems. The micro, meso and macro level categorization has been used in a range of different domains
to characterize complex system organization (cf. Liljenstrom & Svedin, 2005). In this study, micro level variables
encompassed individual teachers and their classrooms; meso level variables encompassed multiple teachers within
the school or  within  the New Mexico    Adventures    in Modeling    project; and  macro    level  variables  encompassed
multiple schools, district-wide activities and beyond.

Results
          This section is organized by evidence and/or outcomes under each of the design principles that illustrate or
reveal the evolving nature and success of the professional development activities undertaken in the project.

Feedback
          Table 1 shows a topology of affordances and barriers to implementation constructed from the structure,
function, behavior--micro, meso, macro taxonomy. The topology was used to support several program activities.

Identifying a Propensity Toward Change Hierarchy
          Surveying the topology of variables allowed the project team to identify which variables were the most
difficult, comparatively, within which to facilitate change. Structural variables presented the greatest challenge. For
example, the location of computers within a school appeared to be a ubiquitous concern for our participants, many
of  whom   complained  about  having  to  waste valuable   teaching   time tracking    down   the  computer    lab  manager,
reorganizing schedules to accommodate available space, and moving classes between rooms that were often located
in different halls or even different buildings. These structural variables were ones that the project team had little
control over. The pattern of difficulty also appeared to increase, not surprisingly, moving from micro to macro
levels, e.g., from the individual to the school-wide district. Behavioral variables were the next most difficult to work
with, however, many of these variables showed small increments of growth as participation in program activities
increased over time. For example, teacher's risk-taking thresholds and comfort levels in working with both the
desktop and   handheld  computer   simulations  improved   with   successive   iterations of classroom      implementations.
Frequent availability of facilitators and willingness to provide technical, pedagogical and moral support was found
to be a key change mechanism. Thus, in terms of behavioral variables, the role of some members of the project team
was one of edification, a kind of support or resource that was continuously available as changes in self-efficacy
beliefs, for example, emerged. However, similar to structural variables, the locus of control generally existed just
outside the purview of the project team. Likewise, the level of difficulty in effecting change generally increased as
the size of the system increased. Functional variables were by far the easiest ones to facilitate in terms of working
toward  improving   implementation  conditions.  Apart    from  two   variables, i.e., number    of   years of  experience a
teacher has and a teacher's experience in previous careers, the project team had some level of control over all other
variables that enabled  relatively immediate   action. For   example,   teacher's   indicated    that they  would   be  more
inclined to use StarLogo activities in the classroom if they had ready-made curriculum materials available to them.
Therefore,  compiling  and   constructing subject-specific   models    and  curricula   became      a focal    aspect of our
professional  development   workshops  where   previously,  skill  in  programming     and   the development     of complex
systems theoretical understanding took the greatest priorities.

Distributing Expertise
          Understanding specific implementation needs enabled us to select from the available bank of expertise and
assign activities to the most appropriate project members. For example, due to his previous career experience as a
manager   for  various web-based    games   and  simulations    projects   one   of  our   lead  facilitators  assumed   the
responsibility for the design and construction of the web-based models library. Another facilitator, with 40 years of
teaching experience, had worked in various leadership capacities including district-wide technology coordinator, and
had an  implicit understanding  of  teacher self-efficacy   issues  in science   and   technology     classes. She  had  also
developed a vast and intricate educational network in which she could draw on the expertise of former colleagues
and make valuable connections between people. She visited several of our struggling teachers to lend moral support
and in two cases, through her network of connections, secured extra computers in classrooms that had insufficient
hardware to run StarLogo models. Through her work with after school programs in the local school district, another
of our lead facilitators became well connected with the various middle and high school administrators in the district.
Furthermore, because her own children were attending district area schools, she knew exactly when special events
were  being   held, when   schools  were  closed and      when  teachers would      be  tied up   with  other   professional

                                                           869                                                      ICLS 2006
commitments. All of this information was very useful in planning, for example, when our key informational open
houses would be held to showcase the program to schools and administrators.

Adaptation
        Adaptations made to key professional development components in the project included the categories of
recruitment, partnerships & networks, administration, workshops, facilitation structure, curriculum development and
communication     tools. Three  components      are  discussed   in detail  below  that   show   the  evolution    of  adaptive
professional development strategies.

Workshops
        Three  major     goals underpin    the program    framework:   working    with  teachers  to  develop     and  integrate
Adventures  in Modeling      curriculum    in  their specific content  areas;    facilitating a shift toward    understanding
phenomena   from   a  complex   systems    perspective;   and teaching  computational     skills to   construct,   manage  and
interpret models or simulations. Although all three serve important roles, arguably the most critical of these is the
ability to use AIM curricula in the classroom. However, what we found from participant feedback was that learning
the StarLogo programming language was the first barrier to entry in terms of teacher self-efficacy beliefs, comfort
levels and risk-taking thresholds. For a majority of our participants who were novice programmers, this perception
became  a   deterrent for  using AIM    activities   with their   students.  Consequently,    a  good  portion    of  workshop
instructional time during the first year focused on helping teachers improve programming skills. Yet despite this
effort, teachers continued to struggle with this dimension. Obviously some changes needed to be made. According to
discussions with  facilitators  and long-time    StarLogo   users,  there   was  underrepresented     potential   and  value in
exploring uses of  existing    models.  It was  revealed  that   more experienced    StarLogo    teachers often    began  with
working code and simply made minor modifications to suit the purpose of the particular concept being illustrated. In
order to follow this curricular route, however, teachers needed to have a solid understanding of the complex system
they wanted to model. The focus of the second summer and follow-up workshops thus shifted to address the latter
two of the three major goals. Not coincidentally, the percentage of teachers who incorporated StarLogo activities
within the first term of the school year increased from 41% with Cohort 1 to 65% with Cohort 2.

Facilitation Structure
        Initially the    program began     with three   instructional facilitators  (tier 1)   who   had differing    levels of
responsibilities, time commitments and flexibility in their workday that constrained or enabled participation in the
project. The inner-city science teacher for example, could not leave his school during the day to facilitate in another
teacher's classroom. After school time was also tied up with detentions and/or staff meetings focused on school
improvement. The facilitator with the greatest flexibility in her schedule was the after school program coordinator.
She indeed had an enormous impact helping teachers work with their students on AIM activities, however, she was
only one person and there were many more teachers who could have benefited from the assistance. To address this
issue, the program moved toward a more decentralized facilitation model during the second year of the project in
which four Cohort 1 participants became mentors in their own schools as tier 2 facilitators. The hope was that this
would alleviate some of the time constraints previously experienced by tier 1 facilitators and that small communities
would emerge around a nucleus of like-minded teachers. After some time, we found that, although there was a
strong desire to create local community structures, the notion of decentralized facilitation still could not overcome
the day-to-day teaching issues such as difficulties in finding common times to meet across different subjects and
grade teams. In the Winter '04 and Spring '05 terms, the facilitation structure became a combination model of
within school  decentralized    facilitation  accompanied     by  two centralized   non-teaching     facilitators  who  shared
classroom visitation  and  facilitation duties  across  program     schools. This  structure   appeared  to suit   the greatest
number of participant needs allowing for more informal collaboration between tier 2 facilitators and the teachers in
their schools and more formal classroom assistance conducted by tier 1 facilitators.

Curriculum Development
        Changes   made    in the curriculum     development   component      are perhaps  the   most  illustrative of  how   the
program continuously adapted to emergent professional development foci. Four curriculum tools were developed
over the course of the two-year implementation, each reflecting participant needs at the time of development. As
previously discussed, it was determined after the first summer workshop that a major barrier to program efficacy
was teachers' understanding of StarLogo programming and model construction. In order to assist teachers, one tier 1
facilitator created a comprehensive modeling tutorial and provided pedagogical strategies that would help teachers

                                                              870                                                     ICLS 2006
use the tutorial with their own students. A models library (http://education.mit.edu/starlogo/library) became the next
curriculum piece to be developed as participant needs and program foci shifted to curriculum integration. A multi-
media case of exemplary StarLogo use in the classroom (http://education.mit.edu/aim-cases/index.php) was also
constructed as teachers voiced their concerns about not being able to observe how AIM activities would work in real
classroom settings. And finally, the curriculum binder was constructed with ready-to-use sample units parsed into
subject content areas and grade levels. It was expected that participants would continue to add lessons to the binder
and  maintain   it for their own   purposes.  Although   the  curriculum  binder    may  seem  to   be a trivial  addition, it
represented   movement    toward   a   more  autonomous,   self-organized    point  within the  professional    development
continuum where teachers were poised to take more ownership of their own learning. After each curriculum tool
was introduced, participants showed overwhelming interest and used them to more or less degrees in their curricula.

Discussion and Educational Implications
        Reiser et al. (2000) have written about the importance of attending to mutual adaptation of research goals
and local contexts in order to support educational reform efforts. Fishman et al. (2004) present a list of key issues to
explore when dealing with technology innovations and the capacities of the educational contexts the technologies
are intended for. By highlighting the mechanisms of feedback and adaptation we have offered practical insights for
professional development efforts in a number of different ways. When looking across the evidence, two meta-level
themes can also be hypothesized to account for the success of the framework. Also rooted in a complex systems
explanation, these themes: structure vs. agency and short-term vs. long-term goals, have promising implications for
professional  development     and  educational   reform. The   tension  between     structure and   agency   is  an essential
characteristic of real world complex systems. As Watts (2003) notes, "It is through our surrounding structure that we
order and make sense of the world. Yet too much structure, too strong a hold of the past on the future, can...be a bad
thing, leading to stagnation and isolation" (p. 100). Ensuring a balance between structure and agency appeared to be
a critical enabling component of our professional development framework. Structure can be interpreted in at least
two ways, i.e., the structure of professional development activities and the educational structure as outlined in the
topology of implementation variables (Table 1). Similarly, multiple levels of agency existed in the program, i.e.,
individual participant personal and professional agency, facilitator/researcher agency, a collective group agency as
educators in our distinct community or educators within the more global educational system. Understanding the
context within which we operated through feedback--the physical barriers such as centralized computers, broader
educationally imposed barriers such as NCLB and the like, then applying this information to promote adaptation,
facilitated a constant    development   and  exchange   between   structural (e.g., construction  of   curricular tools) and
agency-related (self-efficacy beliefs) variables.
        Lemke      (2001)    presents a model   for  understanding  multi-scale  complex    systems    that is  premised    on
interpreting processes and activities that occur within and between different levels of organization. He suggests that
how we come to understand the meaning of something is often contingent on the accumulation and transfer of
information, acquired through short-term events, that may be distant from each other in space and time. Thus, we
must be cognizant of the notion that change can happen over shorter and longer periods of time. He also states, "To
analyze human social activity, development and learning across multiple time scales, we must be as willing to look
at biography    and history  as at situations and   moments,   as methodologically   and   theoretically prepared   to study
institutions and communities as to study students and classrooms" (p. 25). In Table 1, we presented a topology of
implementation variables that include biographical and historical information (e.g., previous career experiences) as
well as contextual     or environmental   information    that potentially impacts    the success    of the  program.   These
implementation variables have also been analyzed to take account of the multiple levels of systems we work with.
But perhaps the greatest use of the topology that we have found has been as a tool for setting short-term and long-
term program goals as well as for understanding short-term and long-term participant goals. Identifying hierarchies
of change and determining which variables were the most feasible to address at different times, provided the project
team with a manageable structure from which to proceed toward positive project development.

Conclusions
        The     purpose   of this paper  was  to demonstrate   the  efficacy of a   professional  development     framework
informed by two complex systems design principles of feedback and adaptation. We have shown that structuring a
professional development program around these principles facilitates the development of important strategies and
processes   for program   organizers    such as  the identification of salient system    variables, effectively   distributing
expertise, and adaptation of essential professional development resources and activities. We hypothesize two meta-
level themes that may account for success. Each illustrates the tension that exists between competing variables that

                                                             871                                                    ICLS 2006
need to be considered in order to work effectively in real world complex educational systems. We believe that
knowledge gleaned from this study contributes to our understanding of how the complex systems mechanisms of
feedback and  adaptation    can   have   potentially powerful  impacts   on scalable   and  sustainable professional
development and educational reform.

References
Coburn, C. (2003). Rethinking scale: Moving beyond numbers to deep and lasting change. Educational Researcher,
         32(6), 3-12.
Colella, V. & Klopfer, E. (2000). Seeding change: Bringing modeling to science teachers and their students. The
         Bulletin of The Santa Fe Institute, 15(2).
Colella, V., Klopfer, E. & Resnick, M. (2001). Adventures in Modeling. New York: Teachers College Press.
Cuban, L., Kirkpatrick, H. & Peck, C. (2002). High access and low use of technologies in high school classrooms:
         Explaining an apparent paradox. American Educational Research Journal, 38(4), 813-834.
Elmore, R. (1996). Getting to scale with good educational practice. Harvard Educational Review, 66(1), 1-26.
Fishman, B., Marx, R., Blumenfeld, P., Krajcik, J. & Soloway, E. (2004). Creating a framework for research on
         systemic technology innovations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 43-76.
Fullan, M. (2003). Changes Forces: With a Vengeance. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Gell-Mann, M. (1994). The Quark and the Jaguar. New York: W. H. Freeman and Company.
Hmelo, C., Holton, D. & Kolodner, J. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 9(3), 247-298.
Klopfer, E. Yoon, S., Perry, J. (2005). Using palm technology in Participatory Simulations of complex systems: A
         new take on ubiquitous and accessible mobile computing. Journal of Science Education and Technology,
         14(3), 285-298.
Lemke, J. (2001). The long and the short of it: Comments on multiple timescale studies of human activity. Journal
         of the Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 17-26.
Liljenstrom, H. & Svedin, U. (2005). Micro Meso Macro: Addressing Complex Systems Coupling. London: World
         Scientific Publishing Co., Inc.
Lincoln, Y. S. & Guba, E. G. (2000). Paradigmatic controversies, contradictions, and emerging confluences. In, N.
         K. Densin & Y. S. Lincoln, (Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Reiser, B.J., Spillane, J. P. & Steinmuller, F., Sorsa, D., Carney, K., & Kyza, E. (2000). Investigating the mutual
         adaptation process in  teachers' design of   technology-infused curricula. In B.  Fishman & S. O'Conner-
         Divelbiss (Eds.), Fourth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 342-349). Mahwah, NJ:
         Erlbaum.
Senge, P., Cambron-McCabe, N., Lucas, T., Smith, B., Dutton, J. & Kleiner, A. (2000). Schools that Learn. New
         York: Doubleday.
Strauss, A. L. & Corbin, J. M. (1998). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing
         Grounded Theory (2nd edition). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Acknowledgements
We would like to gratefully acknowledge Judy Perry for her assistance on the data analysis portion of this paper.
This research was supported by a National Science Foundation ITEST Grant (Award # 0322573).

                                                          872                                                ICLS 2006
