        Comparing Instructional Methods for Teaching Technology in
        Education to Preservice Teachers Using Logistic Regression

           Dongping Zheng, Michael Young, University of Connecticut, Neag School of Education, Department of
        Educational Psychology, University of Connecticut, 249 Glenbrook Road U-2064, Storrs, CT 06269
                                    Email: dongping.zheng@uconn.edu, myoung@uconn.edu

          Abstract: This analysis was completed in the context of an ongoing design project for a junior
          level course (Technology in Education) in the teacher preparation program in a large New England
          public university.  We implemented a design during Fall 2003 comparing two types of instruction:
          problem­based learner-centered learning cycles (PBLC) and didactic direct instruction (DI), both
          of which reflected our previous research findings concerning best instructional practices. Analysis
          using Logistic Regression identified a model that differentiated the PBLC and DI approaches in
          areas of preservice   teachers'   perceived  knowledge   of  technology  integration  and    technology
          competencies, and revealed that preservice teachers who reported more favorable computer use
          and more knowledge of e-portfolio development were more likely to be in the PBLC approach.

Introduction
          Means & Coleman (2000) have demonstrated that not only can the wise use of educational technology
improve student achievement but it can also improve students' self-concept and motivation. In contrast, according to
a report by the National Center for Education Statistics (Smerdon et al., 2000), only approximately 33 percent of
teachers reported feeling very well prepared to integrate educational technology into classroom instruction. In 2001,
the U.S. Department of Education initiated the Preparing Tomorrow's Teachers to Use Technology (PT3) program
with the goal of ensuring that new teachers enter the classroom prepared to effectively use the computers that await
them. However, "technology integration is complex and teachers with little classroom experience typically have no
context in which to apply what they may learn in university computer courses" (Sayvenye et al., 2003).

          Technology in Education, a one-credit course, required for students who enter in their junior year into the
teacher preparation   program   of a  large New   England  public  university, was   the context   for an ongoing   design
experiment.   Constraints, such  as   being  only one-credit, and  presenting  to students   without   classroom   teaching
experiences, provided us a challenging context in which to realize the course goals. The course aimed to develop
students' awareness of a broad range of educational technologies and to have students consider potential technology
integration into their future K-12 classrooms. Our goal in this study was to identify best research-based instructional
practices  related specifically   to  developing   preservice   teachers' understanding   and   willingness  to   integrate
educational  technology    into their future teaching.  Not   only did we   seek  to find out  how   to  effectively teach
preservice teachers   about  educational  technology   by  using instructional design    theories, but we   also hoped  to
contribute to the field our views regarding what preservice teachers should learn to enable them to educate children
in the "new literacies" for the 21st century (Collins, 1996; Leu & Kinzer, 2000; Reigeluth, 1999; Leu et al. 2004).

Theoretical Framework
          The comparative    course   approach (Problem-based    Learning   Cycles vs.  Didactic   Instruction) was  based
upon application   of  instructional-design  theories. "An instructional-design   theory  is a theory  that offers explicit
guidance  on  how  to  better help  people  learn and  develop.  The  kinds of learning   and  development   may   include
cognitive, emotional, social, physical and spiritual" (Reigeluth, 1999, p. 5). Reigeluth (1999) further described the
characteristics of instructional-design theory as "design oriented, they describe[describing] methods of instruction
and the situations  in which    those methods  should   be used, the  methods  can   be  broken into   simpler  component
methods, and the methods are probabilistic" (p. 7). The simpler component methods are referred to as component
(mini) methods by Reigeluth. They are probabilistic, rather than deterministic, which means that providing abundant
examples of concepts will not ensure that the goals for the students will be attained, but will increase the probability
that they will be attained. Reigeluth stated that even though the component (mini) methods are "highly interrelated

                                                            873                                                  ICLS 2006
and usually highly situational in their effects on attaining the desired outcomes, an instructional-design theory is
easier to apply if it describes methods on a relatively detailed level" (p. 11).

Problem-Based Learning Cycles
         Learning cycles were adapted as an approach to problem-based learning in teacher technology integration
because  they  were   deemed  to  have   a broad   foundation   in cognitive science   (Schwartz   et al., 1999).  One  of  the
purposes of using learning cycles was to contextualize preservice teachers' thinking about learning and instructional
design  (Schwartz   et al., 1999) and    to  move   them  away     from implementing     technology   for  technology's  sake.
Preservice teachers in their first year of education courses have only their own experiences as students to draw on
and have not yet been in the role of teacher in the classroom. Learning cycles are typically organized around two or
three  successive  challenges   that present   hypothetical  realistic  situations. The  order  of the  components      for the
learning cycles is not prescriptive. It is flexibly adaptable to learners' and teachers' needs (Schwartz et al., 1999). As
shown in Figure 1, Schwarz et al. (1999) proposed that learning cycles include seven components: look ahead and
reflect back, the initial challenge (beginning of the first inquiry cycle), generate ideas (about issues and answers),
multiple perspectives,   research and    revise (to  help students  to  explore a   challenge), test  your  mettle  (formative
assessment),  go   public   (progressive deepening,   general   reflections and   decisions),  and assessment.    These  basic
components of instruction have since been adapted to several different contexts (Bransford, Vye, Bateman, Brophy,
& Roselli, 2004; Vanderbilt, 2003).      The adaptation of this design for preservice teacher technology preparation is
described below.

                                Figure 1. Main screen and learning cycles of Star Legacy

Didactic Instruction
         Gagné's instructional theory has three major components: taxonomy of learning outcomes; conditions of
learning (Gagné,    1977);  and  nine events    of  instruction (Gagné,  Briggs,    & Wagner,   1992).  A   central notion   in
Gagné's     theory is  that different kinds    of  learning  outcomes    (intellectual skills,  cognitive   strategies, verbal
information, attitudes and motor skills) have different internal and external conditions that support them (Gagné et
al., 1992).  The   external  conditions    are parameters    that  the teacher  or  instructional  designer  controls   during
instruction. The internal conditions are skills and capabilities that each learner brings to the instructional setting.
Information-processing    theory  provided     the basis for Gagné   to propose   an  instruction  model   incorporating  nine
major events. Gagné et al. (1992) suggested that the Nine Events of Instruction are always relevant, even though
they will vary with the type of learning outcome being achieved, and with the specific content of the learning. The
nine external instructional events are gaining attention, telling learners the learning objective, stimulating recall of
prior learning, presenting   the stimulus,     providing learning  guidance,   eliciting performance,   providing   feedback,
assessing performance, enhancing retention and transfer to other contexts. This approach provided the basis for our
direct instruction condition.

Research Design
Context
         Technology    in   Education is   a required  course   taken  each  Fall  semester by  approximately     130   juniors
starting their first year of a 5-year integrated bachelors/master's teacher preparation program. The course was taught
in   eleven sections  of  approximately    12  students  per  section,  each taught   by  a graduate   teaching   assistant  or

                                                              874                                                   ICLS 2006
professor.  A faculty professor oversaw the organization, design, implementation, and teaching of the course. Each
lab section met 1.25 hours per week for 12 weeks. For our 2003 implementation, there was one faculty instructor
and four TAs on staff.     The   faculty  instructor  taught   3  sessions, and  each   TA  taught   2 sessions. In   Fall 2003,
participants took the course implementing one of three instructional pedagogies, varying on the course section based
on normal registration (no random assignment): PBLC, DI, or Hybrid 2002 Design (HD, as a comparison condition).
Each  instructor  was   assigned to and   used  only  one   of   the pedagogies  except   for the faculty  member.    Instructor
assignment was self selected (see Table 1). All instructors taught in treatment conditions that they never taught
before, except for the faculty instructor who taught one of the HD conditions.        The pre-exposure effect in PBLC and
DI conditions was thus minimized. For the simplicity of comparison and providing parsimonious interpretation, in
this paper,  we  focus  on PBLC    versus  DI   in relation   to student technology   competencies     and   integration.  In our
method,    each instructional  pedagogy   was   taught  by  two   instructors,  which   allowed   us  to somewhat     gain some
evidence   concerning   instructor versus  pedagogy    (i.e., whether   superior   student  performance   is due  solely   to the
selected pedagogy and materials of one approach or due to superior instructor ability, or an interaction of the two).

Table 1. Instructor Assignment

                PBLC                                     DI                                       HD
Faculty instructor and TA1 each           TA2 and TA3 each taught 2          Faculty instructor taught 1 session,
taught 2 sessions                         sessions                           TA4 taught 2 sessions

Problem-Based Learning Cycles
           The PBLC format organized the course into five cycles, implemented in WebCT campus edition (a course
management        tool)    each    starting     with    a      challenge     or         problem      (Delisle,    1997)       (see
http://www.education2.uconn.edu/EPSY240/learningsciences06/PBLC.htm):                 1)    assistive    technology   used    for
special and regular education students; 2) the Web as a data and communication tool, including a view of                   "new
literacies" involved   in online reading   comprehension;      3) technologies   such   as  Lego  robotics,  online games     and
simulations that support problem-based and project-based learning; 4) video and multimedia technologies including
digital stills  and   movies, cable TV    and   live  web   broadcasts;    and  5) online   forums   for  teacher professional
development     through   e-portfolios, threaded   discussions,   synchronous    chats,   and video.   The   PBLC   design    was
adapted from Schwartz et al. (1999), to our local needs (see Figure 2).        This PBLC design featured five major steps:
1) Present the cycle's challenge; 2) Brainstorm and develop initial solutions; 3) Consult experts and resources that
consider   the  problem   from multiple   points   of view;   4)  Assess the   solution   against objective  criteria and  dyad
partners; and lastly, 5) Publish it to WebCT as a peer effort. By repeatedly revisiting an issue at deeper levels and
from differing perspectives, it was hoped students would gain deeper and more elaborated understanding.

           Preservice teachers who were in PBLC treatment sections were assigned to dyads and started each learning
cycle individually with Your Challenge, Completed Initial Thoughts individually and then worked through the cycle
collaboratively starting with Perspectives and Resources. The challenges were case-based, anchored in realistic but
fictitious contexts (CTGV, 1990, 1992).     Having students experience many narratives and approaches was intended
to lead  to students   toward  creating  richer  case-based    experiences  and    better case-based   reasoning  (Jonassen    &
Hernandez-Surrano,      2002; Kolodner    & Guzdial,    2000).   Such   activity may  foster  generative   learning   (Wittrock,
1989),  elicit  prior knowledge    (Gagné,  1977),    avoid   "inert" knowledge    (Whitehead,    1929),   and make    learners'
thinking explicit when putting their thoughts in the private discussion forum (Lin & Lehman, 1999). As part of the
Perspectives and Resources stage of some cycles, dyads had to explore hands-on Treasure Hunt (TH) activities,
again   in dyads.   Each  TH   activity consisted  of  instructions   that  gave   context, directions   for operating    various
technology and reflection questions. This design provided naive learners with multiple representations in the spirit
of designing for cognitive flexibility (Spiro, Feltovich, Jacobson, & Coulson, 1991) and allowed peers to anchor
their thinking and reflection in a realistic (if not real) context, which fostered knowledge in depth, and nurtured             a
respect for a diversity of opinion through peer collaboration.        Dyads tested their understanding of the case through
reflections and had opportunity to achieve mutual understandings through social construction of knowledge (Lave &
Wenger, 1991). Students then posted their later thoughts in public on WebCT and social construction of knowledge
expanded from dyads to the whole class as students commented on one another's solutions to the challenge. From
this we expected students in the PBLC sections would likely have deeper understanding of educational technologies
and thus be aware of technology skills and applications in depth, compared to those receiving direct instruction.

                                                               875                                                    ICLS 2006
Didactic Instruction
          Didactic or Direct  Instruction   is the  most well-established    way  to meet  educational   goals,   especially in
situations where high stakes objective tests are the sole measure of student achievement (Stebbins et al., 1977).           For
example, see http://www.jefflindsay.com/EducData.shtml. In contrast to the "learning cycles" approach, the sections
that  were  taught   using   the objectivist   didactic  instruction  followed   the idea   of  "teaching   by    telling" (see
http://www.education2.uconn.edu/EPSY240/learningsciences06/DI.htm).             In  this mode   of  instruction  based on   the
work   of  Siegfried Engelmann,     the teacher  tells  the  students about  a  specific subject   and   delivers whole-class
recitation questioning for recall. The students' task is primarily defined as remembering exactly what the teacher
taught and to reproduce that information later, usually on an objective multiple choice test. In this type of lesson
plan,  the focus  is on recall   of information,    not deep   understanding   or transfer. The    five  areas of  technology
integration concepts used in the PBLC sections were in this approach delivered in a lecture-like format (that could
include the use of PowerPoint presentations, overheads, videos, and worksheets.). These lessons included expository
learning, demonstration, and drill-and-practice. This is a very efficient form of instruction and fits within the limited
amount of time available in the lab, which, as a one-credit class, meets for only 75 minutes one day per week for 10
weeks.  Threaded   discussions   on  WebCT     campus   edition    were also used  for facilitating  lectures  in the form   of
teacher­centered questions and answers, as opposed to the social collaborative student-centered use of discussion in
the PBLC approach. The lessons were highly organized, planned and scripted and usually contained the following
components:
     ·    Link of lesson plan to subject curriculum course of study or state standard
     ·    Materials needed
     ·    Interesting opening of teacher and student activities
     ·    Instructional teacher and student activities with clear focus and visual aids
     ·    Closing teacher and student activities that provide summary
     ·    Clear assessment tools to measure acquisition of facts and information

          In designing these lessons, we attempted to adhere to Gagne's Nine Events of Instruction. The focus on the
lesson  was   the  delivery  of  information   in   a  clear straightforward   manner    without   the   benefit  of hands-on
explorations,  higher-order   questioning,   and   with  limited   need  for collaboration  with    peers. Because    didactic
instruction was teacher centered and student-teacher interactions were direct and short in order to fulfill the pre-
defined objectives or recitation, we expected students would likely become aware of a broader range of educational
technologies and thus be aware of technology skills and applications in breadth, rather than in depth compared to the
PBLC sessions.

Data Source
          A Likert-type scale (from 1 strongly disagree to 5 strongly agree) pre-post online survey measured student
attitudes, self-reported technology competencies, comfort with technology, and preference for collaborative learning
regarding projects involving educational technology (Zheng, Young & Sulzen & 2003). One-hundred-thirty-eight
participants filled out the pre-survey and 122 participants filled out the post-survey. After matching pre and post
data  entries and  filtering  based  on  signed   informed   consent    forms, 101   complete   data sets  were   analyzed,   a
combination of 78 in both PBLC and DI conditions.

Results
          An Independent Samples T-test conducted on the pre-data revealed no mean differences between the PBLC
and DI groups. Independent-samples T-tests were conducted on selected variables (see Table 2) according to the
aforementioned    theoretical premises   to  detect statistical differences  across  the levels of   the dependent    variable,
Instructional Group (PBLC vs. DI). Except for the Support Learning variable, Homogeneity of Variance of other
variables was confirmed. Please refer to the online survey (Zheng, Young & Sulzen & 2003) for item stems.

Table 2. Result of Independent Samples T-Test (n=78)

                                                             T                               df                   P
WebTech                                                      .667                            76                  .507
EPortfolio                                                   -4.319                          76                  .000

                                                               876                                                   ICLS 2006
Paperless                                                 -2.003                             76               .049
Computer Use                                              -2.998                             76               .004
Support Learning                                          -1.998                             76               .049

       The  goals  of  the  analysis  were   to predict  the Instructional Group     in order   to determine  a model   that
differentiated the PBLC and DI approaches in the posttest variables, in the areas of students' perceived knowledge
of technology   integration  and   technology   competencies;    and to   rank the  relative    importance of the  variables.
Through an examination of the correlations among variables, multicollinearity was not severe. The tolerances for all
variables (range from .604 to .883) were larger than .25 and the values for VIF were less than 4. The likelihood ratio
test results showed that the five-variable-model fit     best, 2 =   28.87 d   f= 5, at p = .000 level, G =    28.87 (D0  =
106.628,  Dm1  = 83.815,   Dm2   = 77.762).  When   WebTech    was   added to  the  model,   it reduced deviance  to 77.762.
Therefore  R2L =   1- Dm2 / D0 =1- 77.762 /106.628= .27, indicating 27% of true proportion of reduction in deviance.
The five-variable-model better differentiated the PBLC and DI approaches, in that it helped us detect in what degree
and in what areas PBLC and DI approaches had stronger impact on students' perceived knowledge of technology
integration and technology competencies. Hosmer & Lemeshow goodness of fit test (C- hat = 9.951, df = 8, p =
.295) showed that there was a good consistency between observed and predicted probabilities.

Table 3. Variables in the Equation

                               B       S.E. (B)       Wald's         Sig.       Exp(B)/OR          95.0% C.I. for EXP(B)
                                                                                                   Lower          Upper
     WebTech                   -1.222        .532        5.279        .022                .295        .104            .836
     EPortfoio                 1.463         .439       11.088        .001               4.321       1.826           10.225
     Paperless                 -.121         .362         .112        .738                .886        .436           1.801
     Computer Use                .689        .325        4.482        .034               1.991       1.052           3.767
     Support Learning            .404        .464         .759        .384               1.498        .604           3.716
     Constant                  -3.727    2.322           2.577        .108                .024

         Results shown in Table 3 indicate that Computer Use (Wald's = 4.48, p = .034), EPortfolio (Wald's =
11.088,  p =.001),    and WebTech     (Wald's   = 5.279,  p  =.022), were   the    most salient  variables in distinguishing
between   the  PBLC    approach  and  DI in   the  five-variable model.   Computer      Use, (1.99-1)*  100=99    %, can be
interpreted as one unit of increase in computer assignment increases the odds of being in the PBLC group by 99%.,
EPortfolio, (4.321-1)*100 =332.1% can be interpreted as one unit of increase in EPortfolio increases the odds of
being in the PBLC group by 332.1%. WebTech, (.295-1) *100 = -70.5 %, can be interpreted as one unit of increase
of Web technology use decreases the odds of being in the PBLC group by 71%. The WebTech variable should be
interpreted with caution since Independent samples T-test showed no statistical differences between PBLC and DI
groups. Adjusting for base rate, classification error was reduced by 48% (p =.48) using the five-variable model. 72.5
% of the DI and 75.7% of the PBLC were correctly predicted.

Discussion
         By    using  the  current dataset   measuring   preservice  teachers'     technology   competencies,   professional
development, comfort with technology, and preference for collaboration regarding educational technology projects,
a model to predict group preservice teachers' membership in either PBLC or a DI condition was identified through
logistic regression. Students' comfort with giving their students an assignment requiring extensive Computer Use
and students' ability to create an EPortfolio were the most salient variables predicting group membership. Positive
slope (B) of these two variables indicated that those students who rated themselves high on these two variables tend
to belong  to  the PBLC    group.  The  Odds    Ratio (OR)   was  about   2.0  for the  Computer   Use  variable,  indicating
preservice teachers reporting more higher comfort giving assignments with          computer use were about twice as likely
to be in PBLC groups. The OR was 4.3 for the EPortfolio variable, indicating preservice teachers reporting higher
EPortfolio creation skills were 4.3 times more likely to be in PBLC groups. The School of Education adopted the
TaskStreamTM online portfolio system for supporting EPortfolio development. EPortfolios were products developed
as a result of Professional Development Learning Cycles.       One way to explain why students in the PBLC condition
reported much   more   favorable   portfolio creation is that  Learning   Cycles   might  progressively    promote students'

                                                             877                                                   ICLS 2006
understanding of their development of teaching and technological skills in a realistic setting. Students put more
effort into developing their EPortfolios, and thus they rated their knowledge of EPortfolios much higher. This result
informed  the design team's  subsequent  decision-making   for the following   year. Given  both  the teacher  training
program's and the university's efforts to EPortfolio assessment, the finding of this study helped us in making design
decisions on how best to teach EPortfolio development. Computer Use was an indicator of transfer, suggesting the
PBLC   group  was  more  comfortable   using  what they  learned   in the  course. In the PBLC     approach,   students
extensively used  online discussion  tools and  problem-based    prompts   for guided exploration    and discussion of
educational technology.  Using  online threaded  discussions in  the  learning cycle format  afforded   future teachers
direct experience with the  educational value  of communication    technology   and  hence, their  comfort  with using
computers for their own teaching may have increased. Teacher effects remain a possible limitation of the study.
Even though efforts were made to maximize treatment fidelity, including informal training at TA meetings, uniform
lesson plans within each treatment, and class observations, latent constructs such as teacher personality and student's
interactions with teachers were not subject to experimental control. As with any design research, without replication,
our evidence should be considered with caution.

Educational Importance of the Study
          The importance of identifying research-based instruction in teaching educational technology to preservice
teachers  can be  evidenced  at both local and  national levels. The   preservice  teachers in  this five-year  highly-
competitive teacher education program are educated to be leaders with the ability to envision future needs of the
work force. Research has shown that wise use of technology allows people to solve problems effectively and shorten
the gaps of communication among cultures (Ge & Land, 2003; Schlager, Fusco, & Schank, 2002; Uribe, Klein, &
Sullivan, 2003). Although   research such  as Project Followthrough    has  shown  (Stebbins et al., 1977)  that direct
instruction is the most effective approach in three areas: skills (reading, language, spelling, and math), cognitive
skills, and affective behavior, the development of 21st Century literacies and transfer from courses that occur before
student teaching to eventual teaching behaviors may require more. As Reigeluth (1999) stated employers now want
people who will take initiatives to solve problems and who will bring diversity, especially diverse perspectives, to
the workplace.  Our  finding that PBLC  experiences   may  be  the best instructional practice  to educate  preservice
teachers to embrace technology in their future teaching profession is critical to young learners in the 21st century.
Furthermore,  the design  research   technique and  logistic regression    may  also  prove  useful  to  other  teacher
preparation programs   that  have similar  circumstances   and  constraints in  terms of  how   to   teach educational
technology.

References
Barab, S. A., Eun-Ok, B., Schatz, S., Scheckler, R., Moore, J., & Job-Sluder, K. (2002). Illuminating the braids of
          change in a web- supported community: A design -experiment by any other name, from
          http://inkido.indiana.edu/research/onlinemanu/papers/designilf5print.pdf
Baumgartner, E., Bell, P., Brophy, S., Hoadley, C., Hsi, S., Joseph, D., et al. (2002). The Design-Based Research:
          an emerging paradigm for educational inquiry. Unpublished manuscript.
Bransford, J. D., Vye, N., Bateman, H., Brophy, S., & Roselli, R. J. (2004). Vanderbilt's AMIGO project:
          Knowledge of how people learn to enter cyberspace. In T. M. Duffy & J. R. Kirkley (Eds.), Learner-
          centered theory and practice in distance education, cases from higher education (pp. 209-234). Mahwah:
          Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in
          creating complex interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Coiro, J., Sulzen, J., Zheng, D., & Zhang, H. (2002). Instructional design proposal for technology in education:
          EPSY240. Storrs, CT.: University of Connecticut.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.), New directions in
          educational technology (pp. 15-22). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Collins, A. (1996). Design issues for learning environments. In S. Vosniadou, E. De Corte, R. Glaser & H. Mandl
          (Eds.), International perspectives on the psychological foundations of technology-based learning
          environments (pp. 347-361). Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Association.
Delisle, R. (1997). How to Use Problem-Based Learning in the Classroom. Washington, DC: Association for
          Supervision of Curriculum Developers.
Gagné, R. M. (1977). The Conditions of Learning (3th ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

                                                         878                                                 ICLS 2006
Gagné, R. M., Briggs, L. J., & Wagner, W. W. (1992). Principles of Instructional Design (4th Ed.). Fort Worth: HBJ
       College Publishers.
Ge, X., & Land, S. M. (2003). Scaffolding students' problem-solving processes in an ill-structured task using
       question prompts and peer interactions. Educational Technology Research and Development, 51(1), 21-38.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Leu, D. J., & Kinzer, C. K. (2000). The convergence of literacy for information and communication. Reading
       Research Quarterly, 35(1), 108-127.
Leu, D. J., C. K. Kinzer, et al. (2004). Toward a theory of new literacies emerging from the internet and other
       information and communication technologies. In R. B. Ruddell and N. Unrau (Eds.), Theoretical models
       and processes of reading (5th ed.) (pp.1568-1611). International Reading Association.
Lin, X., & Lehman, J. D. (1999). Supporting learning variable control in a computer-based biology environment:
       effects of prompting college students to reflect on their own thinking. Journal of Research in Science
       Teaching, 36(7), 837-858.
Means, B., & Coleman, E. (2000). Technology supports for student participation in science investigations. In M. J.
       Jacobson & R. B. Kozma (Eds.), Innovations in Science and Mathematics Education (pp. 287-319).
       Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Reigeluth, C. M. (1999). What is instructional-design theory and how is it changing? In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.),
       Instructional-design theories and models: a new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 5-29).
       Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Robinson, L., Zheng, D., Sulzen, J., & Young, M. F. (2002). Course syllabus for technology in education.    Retrieved
       February 25, 2006, from http://sp.uconn.edu/~myoung/EPSY240web/syllabus.htm.
Sayvenye, W., Brush, T., Middleton, J., Julian, M., Horn, P. J., Oksuz, C., et al. (2003). Developing and evaluating
       online teacher videocases for learning technology integration. Paper presented at the American
       Educational Research association, Chicago, Illinois.
Schlager, M. S., Fusco, J., & Schank, P. (2002). Evolution of an on-line education community of practice. Retrieved
       February 25, 2006, from http://www.tappedin.sri.com/info/papers.html.
Schwartz, D., Lin, X., Brophy, S., & Bransford, J. D. (1999). Toward the development of flexibly adaptive
       instructional designs. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models: a new paradigm
       of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 183-213). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Smerdon, B., Cronen, S., Lanahan, L., Anderson, J., Lannotti, N., & Angeles, J. (2000). Teachers' Tools for the 21st
       Century: a report on teachers' use of technology. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, P. J., Jacobson, M. J., & Coulson, R. L. (1991). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism, and
       hypertext: Random access instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains.
       Educational Technology, 5(31), 24-33.
Stebbins, L. B., St. Pierre, R. G., Proper, E. C., Anderson, R. B., & Cerva, T. R. (1977). Education as
       experimentation: A planned variation model. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.
Sulzen, J., Robinson, L., Zheng, D., & Young, M. F. (2002). The University of Connecticut's Technology in
       Education Course for Preservice Teachers. Paper presented at the Northeastern Educational Research
       Association, Kerhonkson, NY.
Vanderbilt, T. P. G. a. (2003). Three AMIGOs: Using "anchored modular inquiry" to help prepare future teacher.
       Educational Technology Research and Development, 51(1), 105-123.
Whitehead, A. N. (1929). The aims of education. New York: MacMillan.
Wilson, B. G. (1995). Situated instructional design: Blurring the distinctions between theory and practice, design
       and implementation, curriculum and instruction. Paper presented at the National Convention of the
       Association for Educational Communications and Technology, Washington D.C.
Zheng, D., Young, M. F. & Sulzen, J. (2003). EPSY240: Technology survey. Retrieved February 25, 2006, from
       http://www.education2.uconn.edu/EPSY240/presurvey.cfm and
       http://www.education2.uconn.edu/EPSY240/EPSY240_survey/postsurvey.cfm

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Dr. Ann O'Connell for her statistics expertise and feedback. Thanks to Dr. Robert Hannafin for his
support and valuable input.

                                                         879                                                 ICLS 2006
