    Flow Blocks as a Conceptual Bridge Between Understanding
            the Structure and Behavior of a Complex Causal System

       Oren Zuckerman, MIT Media Lab, 20 Ames Street, Cambridge, MA 02139 orenz@media.mit.edu
            Tina Grotzer, Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Education, 124 Mount Auburn Street,
                              Cambridge, MA 02138 Tina_Grotzer@pz.harvard.edu
            Kelly Leahy, Harvard Graduate School of Education, Appian Way, Cambridge, MA 02138,
                                               kellyleahy75@gmail.com

            ABSTRACT: Complexity exists in the world all around us. While it has garnered the focus
            of scientists in forms such as quantum mechanics and chaos theory, complexity also exists
            in the every day world. For instance, in order to understand the transmission of a common
            cold, one   needs to understand     probabilistic causation, branching   causal patterns, and
            distributed agency.  In this  paper we  argue that  students  need opportunities to learn  the
            causal concepts related to complexity and we review research in support of this assertion.
            We introduce a set of materials called "Flow Blocks" that are designed to give children the
            opportunity  to explore complex    causal relationships and  their analogical relationships to
            real world systems. We go on to share exploratory research that we conducted using Flow
            Blocks and to discuss what the finding suggest for learning about the nature of complexity.

Introduction: Learning About Complexity And Systems Concepts
       Research shows that very young children hold fragile developing concepts related to forms of complex
causality and yet, the science education literature repeatedly shows that students of all ages tend to make simplifying
default assumptions about the nature of causality that undermine learning (Grotzer, 2003). The problematic nature of
these assumptions is particularly evident in concepts that have obvious systems-thinking aspects, such as ecosystems
relationships or the spread  of  disease,  but can also be    problematic for  learning "everyday science   concepts"
(Grotzer, 2004).

       Hmelo, Holton, and Kolodner (2000) introduced the Structure-Behavior-Function framework (SBF) in the
context of complex systems. Borrowed from systems approaches to artificial intelligence (Goel & Chandrasekran,
1989), it draws distinctions between structures, functions, and behaviors of systems and the connections between
them to illuminate types of reasoning about systems. According to Hmelo and colleagues (2000), structure refers to
the actual physical structures of a system, such as the lungs and alveoli, function refers to the purpose of the system
or subsystem, so the transport of oxygen throughout the body, and behavior refers to the dynamic mechanisms and
processes that enable the structures to carry out their function. Hmelo and colleagues (2003) found that students
were more likely to perceive the structural aspects of a system and to miss the behavioral or functional aspects.

       Building on this earlier work, we hypothesize that particular kinds of learning scaffolds may help children
bridge between the different SBF layers, specifically the structural and the behavioral layer. Our assumption is that
people's tendency to focus on the structural layer is rooted in children's early learning of causal models. Children
learn about causality from interaction with the physical world around them, acquiring knowledge through the senses.
Since the senses perceive the physical, visible world, children naturally develop a good understanding of simple
causal models, models that can explain children's interaction with the physical world. For example, playing with
physical objects such as blocks or stones help children learn about direct cause-and-effect: one pushes the block, and
the block moves. Andersson (1986) referred to this as the experiential gestalt of causation (EGC) and argued that
students extend the primitive notion, learned in infancy, of an agent that physically affects an object to a sense of
"the nearer, the greater the effect" to difficulties in learning various science concepts. Water, sand, and other natural
materials help children refine these understandings. But the same interactions create an over-emphasis on direct,
short-term, visible cause-and-effect relationships.   The natural  world  is full of more   complex   cause-and-effect
relationships, such as the water cycle and photosynthesis. But the processes underlying these causal relationships are
invisible to the human senses. Therefore, people's intuitive reasoning is about the visible and the physical, rather
than the invisible interacting processes.

                                                          880                                                ICLS 2006
Flow Blocks: New Type of Educational Technology
         In exploring the question "How might scaffolding impact children's ability to grasp different levels within
a system?" we introduced Flow Blocks, a learning technology designed at the MIT Media Lab (Zuckerman, Arida,
and Resnick, 2005). Flow Blocks are a set of physical blocks, each with embedded computation, that snap together
using magnetic    connectors. Children  connect  the blocks   in different arrangement,   and then   send a light signal
through the blocks, creating a visible chain reaction of `moving lights'. Just like LEGO® bricks, that help children
experience how different arrangements can result in different physical structures (a house, car, train, or person),
Flow Blocks help children experience how different arrangements can result in different causal structures (a linear
chain reaction, circular chain reaction, reinforcing chain reaction, or probabilistic causation).

         We reasoned that Flow Blocks might bridge children's intuitive reasoning about the structural layer to the
more advanced reasoning about the behavioral layer. The design of Flow Blocks makes the behavioral layer visible
(the moving lights), along with the structural layer (the physical blocks), so children can acquire new causal-models
and develop a new intuition in a gradual process, at their own pace, in the same way that an infant learns about
direct cause-and-effect through play with physical objects. In part, whether or not children are able to learn about
systems using Flow Blocks depends upon their ability to see them analogically--as more than just a set of blocks,
but as a structural and/or behavioral analogy to how systems in the world work. In order to draw an analogy, one
must  be able  to see  a relationship between whole   systems    of connected   relations and to   match  them--to  find
structural alignment (Gentner, 1983).

Methodology

Design.     In order to consider how scaffolding impacted students' ability to grasp the structural, behavioral, and
analogical aspects of complex systems concepts, we conducted an exploratory study focused on children's ability to
make  the  transition between  physical or structural components    of  a  system to  behavioral  or processes within a
system.  We did not focus on how children responded to functional aspects of a system as in the earlier research
(Hmelo et al., 2003).

Participants.     Fourth and fifth grade students (n = 18) from an elementary school in Cambridge, MA with an
ethnically and socio-economically   diverse population  participated   in  the study. The students   received no  formal
exposure to systems-thinking or complex causality concepts. Eight fifth graders, with even representation from each
gender,  and ten  fourth graders, with  a higher representation   of girls (eight girls and  two   boys)  comprised the
interviewees. Classroom teachers selected the students for participation. Teachers were asked to select students who
were average achievers from those who had returned parental permission slips.

Procedure.     Each student participated in one 50-60 minute session exploring Flow Blocks with one other student
of the same age and gender, and an interviewer who is a graduate student at MIT.        The students were paired with
another student to encourage communication between them and offer a window into their thinking with minimal
researcher probing. Each session was videotaped for later analysis.

         The  interview  technique proceeded    from  little researcher support   (highly open-ended)    to increasingly
scaffolded questioning. The interview was comprised of three sections as follows. In the first part of the session, the
students were given a basic introduction to the blocks. The researcher told them what each block did in a technical
sense and demonstrated how to connect the blocks. The students were given a limited set of blocks to start with, and
new blocks were added in parallel with the students' progress. The interviewer handed the blocks to the students and
said, "Let's see what you can do with the blocks." The interviewer was careful not to use terms such as "build" that
would imply one type of focus (structural, for example) over others (behavioral or functional, for example). After a
few minutes, the interviewer added, "Try to explore different configurations.        Let me know when you are done
exploring this set and ready to move on." When students said they were ready to move on, the researcher added two
more blocks. The additional blocks enabled the completion of a closed shape (see Figure 1.).

                                                          881                                                   ICLS 2006
            Figure 1.                                Figure 2.                             Figure 3.
       "Rectangle" Loop                           "Square" Loop                     "Non-Symmetric" Loop

         The  limitation in the blocks' design    is intended   to guide  the students toward  cyclic   structures and  the
investigation of the behavior of circular causality. The researcher used simple, non-leading probes such as "Can you
tell me about what you are doing?" or "Can you tell me about what you made?"

         In the second part of the interview, the interviewer added two blue blocks, to enable the creation of more
complex configuration, and said to the students, "Let's see what you can do with this set of blocks."              After 10
minutes, if the students had   not created the    non-symmetric    loop, the  researcher presented  a picture of   one (see
Figure 3), and said, "Another student made this and called it a `circle', is this `circle' similar or different than the
previous ones you formed?"     If the students only mentioned similarities, the interviewer probed for differences and
vice versa.

         Next, the interviewer introduced a set of analogies for the circular pattern in a given order for each set of
students to see how well they could map the particular analogy. The analogies were asked in an order that started
with simpler causal concepts becoming increasingly complex. For each one, the researcher asked: "Is this example
similar or different to what is going on with the blocks"? The analogies were: (1) Dominoes falling over. (2) Toy
train going around a track. (3) Bicycle chain. (4) Gerbil running on a wheel. (5) Water cycle.          The first analogy,
dominoes falling over, involves causality that is linear, sequential, and discrete. It is a type of chain reaction where
there is causality local to each interaction point. The second analogy, a toy train going around a track, involves
cyclic, sequential causality, where causality is local to each interaction point.   The third analogy, the bicycle chain,
involves cyclic simultaneous causality that is both local to the point where it is pedaled and distributed across the
chain. The fourth analogy, the gerbil running on a wheel, is also cyclic simultaneous causality that is both local to
the point where the gerbil is running. The final analogy, the water cycle, involves cyclic causality that is sequential
in the specific example   but  simultaneous in    a  global sense,  with  local causality driving   the pattern. We    were
interested in whether students would be able to map the relationship between the components of the blocks to the
components of each example and what aspects of the causal relationship they picked up on.

Coding and Analysis.           The videotaped sessions were transcribed, and coders worked from the transcriptions
and the  videotape. They  were   coded  independently   by   two   researchers  for statements that indicated a  focus  on
structure and on behavior of a system. The researchers coded for statements that suggested whether students were
focusing on structural, behavioral, or analogical relationships and/or features of the blocks.    Examples of behaviors
and comments with a structural focus include:
    ·    ...building a physical structure where the lights don't work.
    ·    ...paying more attention to the notch in the block than the arrows.
    ·    ...building complex loops without testing them in terms of the light.
    ·    ...making bigger loops (but not additional loops for different behaviors).
    ·    ..."I can use it to make the letter "T."

Examples of behaviors and comments with a behavioral focus include:
    ·    ...talking about the behavior of the light. "It goes round and round."
    ·    ...referring to the square shape as a circle or a loop (which emphasizes the behavior of the light over the
         physical geometric shape.
    ·    ...explicit distinctions between its geometry ("it is in the shape of a square" ) and its behavior ("but it goes
         around in a circle.")
    ·    ..."they are passing light to each other."

Examples of behaviors and comments with an analogical focus include:

                                                            882                                                  ICLS 2006
     ·   ..."it is kind of like a merry-go-round."
     ·   ..."it works like a spinner board."

     The researchers also noted whether students mapped the relationship between the components of the blocks to
the components of each analogy example and which aspects of causality students picked up on in their comments
about the analogies.

     One researcher  coded   100%    of the protocols. A  second   researcher coded a randomly     selected 25%  of the
protocols. The scoring system was refined until initial agreement of at least 85% was reached. A second round of
scoring was conducted with clarifications to the scoring rules resulting in agreement of 93%.  Remaining cases were
discussed until there was 100% agreement.

Findings And Discussion
         Most students began by forming configurations with the blocks. Their comments suggested a clear focus on
the physical, structural aspects of the blocks. In the following excerpts from the interviews transcripts, the letter `I'
represents the interviewer.

K: You could build a city.
T: Yeah. With the longest....the sens....
K: A giant road.
T: San Francis...  Oh man, I can't say this.
K:   What?
T:   San Francisco Bridge or something.
I: San Francisco?
T:   Yeah, bridge.
K:   Oh, the San Francisco bridge.
I: The Golden Gate.
T:   Bridge.
K: Yeah, the red one?
T: And that's the way to go.

----
I: What are you trying to make?
K:   A square.
T:   It looks kinda like a snake.
I: Like a snake?
T:   A sneaky snake.
I: Ok.
T:   And that's the head.
I: Ok.  It looks like a snake.
T:   And those are the eyes and that's the nose.
I: Ok.
T:   And that's the mark on it.

         Interestingly, all of the student pairs did start with linear patterns. It was interesting that even though one
team of girls wanted to make a circle right away, the physical creation of it was tricky for them.

         As   the  students gained  more  `play  time' with  the Flow Blocks,   more  students started to   differentiate
between  the   physical configuration   and the  behavior of the blocks.  There was  clear evidence  that   the students
distinguish between the physical structure of the blocks and the patterns of the light.    They were quite articulate
about the difference between geometrical shapes and patterns of behavior. Some of the students also show a clear
focus on the relationship between pattern and behavior. There were great terms here for distinguishing pattern from
physical structure ("repeatedly", "circulating" "self-contained").

I: Ok.  And what do you think about this shape? What would you call this one?
C:   Um, a square.

                                                            883                                                ICLS 2006
I: A square?
A:   A circle.
I: Circle?
C: Square or circle.
A:   Well, for this it would be like a circle because...
C: Yeah, um, geometrically it's like a square.
A:   A square.
C:   But if, like, we're using circuits and stuff you would refer to it as a circle.
A:   It depends on what kind of shape, because this is, like, a rectangle, and you couldn't make a circle out of it, so it
would be a circle sort of.
I: So what's circle about it? Is it like, geometrically it's a square, right?
C:   Yeah.
I: So, but circle is still a good name for it?
C:   Yeah, well if you're only, if you're able to talk about, like, um, how you, I don't know how to explain it exactly.
Say you wanna talk about how you're using, um, like, circuits and batteries, you would, um....I, like...        Ok, so this
would be, you would say it's a circle if you're only talking about using a circuit or a battery or something, but... if
you're, like, if you want, if you wanna talk about, like, geometrically what shape it is you would say it was a square.
I: Ok.   So if you talk about the circuit it's a circle and if you talk about the geometrical shape it's a square?
C:   Yeah.
I: What do you think A?
A:   I think it would be a circle, sort of, because you can't really make a circle out of this shape.   Geometry, like... it
would be considered a square.
I: Um hmm.
A:   But it's really it would be sorta like a circle, for this matter.
I: For this matter it's a circle?
A:   Yeah.
I: Why?
A:   Because it travels like that. And so, like, a circle kind of pattern.
I: Pattern?  What do you mean when you say pattern?
A:   Well, I mean, like, if you draw a circle it would sorta seem like you were drawing this.

----
K:   I'm trying  to make   it go,  make it so   it can go around  in    a circle either way, but I could  just change  this
completely.
S:   [...inaudible...]
I: Go around in a circle, you said?
K:   Yeah.
S: Yeah, go around in a circle either way.
I: What do you mean, circle?
S: Well, a square actually, I think.
K:   Yeah.   Well, like, so it keeps going on and on and on.
S:   Like we had before, but she wants it to go on so if it's...so if it goes this way it'll go around. It won't go around
okay?
K:   Yeah.
S:   But if it goes this way it'll go around.
I: You know that when I play with people with this, some kids say circle and some kids say square.           What do you
think it is?
K:   Well, the shape is a square or a rectangle.
S:   Yeah but technically it's going around in a circle.
K: But like, a circle you think it, like, keeps going around and around forever.
S:   Yeah, so...
I: So what word do you think is better to use, or what is the difference between using them?
S: Well, a square has corners and is actually going around
K:   The actual shape is this.
I: Um hmm.
K:   Is a square, but, um, the concept of what you wanna do is different.

                                                             884                                                   ICLS 2006
S: Than what it actually is.
I: So the circle is more of the concept?
K:  Yeah.
I: Like if the rectangle is a shape, so what is a circle?
S: A circle is a shape, but it's going around in a pattern that much like a circle.

        Some of the students had already studied a unit on electrical circuits. Those students had a hard time seeing
beyond that and were most likely to focus on the underlying mechanism of what made the blocks light, than on the
actual behavior of the lights themselves.    This mechanistic approach seemed to make it hard for students to use the
blocks as an analogy to new situations and likewise transfer information from the blocks.

        Once  students    began  to focus   on    the behavior  of  the lights, they  seldom   reverted back  to  discussing
physical structure except in contrast with behavior or in discussing the mechanics of sticking the blocks together.
The point of transition for most students was the point at which they constructed a loop and the pattern in the blocks
departed from a domino causality to a cyclic sequential pattern.        It took students a varying amount of time to get to
this point, with some of the teams making a number of configurations (all flat on the table) as with building blocks
before switching to a focus on the behavioral aspects of the blocks. But once students made this switch, they pretty
quickly started to explore various possibilities for creating loops.

        Interestingly,   there was  little spontaneous   generation  of  analogy,    but students were  able to  analyze the
analogies given with    some   success by  noting  aspects   of the  underlying  causal  forms, and    were able to generate
analogies when prompted. For instance, the following examples reveal some ability to map the components of the
domino and cyclic relationships:

K:  And, um, the light is, um... the light is like the, the... well the arrow is like the thing that hits it and the light
makes it fall cause the next one...
M: Like the arrow is the domino and the light is the domino that started it.
K:  That's hitting it.
M:  So it keeps going.   So it's like they're pushing the other one down so that if it's like in a line, if you push that
one down... um, it will hit that one.  So that's kind of like what the light is doing.    Except it's the same thing.

--
K:  So it's like the train is going on the track.
M:  And the green one is probably the, uh, the tracks that curve.
K: ....the light is the train that goes round and round on the tracks.
M:  And the blocks are the tracks.
K:  There's no end for it.... It would just keep on going round and round cause this is there and there's arrows there.

        It is possible that students focused first on observing the behavioral aspects of the blocks and would only
begin to make spontaneous analogies later given sufficient time to explore the behavioral aspects.           An interesting
extension to this study   would  be  to   give the  blocks to   students to play  with   for extended  periods   of time and
videotape their actions to see if they move through different phases in how they play with them (beyond what was
noted here with the move from physical structure to behavioral aspects). With the educational scaffolding built into
the block design, the students were able to move beyond the structural level and focus on behavioral aspects of the
causality within the system.    This   is  promising   given earlier research   that suggests  that students have   difficulty
moving beyond the structural features of a system. For example, using an aquarium as an ecosystem, Hmelo-Silver,
Pfeffer, and Malhotra (2003) found that children and novices assumed that the role of plants in an aquarium is
decorative only, that the plants are there to please the viewer--exemplifying how novices focus on the physical,
visible parts of a system, or the structural level. People with greater expertise in the subject matter (such as teachers,
aquarium  enthusiastic,   or academic     experts) were   able  to separate between      the structure and  behavior  levels,
reasoning about the role of the plant in the aquarium and its interaction with other components.

        An important extension of this work would be to consider whether the blocks could be used as scaffolds for
deeper understanding of systems such as an aquarium or other ecosystems studied in school. So while the design of
the blocks did help students notice behavioral aspects of the blocks themselves, the broader question of their ability

                                                             885                                                    ICLS 2006
to function analogically remains to be explored   in greater depth and  with more complex    analogies    and subject
matter.

References
Andersson, B. (1986). The experiential gestalt of causation: A common core to pupils' preconceptions in
         science. European Journal of Science Education, 8(2), 155-171.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive Science 7, 155 ­
         170.
Goel, A. & Chandrasekran, B. (1989). Functional representation of designs and redesign problem-solving.
         In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 1388-
        1394). Los Altos, CA Morgan Kaufmann.
Grotzer, T.A. (2003). Learning to understand the forms of causality implicit in scientific explanations.
         Studies in Science Education, 39, 1-74.
Grotzer, T.A. (2004). Putting science within reach: Addressing patterns of thinking that limit science
         learning. Principal Leadership, October, 2004.
Hmelo, C.E., Holton, D.L., Kolodner, J.L. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. The Journal
         of the Learning Sciences 9(3) 247-298.
Hmelo-Silver, C.E., Pfeffer, M.G., & Malhotra, B.A. (2003, April). Fish swim and rocks sit:
         Understanding structures, behaviors, and functions in a complex system. Paper presented at the
         American Educational Research Association Annual Meeting, Chicago, IL.
Zuckerman, O., Arida, S., & Resnick, M. (2005). Extending tangible interfaces for education: Digital
         Montessori­inspired initiatives. In the proceedings of CHI 2005, Portland, Oregon.

                                                         886                                                 ICLS 2006
