    Showing Evidence; Analysis of students' arguments in a range of
                                                      settings

                       Issam Abi-El-Mona, Barbara Hug, University of Illinois, Champaign, IL
                                    Email: abielmon@uiuc.edu; bhug@uiuc.edu

          Abstract: The purpose of this study is to investigate evidence-based arguments generated through
          the use of a web based tool, Showing Evidence. Six of 40 sample classrooms during 2004-2005
          were purposefully sampled from the tool's database. Analysis focused on identifying the physical
          and argumentation schematic structures of possible evidence based explanations using Toulmin
          (1958) and Walton (1996) frameworks. Findings demonstrate student's ability to depict proper
          data for claims yet inability in structuring overall explanations.

Introduction
      Recent reforms in science education are encouraging the practice of constructing evidence based explanations in
science classrooms   through   scientific inquiry (National   Research    Council, 1996;   Kuhn   &  Reiser,  2005).  These
explanations form the basis of arguments student construct to show their understanding of science concepts. The
practice of argumentation is an essential feature in education.

Statement of the Problem
      Students have difficulty in creating logical and reasoned arguments. These difficulties are compounded by the
fact that the meaning of explanations are largely determined by the socio-interactive discourse that occurs within
various contexts (e.g. Anderson, Chinn, Chang Waggoner & Yi, 1997). Many types of explanations generated from
various levels of  cognitive reasoning    exist (Nagel,  1961).    These  issues have  led the  drive  towards  developing
methodical tools for supporting both teachers and students as they engage in argumentation skills (Osborne, Erduran
& Simon, 2004). One example is the Intel designed Showing Evidence software. In creating an explanation, students
collect evidence,  evaluate  the evidence,    and then  make    visible  the connections   between  the  evidence   and   the
scientific concepts being investigated.   This  then  needs  to  be communicated    to the  community      (Kuhn &   Reiser,
2005;   NRC,  1996).   These features are    supported  in the   Showing   Evidence  tool. The   goal   of this study  is to
investigate how students used the supports present in the tool to construct evidence based explanations. Specifically,
it is the  feature of  using evidence     in argumentation   that   this study   investigates. This study   identifies both
argumentation and explanation as both a process and product that students and teachers engage in during instruction
(Kuhn & Reiser, 2005). Argumentation often includes the use of individual explanations generated by students to
provide support to the larger issue. Argumentation is not only a reasoned causal account of how or why something
occurred but also the use of evidence within a social context. Argumentation in the context of this study is seen as
both a social and cognitive process. Argumentation is viewed as a scientific based activity whereby valid arguments
and   explanations are those that clearly    demonstrate the    relationship between  evidence   and   claims and   thus  are
designated as evidence based arguments. The research questions are: What types of explanations or arguments are
generated across different grade levels? How are these explanations or arguments different or similar?

Method
      Six of 40 sample classrooms during 2004-2005 were purposefully sampled from the database by selecting for
science-based  issues. Of the  samples,   random     samples of  10 artifacts were taken   per  class. All targeted science
based debate topics with subject matter ranging from health sciences, physics, biotechnology, genetics, geology and
mathematics.   Data   included students'     written claim   to  a given  question,  written   evidence,   explanation   and
conclusion. Analysis involved identifying features and forms of existing arguments. Analysis was based on a rubric
adapted from Toulmin (1958) and Walton (1996).

Findings
      Initial findings demonstrated students were able to develop multiple explanations but not all explanations were
linked to a fully developed argument. In looking at the components of the explanations, a number of interesting
findings suggest the tool is helping students develop explanations but additional support might be needed. We have

                                                             888                                                  ICLS 2006
seen: (1) In all samples evidence relies largely on authoritarian sources (e.g. science text, internet based science
topics, science professional journals). However there is a distinction between upper and lower grade levels as to
what represents an authoritarian source. For example, the majority (27.4%) of high school samples used data sources
taken from science professional journals whereas the majority of middle and elementary levels depended on public
news media (41%). (2) Supporting evidence for explanations included redundancy for most samples (i.e. groups
tended  to use  the same   sources)   but this was  exceptionally higher   in   middle and  elementary   levels  (10%);  In
addition,  high   school students  supporting  evidence emphasized     specific scientifically  topic relevant data (60%)
whereas middle and elementary emphasized individual beliefs/ interpretations of data (70%). (3) For all samples,
evidence   represents  scientifically grounded   facts yet  explanations rarely   show    clear connections   between    the
evidence presented and claim noted. Student groups tended to list highly relevant data and yet they do not seem to
be able   to: (a) relate data  sources to  each other  and  (b)  use them  to   relate to the  claim(s). (4)  Structures of
explanations   are largely in  the form   of claims for all samples   with predominance     demonstrated   in  middle and
elementary levels (30% high school; 86.4% middle and elementary levels). Rarely found were complete arguments
where  claims,  warrants   and data   were clearly connected.   Justifications, when   present, rely  heavily on repeating
supporting    evidence and  rarely consider  counter   claims to their original  claims.  Middle  and  elementary   school
samples (1.4%) demonstrate the proper choice of counterclaims yet no clear justification as to HOW they are used to
strengthen the overall explanation is given. (5) Argumentation schemes were largely arguments from example (81%)
for high school levels. This means high school levels rationalize explanations of data used by providing examples
related to previous scientific content learned. Middle and elementary levels largely use arguments from sign (46%).
Such samples used a general observed event from personal experience.

Implications
    Implications on improving the tool are suggested: providing options for uploading other sources of data,
inserting additional dialogue boxes promoting users to construct a sentence that demonstrates HOW data relate to
claim, providing tests credibility of chosen data, prompts challenging explanation validity, and changing explanation
prompts to scaffold students in writing specific- topic content related (in this case science evidence based)
explanations.

References
Anderson, R., Chinn, C., Chang, J., Waggoner, M. & Yi, H. (1997). On the logical integrity of children's arguments.
    Cognition and Instruction, 15(2), 135-167.
Kuhn, L. & Resier, B. (2005, April). Students constructing and defending evidence based scientific explanations.
    Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, Dallas,
    TX.
Nagel, E. (1961). The structure of science. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
National Research Council (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: National Research
    Council.
Osborne, J., Erduran, S., & Simon, S. (2004). Enhancing the quality of argumentation in school science. Journal of
    Research in Science Teaching, 41(10), 994-1020.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Walton, D. (1996). Argumentation schemes for presumptive reasoning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum and
    Associates.

                                                            889                                                  ICLS 2006
