       `Hybrid Modeling': Advanced Scientific Investigations Linking
     Computer Models and Real-World Sensing (an interactive poster)
         Paulo Blikstein and Uri Wilensky, Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling
    School of Education and Social Policy, Northwestern University - 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL ­ 60208
                                 Email: paulo@northwestern.edu, uri@northwestern.edu

        Abstract: `Hybrid modeling' is an innovative technological platform that enables students to link
        multi-agent    models  ("in"   the  computer)    and  electronic  sensors   ("outside")   in   real time.    The
        platform is designed for learners to validate, refine, and debug their computer models using real-
        world    data. Also,  the   technology    broadens   the  types   of    scientific explorations   possible    in
        classrooms. Pilot studies suggest a real-to-virtual reciprocity that catalyzes further inquiry toward
        deeper understanding.

        What do we obtain from "going out to the world" as a learning resource? Multiple aspects of such learning
experiences have been explored by different schools of thought in education. John Dewey (1916) was one of the first
to emphasize  the   importance   of connecting    school   learning   and  real-world    experiences.   Critical  pedagogy   and
situated-learning   advocates argue    that departing    from   the   learner's  out-of-school    context   is crucial to  foster
emancipating  and   motivating   learning   (Freire, 1974; Lave     &  Wenger,   1991).    Constructionist     educators (Papert,
1991) posit that building personally-meaningful public artifacts is central to promote sustainable and deep learner
engagement. However, does the world afford the necessary information and opportunities for students to learn the
`official' school content? For instance, are acid-base reactions amenable for student inquiry? School laboratories, as
we explain, do not always provide the necessary solutions.

        While    concurring   with  claims  about    the relevance    of the  learner's  context,  background,     and   concrete
experiences  for  education  design, we    acknowledge     that the   current tools for    scientific exploration  available for
students limit the domains and complexity of their real-world investigations. Thus, we submit that the disconnect
between what one could potentially learn in a situated environment and the more traditional school content may be
due to the lack of appropriate tools to `dissect' reality to the appropriate level of analysis. Even if, by definition,
Physics, Chemistry, and Biology are `out-there' in the world, most phenomena are invisible to human vision and
time scale. Many    patterns  in nature  are  too long,   too   fast, too small,  or   too  large for  learners   to extract and
understand the underlying structures. Canonical examples are weather behavior, chemical reactions, housing and
traffic patterns, particle physics, and population ecology. Conventional school laboratories are not well equipped to
support students  in developing    hypothesis  about   the information    they   gather.   For example,   a student   studying a
chemical reaction might discern the components and even hypothesize as to the relations between these components;
however, the investigation cannot go much further. Needed are tools that provide continuity between observation
and  model-building,   furnishing  the `missing   link'  between    data-gathering  and    the construction    of theories using
computational representations. That is, to make the study of these phenomena accessible to all students, we need
new technological tools that foreground and unveil the deep structures. This poster will focus on `hybrid modeling,'
a  framework    for `trans-media'   scientific exploration    and     modeling   which     merges  two   types    of educational
technologies commonly used (separately) in schools. The first kind is robotics and sensing (Martin, 2000; Resnick,
2000)  that uses  computer-controlled    electronic   sensors   and    actuators to  enable    a wide   range   of experimental
activities in the real world. The second technology is multi-agent modeling-and-simulation environments, such as
NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999), where learners model complex natural phenomena by embedding very simple behaviors
into elementary   computational   agents   (Wilensky   &   Resnick,    1995). We  have     linked the  two  technologies   ­ the
"real" and  the  "virtual" so as  both  to  broaden   the  possibilities  of  situated investigations   and    ground  computer
modeling with real-world validation.

        Typically, students build a computer model of a particular scientific phenomenon, such as heat transfer (see
Figure 1) or gas laws (see Figure 2), and a physical device equipped with electronic sensors. The models are then
linked in real time through a low-cost, easily programmable analog-to-digital interface - the GoGo Board (Sipitakiat,
Blikstein, & Cavallo, 2004). Students are able to run their computer model in tandem with the physical apparatus,
comparing their outcomes, and debugging their model until it matches adequately the real-world data. We built
various proof-of-concept   systems   for `hybrid'    explorations   in heat  transfer, gas  laws,  acid-based     and oscillating

                                                             890                                                       ICLS 2006
reactions,  and Materials   Science. Our   main goal, however,   is to  create  a technological  infrastructure  to enable
students to build their own systems.

                               Figure 1. A `hybrid' system for investigating heat transfer.

        Figure 2. A `hybrid' system for investigating pressure, temperature, and volume in a gas container.

        In a pilot study, we compared artifacts generated by undergraduate and graduate students under two distinct
conditions. In the first condition, students created multi-agent models with no sensors or robotics. In the second
situation,  another group   of students built  `hybrid'   models with  sensors.   All students  built their models   as an
assignment in an `Educational Design' course. Our data include students' artifacts, field notes and transcriptions of
interviews. Preliminary results suggest that students attended to phenomenal factors which they would otherwise
have  overlooked,   such as  energy  loss, reversibility, and measuring  error.   In  turn, students  "complexified"  their
computer models so as to include these factors. This interactive poster will exhibit the platform in action, present
student artifacts, and summarize our findings and conclusions.

References
Dewey,  J.  (1916).  Democracy    and   Education:  And    Introduction to  the   Philosophy  of Education.   New   York:
        Macmillan.
Freire, P. (1974). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York,: Seabury Press.
Lave, J.,   & Wenger,    E. (1991).  Situated  Learning:   Legitimate  peripheral    participation.  Cambridge,  England:
        Cambridge University Press.
Martin, F., Mikhak, B., Resnick, M., Silverman, B., Berg, R. (2000). To Mindstorms and Beyond: Evolution of a
        construction kit for magical machines. In A. Druin (Ed.), Robots for Kids: Exploring New Technologies for
        Learning Experiences. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufman / Academic Press.
Papert, S. (1991). Situating Constructionism. In S. Papert & I. Harel (Eds.), Constructionism. Cambridge, MA: MIT
        Press.
Resnick, M., Berg, R., Eisenberg, M. (2000). Beyond black boxes: Bringing transparency and aesthetics back to
        scientific investigation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(1), 7-30.
Sipitakiat, A., Blikstein,  P., &    Cavallo, D. P.  (2004).    GoGo  Board:    Augmenting    Programmable      Bricks  for
        Economically     Challenged   Audiences.   Paper  presented  at the International    Conference  of  the Learning
        Sciences, Los Angeles, USA.
Wilensky,   U.  (1999).  NetLogo.   Evanston,  IL: Center   for  Connected  Learning   and   Computer-Based     Modeling.
        http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1995). New Thinking for New Sciences: Constructionist Approaches for Exploring
        Complexity. Presented at the annual conference of the American Educational Research Association.

                                                            891                                                  ICLS 2006
