  Metalanguage among Families in a Marine Science Museum

                                         Carol B. Brandt, Doris Ash
                        University of California Santa Cruz, Department of Education
                                 1156 High Street, Santa Cruz, CA 95060
                                 Email: carolb@ucsc.edu, dash5@ucsc.edu

          Abstract: Metalanguage, talking about talk or talk about text, is a heightened awareness
          of language, and how language functions in a socio-cultural setting. Using video and
          audio data from 20 Spanish-speaking families in a marine science center in north-central
          California, we describe our system for identifying metalanguage in dialogue as families
          visit the science museum. Our goal is to understand ways in which metalinguistic practice
          contributes to meaning making around biological concepts.

Introduction
          In our research with bilingual families in science museums, we are interested in how parents and
children move from everyday language and appropriate scientific language. As these family members talk
about talk, or talk about text, they are engaged in metalanguage (Coupland & Jaworski, 2004). O'Connor
and Michaels (1996) have also referred to this practice as "revoicing" and a strategy to establish mutual
understanding in dialogue. We describe our system for identifying metalanguage in bilingual dialogue, the
coding scheme that we applied to our data, and look at how metalinguistic practice contributes to, or
detracts from, meaning-making about biological concepts. Our research questions are: What metalinguistic
features can we identify in dialogue among families as they use a marine science museum? How do exhibit
texts appear in metalanguage? And similarly, are dialogues about science taken up metalinguistically?

Research Methods
          Our analysis is centered on a large, naturalistic data set of 20 Spanish-speaking families in a
marine science center in north-central California. Each visit consists of at least two children and one parent,
plus a bilingual mediator who translates English signage and answers questions. We rely on a socio-cultural
theoretical framework rooted in dialogue and in activity (Engestrom, 198l; Wells, 1999). Meaning is built
over time by successive dialogic episodes that can be discontinuous in time (Ash, 2004). Using video data,
observation, interviews, stimulated recall methods (Gass and Mackey, 2000). Our research follows families
as they make sense of science dialogically.

Examples of our coding scheme
          Our identification of metalanguage follows a systemic-functional approach (Halliday & Hassan,
1985).    We coded   dialogue by indicating:     the person  who  was the Speaker,        the person who was  the
Respondent, the type of Metalanguage (see below), Gestural References (e.g. pointing), and the Object of
the metalinguistic reference (text or dialogue). Types of Metalanguage include (metalinguistic markers in
italics):
   A.     Claiming authority (A1), transferring authority to another speaker (A2), or hedging (A3)
          Son: (Flipping through photographs and referring to sea lions) Look, come, let's see, look, here
          are the other types, look. I thought, I didn't think that they had hair, then my mom says that they
          do have hair.  Look, there it is, there are others, look at the other types of seals there are. (B
          Family visit 1, line 1422)
   B.     Intertextuality ­ bringing other sources of information into the conversation
          Son: The whale like.... I have read in a book that when it goes to sleep it goes up to the edge of the
          sea.... (indicating with his hand hear the surface of the water). (B Family stimulated recall, line
          500)
   C.     Clarifying information ­ rephrasing or repeating what another person has said
          Bilingual Mediator: So, when you said that, that it had...that it looked like a shark but it could be
          that it has the shape of a shark....
          Dad: Ah, hah, it has, it has.... because it's not, it's not, it's not the same. To me this one is.... not,
          not, I don't know how, how, how to explain to you, but to me it's not a fish. (B Family visit 2,
          lines 324-328)

                                                         894                                                   ICLS 2006
   D.    Conversation continuity ­ usually involves repeating the other speakers words
         Daughter: [Speaking about whales] I don't know.       I just like that sound they make.
         Mediator: Oh, you like the sound they make.    Okay.   Okay.
         Oh, you like the sound they make.   Okay.   Okay. [Turns to Mother] What did you think, Senora,
         when your daughter was talking to you about ----- Did it surprise you that she knew so much
         [about whales]? (J Family visit 1 stimulated recall, lines 48-50)

Results: The Qualities of Metadiscourse
         Preliminary observations from our research show that even with the translation by a bilingual
mediator   and their    English-speaking   children,  families  rarely  re-voice    or   reference  exhibit  text.
Metadiscourse is most often shared between the mediator and parents recount their museum visit in the
stimulated recall session,  and  less metalanguage    occurs    between parents    and   children, or   among   all
participants on the science museum floor. In these results we compare the occurrence of metalanguage
relative to the dialogue across the entire visit at the museum.

Conclusions and Significance
         Our study   is one of  the  first times   metalanguage  has been       applied to naturalistic studies of
dialogue in science museums. Metalanguage is valuable for understanding how authority is constructed
among speakers    and is one way    that   parents tentatively incorporate more    "scientific"   terms into their
lexicon. In our research we found that by rephrasing or using "clarifying" phrases through metalanguage,
helps to negotiate the meaning of science content. The opportunity to practice using science terms and
concepts has metalinguistic features, especially as one adopts new terminology and the set of values that
are attached to science. In museums docents can use metalinguistic skills to more effectively scaffold
learning for diverse audiences.

References
Ash, D. (2004). Reflective scientific sense-making dialogue in two languages: The science in the dialogue
         and the dialogue in the science. Science Education, 88, 855-884.
Coupland, N., & Jaworski, A. (2004). Sociological perspectives on metalanguage: Reflexivity, evaluation,
         and ideology. In Jaworski, A., Coupland, N., & Galasinski, D. (Eds.), Metalanguage: Social and
         ideological perspectives, pp. 15-51. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Engeström,  Y. (1999).   Activity theory   and individual  and  social  transformation.    In, Y.  Engestrom,   R.
         Miettinen, & R. Punamaki (Eds.), pp. 19-38. Perspectives on activity theory. Cambridge, UK:
         Cambridge University Press.
Gass, S. M., & Mackay, A. (2000). Stimulated recall methodology in second language research. Mahway,
         NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Halliday, M.A.K., & Hasan, R. (1985). Language, context, and text: aspects of language in a social-
         semiotic perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O'Connor, M., & Michaels, S. (1996). Shifting participant frameworks: Orchestrating thinking practices in
         group discussions.  In   D.  Hicks  (Ed.), Discourse,  learning,  and    schooling  (pp.  63-103). New
         York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: Towards a sociocultural practice and theory of education. New York:
         Cambridge University Press.

                                                       895                                                    ICLS 2006
