                            East Austin Stories Exchange:
              Facilitating `Empathy' for Differing Perspectives

            Damien Brockmann, MA, Todd C. Reimer, PhD, University of Texas, Austin, TX
                            missirabah@yahoo.com, t-reimer@mail.utexas.edu

         Abstract:  The East Austin Stories Exchange is a web-based platform where junior high
         and high school students can share personal films about their community and empathize
         with the perspectives presented in other students' films.    The goal of the project is to
         foster students' ability to incorporate    perspectives different  than  one's own  into  a
         developing  worldview.    This    poster presentation will present  our  needs  assessment,
         design solutions, and demonstrate the Exchange's functionality.

Introduction
         The East Austin Stories Exchange is a design experiment that aims to use a web-based community
to facilitate the development of `empathy' in junior high and high school students for perspectives and
worldviews different than their own.    The Exchange is an extension of East Austin Stories, a 3-year old
project in the Radio, Television & Film Department at the University of Texas that enables students to
learn about their community through the production of personal documentaries, specifically focusing on the
stories of people and places in East Austin.

Needs Assessment
         The purpose of the East Austin Stories project is to prompt students to explore their community by
uncovering stories, cultural perspectives, and personal histories.  While participating in the production of a
film may lead to a deeper understanding of the film's subject matter, the project team's experience over the
past three years indicates it is insufficient to help students gain empathy for perspectives presented in other
students' work.

         Empathy is the imaginative intellectual and emotional participation in another's experience. An
individual must extend beyond their personal view, and be able to experience other perspectives as if it
were his or her own (Bennett, 1998).    The affective nature of film affords it the potential to invoke a sense
of `sympathy' in a viewing audience, by prompting them to imagine what it is like to be someone else.
However, these emotions are frequently disconnected from cross-cultural contexts.     East Austin is a diverse
community of Latino, African American and immigrant families; while socio-economically diverse, the
community consists of many middle to lower income households.         Currently there is no mechanism in the
East Austin Stories project to enable students to make the necessary connections between the films they
produce and the diverse perspectives they represent.     These connections are essential in order to foster a
greater sense of empathy for the various perspectives presented.

         There  are several obstacles   to experiencing   empathy   that we seek  to address in  this project.
Students  are often unaware  of   their own  cultural bias  or perspective  and  often  make the  mistake    of
believing that everyone shares a common perspective.      Additionally, empathy is a complex phenomenon of
intellectual and emotional awareness that often requires a certain quality of serendipity and randomness
(Duane and Hill, 1996). The existing design of East Austin Stories currently lacks any consideration for
these obstacles. In addition, the current design lacks a wider social context where those tacit assumptions
can be discussed, challenged, and explicated (Wells, 2000).

Design Solution
         The East Austin Stories Exchange extends the objective of the current project by providing a web-
based platform  where   students can incorporate   their work  into the  context of the multiple perspectives
presented through   the work of   other students.  Prior to exploring connections   between  student  films, a
teacher facilitates a discussion of the different perspectives presented in the documentaries in order to help
students acknowledge that each film, including their own, presents a unique, independent, and subjective

                                                      896                                                ICLS 2006
worldview.   Once the students are grounded in this concept, they can utilize the Exchange to explore the
films of others.

         Our design solution is to create a complimentary website to the existing course allowing students
to index scenes within their films by theme and cross-reference them with other films that deal with similar
topics. They are encouraged to explore the films serendipitously, using the hyperlinked tags to jump from
scene to scene    in different movies  (which  are  related by their  connected  themes). The  indexed buttons
embedded in the videos allow students to view the videos out of chronological sequence, in a manner that
allows their imaginations to wander freely through the content of the videos.    It is hoped that this vicarious
experience   will lead    students to extend  their boundaries    between  themselves  and the external world
(Eisenberg and Strayer 1987), and students will experience the video segments as if they were an internal
construct of their own minds (Bennett, 1998).

         Through     this method   of exploration   and discovery, students  are able  to uncover  themes   and
connections among the movies that may not have been apparent otherwise. Students are encouraged to use
their explorations to engage topics of interest, research them and submit these themes into the Exchange
website  for discussion.       The  resulting social  interaction prompts   students  to  acknowledge  bits of
information and viewpoints other than their own, and frequently leads to a cognitive conflict that triggers
disequilibrium and drives intellectual development (von Glaserfeld, 1987).

Conclusion & Next Steps
         Upon completing the production of the Exchange, we would like to expand the use of the project
to teachers  in  other subject  areas--  particularly   in Language   Arts and  Social Sciences.   We  will be
conducting user-tests of The East Austin Stories Exchange to provide our overall design with formative
feedback, as well as indications for future design work and research.

References
Bennett, M. (1998).    Overcoming the Golden Rule: Sympathy and Empathy.         Basic Concepts of
         Intercultural Communication, M.J. Bennett, ed., 191-214.
Duan, C. & Hill (1996).    The Current State of Empathy Research.     Journal of Counseling Psychology,
         43(3), 261-274.
Eisenberg, N. and Strayer, J. 1(987).   Critical issues in the study of empathy. Empathy and its
         Development, N. Eisenberg & J. Strayer, eds., 3-16.
von Glaserfeld, E. (1987). Learning as a constructive activity. In Problems of representation in teaching
         and learning math (pp. 3-17). Hillsdale, NJ.
Wells, G. (2000). Dialogic inquiry in education: Building on the legacy of Vygotsky. In C. D. Lee & P.
         Smagorinsky (Eds.), Vygotskian perspectives on literacy research: Constructing meaning through
         collaborative inquiry (pp. 19-30). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Winn, W. (2003).      Everyday     Cognition  and Situated  Learning. Handbook   of  Research  for Educational
         Communications and Technology, David Jonassaen, ed., 79- 112.

                                                        897                                                ICLS 2006
