         Facilitating Inquiry using Technology and Teams in Exercise
                                        Physiology: The FITT Project

                                     Darla M. Castelli, Ellen M. Evans, & Mark M. Misic
                                          University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

          Abstract: The link between physical inactivity and disease has become a major public health priority.
          The aim of this project was to reform Exercise Physiology laboratory instruction through curriculum
          mapping  and    the implementation      of  inquiry-based   modules.    Use  of a  quasi-experimental   design,
          content  knowledge,       interviews,   modules,   and    a  questionnaire    provided   evidence   of  student
          performance.    There     was a significant knowledge    difference   between   groups   and  increased comfort
          with the majority of course content resulting from inquiry-based versus traditional instruction.

The FITT Project:
          In the last decade, due to the link with many lifestyle related diseases, physical inactivity has become a
major public health priority. On a national level, a growing number of professional organizations are promoting
physical activity for all ages (NASPE, 2004; USDHHS, 2000). Many Kinesiology majors will be asked to apply
their knowledge in pragmatic settings targeting special populations (e.g., children, older adults, etc.) and yet the
undergraduate curriculum remains traditional in its structure and enactment. Additionally, barriers such as lack of
impact of traditional instruction on student learning (Rio, Collins, & DiCarlo, 2002) and a deficiency of teacher
assistant pedagogical     knowledge     (DePauw,    2003),   often plague  exercise   physiology   courses.  The  pedagogical
method of inquiry combined with the use of on-line modules promotes critical thinking, facilitates learning through
an increased depth of knowledge, and integrates content beyond the classroom in authentic contexts.

Purpose
          The   purpose   of this   project was  to  reform  core  undergraduate    Exercise Physiology   laboratory   courses
through   curriculum  mapping       and the implementation    of inquiry-based    teaching  strategies. During  the first year,
using  instructor and     student   feedback  data,   the instructors  and  researchers   realigned  course   content through
curriculum  mapping    strategies.   Key    concepts  across the curriculum     were chunked  and   progressively   sequenced.
Also created were six online learning modules containing probing questions, brief quizzes on reading materials,
additional resources on the lab topic, description of specific laboratory procedures, video of lab procedures, and data
analysis strategies. The modules were completed prior to a lab session in order to hold students accountable for
creating  their own   hypotheses     regarding  the  experimental   outcomes    and  to facilitate discussion  of the probing
questions  during     the lab   experience.     Following    group    discussion,  the  participants    took on   the specific
responsibilities related to the experiment. This differed from traditional lab instruction where no outside class time
was used in preparation for lab sessions and data collection, and resulting discussions were teacher centered.

Method
          After obtaining informed consent, 189 students (males = 91) in 6 lab sections, were randomly categorized
as traditional  instruction  or FITT    project  inquiry-based   instruction based   on laboratory   section. Different   intact
laboratory sections of the exercise physiology course were utilized, but all participants received the same course
lectures. Within their laboratory sections, the participants completed a pre and post content knowledge test (maximal
score = 100 pts) and questionnaire to identify their level of comfort with course content and specific lab techniques
(e.g., taking  blood  pressure,     administering graded   exercise   testing). The  quasi-experimental   design  allowed  the
researchers to capture the complexity of the interactions through focus group interviews, field notes, and images
(e.g., digital  video and    still) during  the laboratory   instruction. Quantitative  data were    analyzed  using  a 2  x 2
ANOVA (time x lab group), while constant comparison (Lincoln & Guba, 1985) and inductive reasoning were used
to reduce and analyze the qualitative data. Codes and frequency counts of student responses were used to develop
patterns and themes.

Results
          At baseline, there was no significant difference between groups in content knowledge (Mtraditional = 48.14
± 13.78, Minquiry     = 50.56 ± 12.64; p = .65). Both the traditional and inquiry-based learning groups increased their

                                                               900                                                    ICLS 2006
content knowledge; however, the inquiry group had a greater change in content knowledge score than the traditional
group (65.90 ± 10.97 vs. 54.43 ± 14.87; p < .01). Comfort with lab techniques increased, however, questionnaire
data revealed    no significant difference  between   groups  regarding  comfort  with   laboratory techniques (p = .36).
Analysis of the qualitative data resulted in the identification of three themes: (a) authentic engagement, (b) teacher
assistant capacity,   and (c) accessibility  issues.  Many  participants were  more   comfortable   with the  laboratories
because they had completed the initial steps of the module prior to the scheduled lab session. The field notes and
videotapes revealed an important difference between groups in lesson enactment. Student engagement was more
evident   in the inquiry-based   lessons, as traditional  lessons contained   an average   of 30 minutes  of   teacher-led
explanation.   During  inquiry   lessons,  this  time was   utilized more    effectively by developing   hypotheses   and
discussing related findings in the literature. The second theme, teacher assistant capacity, suggests that the level of
implementation of these techniques was dependent upon the teacher assistant as well as the make up of the lab
group. Though the teacher assistants were provided the same materials and training, some embraced their new role
as facilitator while others just "tried" the strategies. The final theme was accessibility issues. Despite the best efforts
of the researchers and instructors to provide equal opportunity for all participants to access the on-line modules,
there was some frustration related to the modules. Participants using antiquated technology struggled to retrieve the
modules from their homes, thus university resources served as their only access point.

Conclusions
          Findings  suggest   that this initial attempt  at transforming  the Exercise    Physiology  laboratory learning
experiences   has been  effective.  Students in  the  inquiry-based  learning group  spent  more time   engaged  with the
content and interpreting their results compared to the traditional group that spent more time learning how to use the
equipment. It has been recommended that the modules be expanded to include simulations, a scientific database that
contains  data   from classic experiments    across  the lifespan (not  just the college-age  students  who   conduct the
experiment on a peer), and a culminating project as an outgrowth of module completion. Despite positive signs of
inquiry-based learning effectiveness, progress has been hampered by technological glitches, specifically with regard
to streaming video over the Internet.

References
DePauw, K.P. (2003).      Changing faculty roles and responsibilities:   Expanding the skill set of faculty perspective-
          from a graduate dean.    Quest, 55(1), 18-25.
Lincoln, Y., & Guba, E. (1985). Naturalistic Inquiry.    Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.
Rao, S.P., Collins, H.L., DiCarlo, S.E. (2002). Collaborative testing enhances student learning.        Advances       in
          Physiology Education, 26(1), 37-41.
National  Association   for   Sport and   Physical   Education   [NASPE].    (2004). Physical  Activity  for Children: A
          Statement of Guidelines for Children Ages 5-12. (2nd ed.). Reston, VA: NASPE Publications.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [USDHHS]. (2000). Healthy people 2010:                   Understanding and
          improving             health.           Washington:             USDHHS.               Retrieved           from
          http://www.healthypeople.gov/Document/tableofcontents.htm#under on May 5, 2003.

                                                             901                                                 ICLS 2006
