 Socio-technical Factors of Practice Transmission in an Online
                                Creative Tool Community

                             Eric Cook, Stephanie D. Teasley, Mark Ackerman
                            School of Information North, University of Michigan
                               1075 Beal Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI        48109-2112
                               Email: [ericcook, steasley, ackerm]@umich.edu

         Abstract: Digital artists using modular visual production environments can now create
         highly customized creative tools such as virtual musical instruments, as well as readily
         sharing and reusing such tools. Aspects of this process both impede and support practice
         learning.  This poster describes   an  ongoing   case study     analyzing the  socio-technical
         factors influencing   development    and transmission   of    practice and   informal learning
         within one example community, the users of Native Instrument's ReaktorTM software.

Background
         Over the last decade, the domain of digital art and music has seen a growing popularity of highly
customizable visual production environments such as MAX/MSP, Reaktor, Synthedit and PD.              Drawing on
visual  and functional metaphors   taken   from   circuit diagrams,     programming    flowcharts  and   physical
modular   analog audio  synthesis, users   in these environments       can create  virtual musical   instruments,
performance   interfaces and   audio/video    composition   tools     by drawing   connections    between  small
functional units (such as oscillators, filters, audio samplers, etc). These systems allow a high degree of tool
customization,   expandability and flexibility.   They  also  support    tool-sharing  and  reuse, as completed
"instruments" (sometimes called "ensembles" or "patches," depending on the choice of host environment),
which may be distributed to other artists using the same program.

         The communities of practice (CoP) literature (Wenger, 1998; Lave & Wenger, 1991) is useful in
framing the informal learning and practice development within the user communities surrounding these
production environments.    The application of the CoP perspective is further extended by social theories of
creativity (Moran & John-Steiner, 2003; Mitchell et al, 2003; Csikszentmihalyi, 1996) as well as by
descriptions of the social dynamics of practice in both folk and professional "art worlds" (Becker, 1984).
Even though the numbers of users is in the tens of thousands, much of the interaction between users of
these  modular production   systems  is instantiated online.   Therefore,     the primary   context  for practice
development and transmission in these communities is virtual and technologically mediated.

         There are  several questions motivating    the research      presented here.  How is creative practice
transmitted  and learned by  members    of these  online  communities?       How is practice developed in this
setting, both  collectively and  individually?     The    highly customizable      nature  of  these  production
environments should increase the tension between individual and collective practice.       At the same time, the
affordance of easy dissemination and reuse of others' work online allows shared instruments to act as
learning objects, a form of reified practice for the rest of the community to examine.        This work seeks to
investigate the socio-technical factors influencing this complex dynamic in this informal learning context.

Site and Participants
         This poster describes  an  ongoing   case  study  analyzing     the development    and transmission  of
practice within one such online community of practice, the Native Instruments ReaktorTM user community.
Reaktor,  a  commercial  visual  programming      language    environment,      allows  users  to  take  software
representations of similar low-level components or "modules," and connect them together into larger
functional units called "ensembles."  These ensembles can be thought of as complete programs for sound
generation, and can be used like musical instruments for recording or performing.          Any user who creates
his/her  own  ensembles  may   share these  with  any   other user.     One of the primary modes of sharing
ensembles is via the "User Library," an online collection of over 2050 ensembles (as of November 2005)

                                                     908                                                    ICLS 2006
accessed via the "Community" section of the Native Instruments website.      This archive is accessible to all
registered users of Reaktor, and is comprised entirely of user-made ensembles that were contributed freely
over the past five years.   Norms of practice and community behavior are learned and transmitted in two
primary   locations on the  Native Instruments  website:   in the User Library    (via attributed comments,
anonymous voting, and contributed ensembles) and in the User Forum (via a threaded discussion board),
located      at:    http://www.nativeinstruments.com/forum_us/                and      http://www.native-
instruments.com/index.php?id=userlibrary_us, respectively.)

Research Methods and Data
          This research  is  designed as  an observational    study utilizing a   mixed-methods    approach.
Specifically,  qualitative assessment of  behavior and    textual communications    will be combined   with
statistical analysis of activity and contribution within both the Reaktor User Library and User Forum.  For
the initial phase of data collection, 232 megabytes of html pages were retrieved from the User Library in
July 1st 2005.   These pages represent the 1994 ensembles visible from the entry pages of the Library at the
time and an additional 991 "hidden" ensembles, which encompass earlier versions of some ensembles
(these are publicly accessible but non-linked pages).     Aggregate activity visible on these pages includes
1,457,193 total items downloaded from the library, 50,656 anonymous scoring votes, and 8436 distinct
comments. Examining individual user activity reveals 503 ensemble contributors, 263 of which were repeat
contributors and 1441 comment contributors, 616 of which were repeat comment contributors.          The next
phase of data collection will focus on the User Forum, which contained 7,233 threads comprised of 50,937
individual posts as of October 31, 2005.

Discussion
         This poster will present and discuss the current findings of this study, highlighting differing notions
of legitimate  participation and authentic   practice within  subgroups of    the community.    In  addition,
comparison of these data to data generated by studies of learning in other virtual communities will be
addressed, paying particular attention to unique characteristics of practice transmission by new media
artists.

References
Becker, H. S.  (1984). Art Worlds. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996).  Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention.
          HarperCollins.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991).  Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation.
          Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Mitchell, W. J., et al (eds.). (2003). Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation
          and Creativity. National Academies Press, Washington DC.
Moran, S. & John-Steiner, V. (2003).  Creativity in the Making: Vygotsky's Contemporary
          Contribution to the Dialectic of Creativity & Development. In . R. K. Sawyer (ed.). Creativity and
          Development. Oxford University Press. 61­90.
Wenger, E. (1998).  Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge
          University Press, Cambridge, UK.

                                                      909                                                ICLS 2006
