      The Role of People Knowledge in Learning Narrative and Domain
                                                        Content

                    Joan Davis, Tiffany Lee, Nancy Vye, John Bransford, University of Washington
               Email: joand@u.washington.edu, tlee13@u.washington.edu, nancyvye@u.washington.edu,
                                                 bransj@u.washington.edu
                       Daniel L. Schwartz, Stanford University, daniel.schwartz@stanford.edu

         Abstract:     We argue that the addition of people knowledge to curricula has the potential--still
         largely unrecognized--to improve classroom learning. We describe the results of two studies on
         people knowledge and learning. Study 1 indicates that narrative information organized around
         familiar,  as contrasted  with  unfamiliar,    people  is better   remembered   and  judged    to be  more
         interesting and   concrete   by learners.  Study  2 focuses    on  people knowledge     and   learning and
         transfer of pedagogical content knowledge.

Rationale and Background
         People's exceptional memory for other people suggests that knowledge organized around people may have
a special status, much like spatial organization and script-based organization have special mnemonic effects. We use
the term "people knowledge" to refer to this phenomenon. The ubiquity of people knowledge may have a unique
neural basis; alternatively, it may be a type of knowledge where many forces conspire to make it special (e.g.,
people  are one  of  the  primary sources   of early  learning,  people   are motivating,  people   are  discrete but change
locations and appear in different contexts). The basis of people knowledge and whether it can be dissociated from
other forms of learning are important questions to explore (Lin & Bransford, 2005; Hong & Lin, 2005). One reason
it is important  is  that instruction  does  not take   advantage   of  people  knowledge     to help  students   learn. Most
knowledge   presentations   are person-neutral   (e.g., a textbook    voice), and  this  may  reflect  a missed   educational
opportunity.

         This poster describes the results of two preliminary investigations of people knowledge on learning. Our
studies are different  from  some   approaches   to  instruction   that tie a particular theory  to a  person:  for example,
"Newton created thermodynamics." While we think this approach can be valuable, people knowledge is probably
most useful when there is some meaningful connection between the theory (or action) and the person, such that one
can imagine why the person has a particular theory (or actions). Studies of effective elaboration provide support for
this view (e.g., Stein, Morris & Bransford, 1978).

Study 1: The Effects of People Knowledge on Interest and Memory for Narrative
         Study   1  was   designed  to   investigate the  degree   to   which   learning can  be  enhanced    by  organizing
information around familiar, rather than unfamiliar, people. Twenty-six graduate students participated in the study.
They read a five-person conversation in which each person was marked only by their names (e.g., Len, James,
Jenny,  etc.). Then  the  participants rated the   comprehensibility    of  the conversation.  Next,   the participants  were
randomly assigned to two groups: Unfamiliar People and Familiar People. The Unfamiliar People group read the
same conversation a second time and rated it for changes in interest and concreteness. The Familiar People group
was reminded of five people whom they all "knew" (characters from a short movie they had seen 2 weeks prior for a
different, unrelated purpose) and then were asked to read the same conversation a second time--with one difference:
the initial names (e.g., Len, James, etc.) had been replaced with names of the familiar people (i.e., characters from
the movie).    The Familiar Knowledge    group also rated the conversation for changes    in  interest and concreteness.

         The results indicate that participants in both groups rated the first conversation as equally comprehensible
(mean rating of 2.6 and 2.8 on a 4-point scale for the Unfamiliar People and Familiar People groups, respectively).
However, participants in the Familiar People group rated the second conversation as significantly more interesting
(t(24) = 4.960, p=.000) and more concrete (t(23) = 7.064, p=.000) than students in the Unfamiliar People group. The
Familiar People   students  also  recalled significantly  more   of the  main   ideas of  the conversation   (t(24) =    2.087,
p=.000) than the Unfamiliar People students.

                                                             914                                                    ICLS 2006
Study 2: An Investigation of People Knowledge on Learning Pedagogical Content
Knowledge
         Study 1 revealed that information organized around familiar people is better remembered and judged to be
more interesting  and   concrete by  learners. Study  2  extends  this   work   by  focusing on  the  question:   How  does
instructional material organized around people improve learning of pedagogical content knowledge?

         In Study 2, 48 undergraduates learn about mathematics pedagogy using one of two types of instructional
documents: expository text (Expository) and a teacher's journal (People Knowledge). Participants in the Expository
group read text on the development of young children's whole number sense (i.e., counting and quantity). The text
defines various principles (e.g., cardinality, one-to-one correspondence) and presents examples that illustrate each
principle. Participants in the   People  Knowledge    group    read   a teacher's   journal that tracks  the  mathematical
development of three fictional students and contains some information about each student's background (e.g., SES,
home life, etc.) and personality (e.g., shy, energetic, etc.). Where the expository text presents general examples to
illustrate children's understanding of the mathematics principles, the teacher's journal defines and describes these
principles in the context  of  the individual  students. It is important    to note that the introductory   sections of  the
teacher's journal and the expository document were identical.

         Dependent    measures   include 1) interest, imagery,   and    comprehensibility   ratings occurring  at four time
points in each document, 2) recall of the mathematics principles described in the documents, and 3) transfer of these
principles to a teaching situation. In the transfer task, participants read a transcript of a first grade mathematics class
and made judgments about students' understanding of counting and quantity.            Our hypothesis is that participants
who  read  the teacher's  journal  containing  "people   knowledge"     will   be more   interested  in and  better able to
remember the content because they would be able to draw inferences and elaborate based on their knowledge of the
people involved.

         Participants in   the People    Knowledge     group    rated   the teacher's   journal  significantly  higher   for
comprehensibility (F1,46= 10.638, p=.002), interest (F1,46 = 18.032, p=.000), and imagery (F1,46 = 32.647, p = 0.000)
than participants in the Expository group. Ratings were made on a 4-point scale (see Table 1). Interactions were
significant for interest (F3,138 = 3.721, p=.013) and imagery (F3,138 = 2.820, p=0.041) but not for comprehension. A
multiple   comparison procedure    revealed that comprehension,     interest,  and  imagery  ratings  for the  introductory
section (rating made at time point 1) of both documents were not significant. Since the introductory section was
verbatim for both documents, it follows that there should    be no difference in ratings.
                           Table 1: Means for Expository/People Knowledge main effect
                                                         Expository       People Knowledge
                           Comprehension Ratings            2.85                   3.37
                           Interest Ratings                 2.06                   2.74
                           Imagery Ratings                  2.54                   3.36

         Data from the recall and transfer tasks are currently being analyzed. Results of this analysis will indicate
whether the differences in ratings reflect how well participants learn and transfer pedagogical content knowledge.

References
Hong, H., & Lin, X. (2005). Effect of people knowledge on science learning. Paper presented at the meeting of the
         American Educational Research Association, Montreal, Canada.
Lin, X. D., & Bransford, J. (2005). People knowledge: A useful ingredient for bridging cultural differences between
         teachers and students. Paper presented at the meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
         Montreal, Canada.
Stein, B.S., Morris, C.D., & Bransford, J.D. (1978). Constraints on effective elaboration. Journal of Verbal Learning
         and Verbal Behavior, 17, 704-714.

                                                            915                                                   ICLS 2006
