   Fostering Generative Reasoning about Complex Phenomena in
                                                    Genetics

  Ravit Golan Duncan, Rutgers University, Graduate School of Education 10 Seminary Place New Brunswick NJ
                                           08901, rgduncan@rci.rutgers.edu

       Abstract: The notion of systems is an important idea in science and science education. Genetic
       phenomena, in particular the mechanisms that link genes to their observable effects, are examples
       of   complicated  multileveled    systems   that students  find   difficult to understand.  Developing
       generative understanding of the mechanisms underlying genetic phenomena is a critical aspect of
       scientific  literacy in this   domain. Here, I  describe the design  and    evaluation of a high school
       genetics unit aimed at fostering such understandings.

Introduction
       The notion of systems is an important and pervading idea in both science and science education (AAAS,
1989). Genetic phenomena and the mechanisms that link genes (genotype) to their observable effects (phenotype),
such as eye color or the symptoms of a genetic disorder, are examples of complicated multileveled systems that
students find difficult to understand (Horwitz, 1996; Marbach-Ad, 2001; Venville & Treagust, 1998). Understanding
the mechanisms involved in genetic phenomena is critical for scientific literacy and the ability to make informed
decisions about personal and public issues concerning genetics (Lewis & Wood-Robinson, 2000).           Moreover, such
understandings  need to be  generative   in nature  to  allow  students to reason   about novel  and unfamiliar genetic
phenomena they may encounter in the future. Fostering the development of generative thinking in genetics entails an
understanding of what sorts of knowledge are critical for such reasoning. In earlier work I presented a cognitive
model of reasoning in genetics that highlighted essential knowledge forms that undergraduate students employed to
successfully reason about genetic phenomena in both novel and familiar contexts. This cognitive model informed
the design of a high school curricular unit aimed at fostering generative understandings in genetics. In this poster I
discuss the key elements of the instructional design and findings from the implementation of the curriculum in a
high school biology classroom.

The Instructional Design
       Scientific literacy in genetics involves understanding how the genetic information brings about observable
features (phenotype) such as our physical traits, symptoms of genetic disorders, etc.      In this regard it is crucially
important that students understand that there is an extensive causal chain linking genes to their phenotypical effects
and that genes do not directly specify the features as we see them. That is, genes do not directly determine the color
of the eye rather they determine the properties of entities whose interactions result in eye color. This is a subtle but
critical understanding since it foregrounds the underlying causal mechanism. In my prior work I identified several
conceptual understandings that were particularly powerful for reasoning about the genetic causal mechanisms: 1) the
understandings that genes directly specify only the structure of proteins, 2) the understanding that proteins are thus
central entities in the causal mechanisms of genetic phenomena, 3) knowledge of important and common roles
proteins play in those mechanisms, and 4) the understanding that explanations in genetics entail accounting for the
complete mechanism (across all biological organization levels) linking genotype and phenotype.        Our design team,
composed of four biology high school teachers and myself, adopted the four key understandings described above as
the learning objectives for the unit.

       We employed several design strategies to scaffold student learning of these ideas. In order to help students
develop an understanding of the central role and multiple functions that proteins have in genetic phenomena we
focused the unit on a detailed investigation of the biological mechanisms underlying a single genetic disorder -
Familiar Hypercholesterolemia (FH). In their investigations students compare data from eight cases of patients with
FH and four cases of healthy individuals, to uncover the underlying causes of the disorder. Students begin the
exploration at the organism    level  examining the observable   effects   (symptoms)  of  the FH  gene  and through a
cyclical process of sequentially delving into lower organization levels (organs, tissues, cells, and proteins) they
uncover the complete biophysical mechanism. The major feature of this approach is that it emphasizes mechanisms
and much of the time is devoted to exploring the role of proteins in those mechanisms. At this stage students do not

                                                           916                                                 ICLS 2006
discuss how the genetic information is mapped onto the physical mechanism, rather the focus is on the mechanism
itself. To help students understand that the genetic information only specifies the structure of proteins we introduce
genes only after students have uncovered the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in FH. Once most of the
underlying causal mechanism has been accounted for the only role left for genes is to specify the structure of
proteins; thus motivating the need for information only at the protein level. In this part of the unit students explore
the way in which the genetic code determines the structure of proteins, and how changes to that code (mutations)
alter  the structure   and  resulting  function  of  proteins. To   reinforce   students    understanding of   the   nature  of
explanations  in   genetics  we  ask  them to create   a  comprehensive    account   of the  biological basis   of FH    as the
consequential   task  for  the FH  investigation.  Students   write a  letter to an  assigned   case  patient  explaining   the
underlying causes of the disorder by providing an account of the mechanisms at each organization level (gene,
protein, cell, tissue, organ/organism). This task emphasizes the nature of explanations in the domain and builds on
students' experiences in the preceding activities. Again, the focus is on mechanism, the role of proteins, and the
mapping between the genetic information and the physical causal mechanism. To further facilitate generalization
and   application  of  the  knowledge    students  acquired,  the   final set of  activities in  the unit entails    compiling
information   about   the biological  mechanisms     involved  in  three  additional genetic  disorders (the   information   is
provided   in a set  of readings)   and  creating  a complete  and   coherent   account  of  the biological    basis for those
disorders. This unit was implemented in an honors 8th and regular 9th grade biology classroom in a Chicago public
high school. In the following sections I briefly describe some of the key findings from that study.

Methods
           To determine students' understanding of the target concepts identified in the curriculum, as well as
students' ability to reason generatively about problems and phenomena in genetics, I conducted qualitative and
quantitative analyses of several data sources: pre and post written assessments (n=100); pre and post clinical
interviews (n=11), video of classroom instruction, and artifacts of student work (the consequential task). Interviews
and written assessments were administered prior to and following the instruction period (5 weeks). Interview tasks
focused on eliciting students understandings of the mechanisms underlying genetic phenomena, whereas, the written
assessments focused mainly on their understandings of entities and relationships. Artifact analysis ascertained the
completeness and connectedness of students' accounts of the causal mechanism of FH.

Results and Discussion
           Overall my findings suggest that the curriculum was successful in supporting students' learning of the
target objectives.   As   a result of  instruction  students  developed    more   sophisticated  understandings    of  genetic
phenomena     and  the  underlying   mechanisms    and   were  able to reason  generatively   about  novel  phenomena       and
generate plausible and domain-appropriate explanations. Specifically, analysis of the written assessments showed
that 68% of students' responses post instruction indicted an understanding that genes code for proteins (versus 1%
pre instruction). Moreover, after instruction the majority (64%) of the students were cognizant of the central role
proteins play in genetic phenomena and were able to identify proteins as a key link between genes and their effects
(4% pre instruction). Analysis of students' explanations of the biological basis of FH showed that the majority
(68%)   of  students'   explanations   accounted     for all  five  organization  levels    (genes,  proteins, cells,  tissues,
organ/organism). These explanations not only referred to the different organization levels, but most of them also
connected the levels by inferring the causal relationships between them- i.e. how changes at one level (mutation in
the gene) would affect subsequent levels (change to a protein and subsequently the cell, etc).              That it, most of
students' explanations (78%) made 6 or more connections (out of a possible 8) between levels, creating a complete
and coherent account of the underlying causal mechanism.

References
American    Association   for  the Advancement     of Science  (1989).    Science for   all Americans,  New    York:   Oxford
           University Press.
Horwitz, P. (1996). Teaching science at multiple space time scales. Communications of the ACM, 39(8), 100-102.
Lewis, J., &Wood-Robinson, C. (2000). Genes, chromosomes, cell division and inheritance -- do students see any
           relationship? International Journal of Science Education, 22, 177 - 195.
Marbach-Ad, G. (2001). Attempting to Break the Code in Student Comprehension of Genetic Concepts. Journal of
           Biological Education, 35(4), 183-189.
Venville,  G.  J., &   Treagust,   D. F. (1998).  Exploring   conceptual   change    in genetics using  a multidimensional
           interpretive framework. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35 (9), 1031-105.

                                                              917                                                    ICLS 2006
