               Mobile Devices to be applied as supporting tools in
              Research Methods Class for Undergraduate Students

                     Eteokleous Mikleia, P.A. College, P.O.BOX 40763, 6307-Larnaca, Cyprus
                                             Email:nikleia@cytanet.com.cy

         Abstract: Mobile devices are becoming part of the educational environment. In this case, mobile
         devices   role as supporting    tools is under    investigation. Specifically, undergraduate     college
         students  appear  to have  time-management     and   organization problems  regarding     designing, and
         constructing the research process and developing their research reports. Hypothesis is made that if
         a SMS alert system remind students for deadlines and other organizational issues related to the
         research process, the time management and organization problems will be addressed.

Introduction to the Problem
         Mobile technology integration has already started.     Mobile devices are everywhere, and mobile learning
(m-learning)  has  emerged    to support the   learning and teaching process.   Mobile   tools  immerse   in  the learning
environment as tools, some being purely assistive and supportive in nature and others are becoming increasingly
intelligent. M-learning is defined as e-learning that uses wireless transmission and mobile devices such as such as
PDAs (Personal Digital Assistants), mobile phones, laptops and tablet PCs. In other words, m-learning is simply
learning that takes  place with   the help of  mobile   devices (Attewell,  2005;  Dawabi,  et   al. 2004;  Trifonova,     &
Ronchetti, 2005). In P.A. College (private college in Cyprus) undergraduate students attend two Research classes in
subsequent semesters. The main aim of the overall course is to provide students with knowledge and skills as well as
with an understanding and application of the research process and steps in constructing and carrying out a formal
research  report. Through  these   two modules,   students  are expected   to take an   exam,   to develop  and   submit   a
research proposal, the various chapters of their dissertation in specific deadlines, submit a research study, and finally
take an oral exam. Each academic year, while fourth-year students attend the Dissertation modules, confusion and
anxiety exist. The above happens most probably because it is their first experience in developing and conducting
research and it is less structured than a regular class. Due to the above, it has been noticed that students appear to
have time-management      and organization   problems.  It is revealed to  have difficulty in   organizing  their research
reports based on the guidelines given (organization problems) and in managing time, and putting in schedule the
research process within the time limits given by the college (time-management problems). They consistently forget
deadlines and  have  questions   on numerous    structural and  organizational issues   related to their  dissertation. For
example, the format/structure of the research proposal/report, what to study for their midterm, what to emphasize for
the oral exam, the contents of each chapter, how to reference books, articles, internet sites etc.

Purpose ­ Methodology
         The current study investigates the role of mobile devices as supporting tools in Research Methods Class for
undergraduate students studying for a degree in Business Administration. The study makes the hypothesis that by
sending students pre-programmed messages regarding deadlines, paper format structure and guidelines; time
management and organization problems are addressed. An SMS-based alert and reminder system was tested on 30
students from P.A. College. During the two month experimental period, pre-programmed messages sent to students'
mobile phones: 1) as reminders for deadlines (midterm, research proposal first and final draft, literature review first
and final draft and midterm date) and 2) as answers to students' requests on format and structure guidelines
(research proposal and literature review structure, chapters and concepts included in the midterm, and reference
secondary sources). At the conclusion of the 2-month experimental period, the analysis (a) tested the effectiveness
of this innovative method and (b) evaluated the potential of introducing mobile technologies to support students in
the teaching and learning process. This piece of research applies a case study design. Qualitative data was collected
through in-depth interviews gathered from a pull of 30 college students. An interview protocol with semi-structured,
open-ended questions was used to collect formal reactions and objective as well as to discuss their attitudes,
experience with the SMS time assistant, and possible future expectations from system upgrades.

Data Analysis and Major Outcomes
         To  begin  with,  students   were asked  to comment     on their  experience   regarding    the mobile   use   as a
supporting tool in the teaching and learning process. The majority of them reported that they enjoyed the use of

                                                           918                                                   ICLS 2006
mobile device for educational purposes. A student that appeared to be very excited after the experiment reported that
"...this is perfect idea and a very interesting concept to be applied". Another one suggested that "...it widens the
opportunities  for mobile   devices, since   they can   be used   to  support  learning".   Overall,   positive reactions  were
recorded by the students which they mentioned that they really liked the SMS alert system. Specifically, more than
half of the participants concluded that it was really helpful since it helped them to keep track with the deadlines and
managed   to  submit  their assignments    on time.  One   said "I cannot   believe  it!! I was   getting SMSs     on what  my
research proposal should include. It is really great!!". Eleven students pointed out that they liked getting messages
reminding them regarding deadlines as well as giving them guidelines. "It is a smart method to engage students in
learning  as well  as  enhance   their performance      since mobiles   are currently   used   by  almost   all of the  college
students....", a student  concluded.   "I  was   really enjoying  it when   I was  getting     messages  on  how   to reference
secondary sources. It is a process that I hate doing from the first year of my undergraduate studies. I was using the
mobile phone, as soon as I had a question on how to reference for example an internet site and the answer was there
for me in zero time". The majority of the students mentioned that as result, when they had meetings with their
supervisors they did not spend time on organizational problems and time scheduling rather than they focused on the
content  of  their dissertation. This  was   really  important  since   they  emphasized    more    on  getting  effective  and
corrective feedback on the content which it was significantly improved in comparison to other years. Finally, they
reported  that they  were   feeling less  confused   and  stressed regarding   the dissertation    process.  To  conclude,  the
effectiveness of this method evaluated based on the following parameters: the fact that students managed to meet the
deadlines and submit the required materials on time, the fact that they had more time to spend with their supervisors
on getting feedback on the content of their dissertation and not on time scheduling and organizational issues and last
but not least the fact that the anxiety and stress level was reduced.

         Only six students appeared to be skeptical regarding this approach. They mentioned that they do not feel
that mobile devices are appropriate for educational and teaching purposes. One of them said that as supporting tools
it might be possible to be used in education but not for any other reason, for example directly in the teaching and
learning process.  One of them said "...I was getting frustrated when I was getting a SMS on when I have to submit
my research proposal. In some causes the messages made me become even more stressed ". Three of them said that
they send SMS to the server to give them guidelines on what to study for the midterm and they found it really
difficult to understand what to read. Two of them pointed out that it might be more effective to use PDAs to do this
experiment. A student concluded that the major problem regarding mobile phones is that not much information can
be given through a SMS.

         Given the overall positive feedback from students, it appears that there is a great potential of introducing
mobile  technologies   to support   students  in the teaching   and   learning process.   Learning     through  mobile  devices
seems to be promising.      Given the positive reactions and encouraging results from the study a more sophisticated
system  applying   mobile   devices is its way   to  be  developed   to function  as  a tool   for students  that  directly and
indirectly influence the teaching and learning process. Further, more experiments will be designed to examine the
effectiveness and potential of mobile devices to be directly used in the teaching and learning process and not only as
a supporting tool. Studies of this kind are still rare, since this field is relatively new. It provides the foundation for
further development and expansion of mobile devices integration in higher educational systems.

References
Attewell, J.,  2005.   Mobile    learning: reaching     hard-to-reach learners  and   bridging     the digital  device. In:  G.
         Chiazzese, M. Allegra, A. Chifari, S. Ottaviano, ed. Methods and Technologies for Leaning. Southampton:
         WIT Press, 361-365.
Creswell, J. W (2002). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative and       mixed methods approaches (2nd ed.).
         Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Dawabi,   et al. 2004. Using  mobile   devices   for the  classroom   of the  future. In:   J. Attewell,  C. Savill-Smith,  ed.
         Learning with mobile devices, research and development.UK: Learning and Skills Development Agency,
         55-60.
Trifonova, A. & Ronchetti, M. 2005. Prepare for a bilingualism exam with a PDA in your hands. In: G. Chiazzese,
         M. Allegra, A. Chifari, S. Ottaviano, ed. Methods and Technologies for Leaning. Southampton: WIT Press,
         343-347.

                                                              919                                                     ICLS 2006
