            Promoting Learning in Informal Learning Environments
                         Tamara Clegg, Christina Gardner, Oriana Williams, Janet Kolodner
                                           Georgia Institute of Technology
                                          85 5th Street, Atlanta, GA     30332
                                   {tlclegg, cmgardne, oriana, jlk}@cc.gatech.edu

         Abstract:   Learners   need to  see the  relevance    of  their learning in their everyday   lives  and
         activities in order to understand and value the importance of learning. To do this, they need rich
         experiences  that promote   such learning   and   mental   model  building. So  how can    we  promote
         substantial  learning  in  everyday,   informal   environments     from   real  world   practices   and
         experiments? Museum learning and some after-school environments have addressed this issue, but
         in many  cases,  the  learning can only  go   but so  far. This  paper seeks to explore    how we   can
         promote learning in these environments that can be transferred to other places and experiences.
         Kitchen Science   Investigators  (KSI) is   a research   endeavor, aimed  at creating   an after-school
         environment where elementary and middle school children learn from everyday experiences. This
         paper tells the story of the learning that occurred in this environment, pointing out activities and
         artifacts that worked well at both motivating and promoting learning.

Introduction
         Family experiences provide rich venues for informal learning when parents interact with children, helping
them to develop and sustain their interests and have experiences that help them learn (Crowley & Galco, 2001;
Crowley & Jacobs, 2002). These experiences effect how they interact with the world later in life ­ the quality of
their thinking, their identities as learners and their feelings about learning, etc. (Crowley & Galco, 2001; Shaffer,
2004a). But the opportunities children are exposed to depend on their connections to adults who have the time,
desire, resources, and ability to help them. Children with less access to these types of connections may have a hard
time identifying or pursuing interests they might otherwise develop, especially those related to science interests that
may also help them develop general critical thinking and reasoning capabilities. Too often school instruction in
those areas is too formal and didactic to generate their interest. The result is that many children do not develop
serious interests and passions until late in their schooling, some never having the opportunity at all. Without getting
to real depth in learning and applying at least some area of understanding, it is difficult to learn to think critically or
to learn how to learn (Linn & Muilenburg, 1996).

         One way to address these problems is by changing schooling, but school is not and should not be the only
place available  to  develop  children's  interests, capabilities,  and  understandings.   Another  way   to  address the
idiosyncrasies in the opportunities that children have available to them is to develop a variety of public informal
learning venues. Museums, after-school programs, church groups, and others have been developed with this need in
mind. But participants in such informal learning activities do not always attend regularly or spend enough sustained
time in these programs for serious knowledge construction. Most informal learning environments tend to be places
where seeds of interest are sown (Wellington, 1990) or where a learner's already-established islands of expertise are
enhanced  (Crowley    et al., 2002), rather  than    being venues    where  sustained   learning leading   to conceptual
understanding is easily afforded and promoted.

         Substantial  learning  requires  significant   time.  Therefore    promoting   learning  in  informal   learning
environments requires finding ways to sustain motivation and interest while promoting construction and refinement
of conceptual models (Crowley & Jacobs, 2002). Kitchen Science Investigators (KSI) is a research endeavor aimed
at creating  an after-school   environment   where     elementary   and  middle   school children   learn  from  cooking
experiences. This paper tells a story of learning that has occurred in this environment, pointing out activities and
artifacts that have worked well at sustaining interest and promoting learning.

Background
         Learning means increasing and revising knowledge and capabilities (Greeno, Collins, & Resnick, 1996).
Learners extend   their  knowledge   by   continually   and   thoughtfully  incorporating   lessons  learned  from    new
experiences into their knowledge bases. The mental models they construct help them explain how things work, and

                                                            92                                                  ICLS 2006
they use  them  with lessons learned  from   experience   to make   and   test predictions  (Collins, Brown,   &  Newman,
1989). To construct accurate mental models and to be able to extend their use to new contexts, it is important for
learners to work on real and varied problems, to experience the results of decisions they make, and to be able to
explain discrepancies between their predictions and those outcomes (Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Greeno, Collins, &
Resnick, 1996; Kolodner, 1997).     When learners value learning, they are motivated to learn and use more self-
regulation, as well as cognitive and meta-cognitive skills (Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Bransford, Brown, & Cocking,
2000).

         Informal  learning  environments     have   traditionally focused     on motivating    learners to   learn  through
exploration (Wellington, 1990). Much of the research on informal learning focuses on museum science learning.
Museum learning has generally been designed to give learners access to the science that explains everyday events
and  objects, providing opportunities  to connect    abstract  science concepts    with concrete  real   world   objects  and
situations, and promote interest and motivation (Crowley & Galco, 2001; Wellington, 1990). Crowley and Jacobs
(2002) found that this is most impacting when parents attend museums with their children and help them use the
museum   experience  to build  upon their existing   islands  of expertise (topics  the  child  has shown     interest in and
knows something about) and help them develop new ones. After-school environments are also difficult places for
promoting deep learning.    Computer Clubhouses, designed by Resnick et al. (1996), are places where inner-city
youth and adult mentors work together on projects. The goal is for children to learn to express themselves fluently
with technology tools (Resnick, 1998). Though there     are some compelling success      stories, cases of sustained deep-
level investigation remain the exception rather than the norm (Zagal & Bruckman, 2005). As in museums, without
guidance from a coach, childrens' exploration is usually limited.

         In order to help learners understand and value the importance of learning from everyday experiences, we
need to promote transferable learning among more participants in informal learning venues. Our research seeks to
use cooking experiences to promote the development of scientific conceptual models and of scientific reasoning
capabilities. We aim to explore the types of artifacts and activities will work best in promoting such learning.

Our Approach:
         Kitchen Science Investigators is an after-school club. Learners actively participate in cooking and baking
with the goal of learning scientific principles behind successful cooking, and practicing reasoning skills required for
revising and  adapting  recipes. As an after-school   program,    KSI  is not  bound  to a  set curriculum    or assessment
requirements. It can take advantage of social interactions for motivating learning the "hows" and             "whys" of the
subject at hand (Wellington, 1990).   Learner motivation and engagement are high priorities in the design of KSI, but
we also need them to take part in activities that promote science learning and expert scientific practices. To meet
these needs, we have integrated the guided inquiry of problem-based learning (Koschmann et al., 1996) with more
open-ended inquiry of project-based learning (Blumenfeld et al., 1991), traditionally enacted in formal classroom
settings (Barron et al., 1998). In KSI, learners progress from structured activities that scaffold their ability to plan
experiments,   draw  conclusions,   and   construct   conceptual    models     (problem-based     cooking   and   chemistry
experiments)  to more   free-form and  complex    tasks such   as  modifying   recipes  for desired   results (project-based
activity called "Retry Days").

         During  the structured  activities, participants engage   in  a  "cooking  experiment".    They  also   carry  out a
"chemistry experiment" that highlights the same scientific concepts featured in the corresponding cooking activity.
The aim here is to help learners make connections between the cooking and the chemistry experiments.                Cooking
experiments involve all groups, and requires them to prepare the same dish.         Each group, however, has a different
ingredient or different quantities of  a selected ingredient. Learners examine differences in the products of their
cooking  and  determine  what    happened    as they prepared  their  recipes.  Chemistry   experiments    are   shorter  and
"cooler." Here, learners' explore the roles of particular ingredients as a way to help them build conceptual models
regarding the chemistry (e.g., How do eggs effect brownies?). Later, during a Retry Day,        a range of variables can be
tested, the outcomes   are unknown    in  advance,   and  the  recipe  procedures   and  their  sequence    are  not   rigidly
prescribed in the true form of scientific inquiry (Gleason & Schauble, 1999). Young learners however, have trouble
developing and completing the necessary sub-tasks required for such scientific inquiry. When parents were asked to
help with this process, they are often effective at helping their children generate evidence and less so at helping them
interpret their evidence (Gleason & Schauble, 1999).

                                                            93                                                     ICLS 2006
          In implementing KSI, we paid attention to practical design issues as well. We recognized the importance of
integrating whole-class discussions with cooking and science activities, to give children a chance to articulate what
they had learned and to make sense across the variety of activities (Kolodner et al., 2003).          Because some of the
complex chemical reactions are difficult for ten and eleven year old learners, we focused the content on leavening
agents, allowing other concepts to fall out of that exploration, without expecting learners to understand or even see
all chemical processes going on in their baking.

Our Studies
          The study was conducted after school, in ten 90 minute sessions held in the small cafeteria of a private
school. Sixteen fifth graders (8 male, 8 female) participated in the program, monitored by three facilitators (two
regulars and one "part-time"). An "occasional" facilitator recorded field notes and helped learners when necessary.
Two  facilitators (the  first two  authors  of this  paper)   and  a  fifth grade  science teacher  led  group  discussions,
answered questions, and prompted learners for scientific observation and reflection during experiments. During the
first few weeks, the KSI learners did cooking experiments with pizza, brownie, cookie, and cake recipes, and carried
out corresponding chemistry experiments. They explored chemical reactions that take place with yeast, eggs, baking
soda and   an  acid vs.  baking    powder,  and  gluten.   During    three  "Retry Days"   (weeks  5, 8,  9), they changed
ingredients and procedures in previously used recipes to further explore these science concepts. We collected video
data, field notes, and learner artifacts to analyze scientific reasoning, using a two-pass approach.

          We used a qualitative approach to analyze the video data and field notes. First, we examined the video data
to identify instances of scientific reasoning and contexts in which it occurred.      In this pass, we identified instances of
scientific reasoning and activity sequences. In a second pass, we looked at all the instances of activity sequences
identified in the first pass   to find instances  of scientific   reasoning  we  might   have missed  and  instances  where
children missed opportunities for scientific reasoning. We used field notes and artifacts to triangulate our findings.

Results
          We present our results as a case study, telling one particular compelling story. The story of pizza and yeast
presents several examples in which students learned content, strengthened reasoning capabilities, and transferred
their learning to new cooking situations. We begin by presenting results from the learners' initial day in the program
and progress through other key sessions during which learners built upon their conceptual models of yeast and other
leaveners.

Day 1: KSI Intro
          On the first day of the program learners had a short discussion where they looked at the differences in
different  types of breads    and  crackers that were  provided    to get   them  thinking about  "leaveners"  (e.g. baking
powder, yeast, etc.), and their effects on the finished product.     All groups then prepared pizza dough using the same
recipe. To  observe  the  leavening    effects of  yeast   in  their pizza,  learners did  a  "Yeast-Air  Balloon"   science
experiment where they combined yeast, water and sugar in a water bottle and secured a balloon on top of the bottle.
Learners   were  amazed  as   they began to  notice  their  balloons  inflating. They  continued   to closely monitor  their
bottles and balloons for more changes. Seeing the inflation of other groups' balloons, one group wondered why their
balloon had not yet inflated. As they attempted to debug their experiment, they figured out that the water they used
was  too  hot and had   killed their yeast. They   redid   the experiment,   making   sure to precisely  measure  the water
temperature. They learned the importance of precision in following a procedure and that there is a real difference
between warm and hot, particularly when using yeast. They brought this to everyone's attention during the large
group discussion:
          Adami: Well actually, this one messed up because the water was too hot, which made it not foam up, and
          this one, we got it at exactly the right temperature.      If that was too hot, it wouldn't foam up and make the
          air go into the balloon, so this one we got it right down to the um 115[°F].

          Another   example   of  reasoning  about   their experiment   results  centers on   the balloon of  one  group of
students inflating more than the other balloons. This group knew they had added more sugar than the procedure
called for, and they conjectured that this was the reason their balloon inflated more than those of other groups:
          Elijah: For ours, we had it all at 118 degrees [Fahrenheit], we put in one teaspoon of sugar accidentally
          [instead of one tablespoon]. After that we put in two more tablespoons, so we had a lot of sugar. And the
          yeast kept multiplying. And it's way up here.

                                                               94                                                  ICLS 2006
Day 5: Pizza Retry Day
         On Retry Days, learners decided which cooking activities or science experiments they wanted to do.            We
asked them to make changes based on science they learned in previous sessions.       On the first Retry Day, all of the
groups chose to try to improve on the pizza dough recipe, generally aiming to make it flatter or thicker. Based on
their previous experiences in KSI, most   groups   increased   or decreased  the amount of  yeast, sugar, and/or      water
(refer to Table 1). One group (Group 2), however, replaced yeast with baking soda and baking powder, which also
required procedural changes to the recipe. Learners were aware from a previous KSI session that baking soda and
baking powder activated with water and that immediately after activating, it produced air (faster than yeast and
water). One group member explained it this way:
         Julia: ... we wanted to see if maybe we could add all the dry ingredients in first, because if we add the
         water and flour first, all the carbon dioxide would just go in the air and flour is supposed to act like a
         balloon and capture the carbon dioxide and see if it's gonna get bigger or thinner.

Table 1: Retry Day 1 Changes to Pizza Crust Recipe

                      Group 1 (Elijah,           Group 2 (Julia et al)   Group 3 (Rachel et      Group 4 (Adam,
                      Jalon, Jacob, David)                               al)                     Darius et al)
Science Question      How much more              What will happen if     What does less yeast    How big will it get?
                      will the pizza rise        we use baking soda      do to make the pizza    Will it pop?
                      with twice as much         and baking powder       different?
                      yeast and sugar?           instead of yeast?
Recipe Change         Double the yeast and       Replace yeast with      ½   amt. of yeast       Double yeast
                      sugar                      baking soda and         ¼ Tsp. less sugar       ½ cup more water
                                                 baking powder.          ¼ Tsp. less water
                                                 Add all dry
                                                 ingredients first,
                                                 then liquids.
Prediction            Pizza will be twice        It will rise more than  Will make it flat, not  It will get huge
                      as tall                    the yeast makes it      as high (Sugar and      because yeast makes
                                                 rise                    water make it rise)     it rise

         Because each group changed something different in the original recipe, we asked each to reserve a sample
of their uncooked dough for observation, placing each "dough ball" on a labeled tray. Our expectation was that
learners would compare their dough balls. We were pleasantly surprised by the extent of their scientific reasoning
when they made these comparisons. Once all of the dough balls were placed on the tray, learners immediately began
to pick the dough balls up, feeling, pressing, and stretching them. As they did this, they were making observations
about how the dough balls felt using terms like "squishy" and "rough." Soon, learners began to rank the doughs,
placing them in numerical order, first based on what dough was the "best," later based on more specific criteria such
as which dough balls were "taller" or the "fluffiest." A few learners began to make predictions about their own and
others' pizza outcomes (e.g., Julia: "I think ours is going to rise the most"; Jacob: "It's definitely gonna rise the
fastest"). As learners came in and out of the work area, they asked one another to feel different dough balls (e.g.,
"Feel ours, and we'll feel yours"). One facilitator prompted learners to think about what might be wrong with one
group's dough when a learner observed, "Well this [dough] is kind of too sticky." The learners concluded that it had
too much water and that more flour should have been added (a technique they learned when making the original
pizza recipe). In another instance, learners became so engaged in the activity of playing with their dough balls and
discussing the science that a group of them spontaneously decided to tell one of the cameras what they learned.
         Adam: ... I learned, that if we put more yeast, it will grow really lar- thick (hand motions). And if we put it
         in warm water, it will pop bubbles.
         Jacob: yeah, but it's really sticky.
         Jalon: And, but if you add more yeast, you need more sugar for it to eat.
         Adam: No you don't!   Because we put warm water in it and it pop bubbles.
         Julia: If you don't add any yeast at all and add baking soda and baking powder instead, it makes it soft,
         smooth, and it makes it taste better.
         Darius: Ours is so much better!

                                                            95                                                 ICLS 2006
         Rachel: Wow, this is fun!

         When a facilitator tried to get learners to sit down together for the formal group discussion, one learner
yelled, "BORING." Yet throughout the entire discussion, he remained fully engaged in scientific discussion as he
played   with the dough   balls. The group    discussion   at the end  of every  KSI  session never    truly became   one
discussion on this day. Learners continued to toss the balls around, intermittently joining the big group discussion
while still talking about the dough balls in their small groups.

Day 8: Retry Day 2 (Cookies With Yeast)
         During the next Retry Day, one group continued to investigate the effects of yeast, using yeast to make
cookies. In planning the cooking experiment, the group decided to replace baking soda and baking powder with
yeast. The hypothesis for this experiment was that the yeast would make the cookies rise more than baking soda and
baking powder and that the cookies would be "more fluffy because air bubbles would form." The group also planned
to add a rise time for their dough and to knead it if it was "kneadable," as they did with other yeast recipes.

         As they began the activity, the learners knew they needed to use warm water to "wake the yeast up" and
sugar for it to "eat". They mapped this to their cookie recipe, recognizing they needed to add warm water to the
ingredients. But they weren't sure how to integrate the sugar, as the original recipe did not call for white sugar. They
asked a facilitator who informed them that the yeast could indeed eat the other types of sugars. They were also
unsure of where mixing the water and yeast fit into the sequence of the procedure. The recipe called for separating
dry ingredients and adding those later. However, they knew that the yeast needed water to be activated. Realizing
this, they sought the help of a facilitator again:
         Elijah (to facilitator): We're supposed to get all the dry products, so should we put water in a different bowl
         from the yeast and then add it later?

         The  facilitator explained that  the water   and  yeast  needed  to be combined   separately. The   student  then
inquired as to where the sugar should go. The facilitator told him to think about it and decide.       He took this issue
back to his group for deliberation:
         Elijah: She said to put the dry flour in the dry products and the wet products in another bowl, and then its
         own bowl, the yeast and water, or the yeast and water and sugar.        Okay, all that we need to have is the
         water and the yeast, OR we can have the water, the yeast and the sugar
         Jacob: Just the water and the yeast
         Elijah: I say the water, yeast and sugar, because the sugar needs the water ­ no the yeast needs water to
         wake it up, and it needs to eat the sugar
         Jalon: No but then, there's nothing to trap the air, (raises both of his hands to mimic the air getting away)
         David: yeah, there's nothing to trap it, so the dough is what will trap it
         Elijah: Okay, so we put the sugar with the dry products (Jake chimes in)

         While the science may not be entirely accurate, we think these learners are focusing on air getting away
because of previous KSI experiences with baking soda and baking powder, which have faster reaction times than
yeast. They did not want to add the yeast too early, so they decided to add the sugar to the dry products, predicting
that the yeast would have it available when everything was mixed together and that the dough would be able to trap
the air. This decision, we think, was based on a combination of group questions and experiments during the first
Retry Day and during Session 7 where they looked at the elasticity and balloon-like features of flour with water.
This was reflected in the group's presentation of their procedure:
         Jacob: We took out baking soda and baking powder, and we added water for the yeast, just because we
         need  the water   for the yeast.  Then    we  put the  yeast and  the  water in a different bowl    than the dry
         ingredients and the wet.   Then we mixed them all together.       It sort of turned out to be a dough, but you
         couldn't knead it
         Elijah: And we used three bowls because we used one for the yeast, we didn't want to add that yet, b/c we
         needed to capture the carbon dioxide, and then we used another bowl for the dry products, and the last one
         for the wet products.

                                                             96                                                 ICLS 2006
Discussion
         We   designed   activities in KSI  to try to promote   conceptual    model building   and refinement  as  well  as
motivation and engagement.      The extent to which we succeeded at both of these things was evident in the things
learners said and did.

Promoting conceptual model building and refinement
         Both the Chemistry experiments and the Retry Day activities were shown to be effective for promoting
model   building   and  refinement.   In  the Yeast-Air   Balloon   experiment,   debugging  mistakes   and   redoing   the
experiment helped the entire KSI group to understand that the temperature of the water is important to the yeast-
water-sugar reaction and that the addition of sugar to the system causes the yeast to produce more air. Evidence that
some participants learned these two concepts was seen later as learners made alterations to recipes on Retry Day.
During Retry Day 1, groups who desired thicker pizza increased the amount of yeast they used, while those seeking
flatter pizza decreased it. However, some learners displayed gaps in their understanding of the role of sugar and
water in the reaction. For instance, Group 4 doubled the yeast and increased the water, but they did not add any
sugar, showing that they did not quite understand that yeast needed to consume sugar in order to rise. The results of
their experiment (pizza the same height as the original recipe) and facilitator scaffolding helped them to recognize
the role of sugar in the reaction. We did not see them use this knowledge later, so we do not know how well they
learned it.

         The groups that substituted ingredients in recipes made efforts to transfer what they knew about a leavener
to other situations,  showing   evidence  of  well-formulated   mental  models. In  making  pizza  with baking    soda and
baking powder, Group 2 found that their prediction was correct, reinforcing their conceptual models of how baking
soda and baking powder work as leaveners. The group that made cookies with yeast showed in their questions their
understanding of the yeast-water-sugar reaction, their ability to apply it in a new situation, and their understanding
of where their knowledge was incomplete.       A combination of facilitator help and their own reasoning allowed them
to add  to  their models   of  the yeast-sugar-water  reaction  and add  to their understanding  of how    to use  yeast in
recipes, as shown in their presentation. The experience with the dough balls shows significant learning of scientific
practice. Learners made comparisons and observations about a variety of characteristics including texture, taste, and
smell of their dough. Their comparisons and observations were at least as detailed as those made during facilitated
discussions after science experiments.

Promoting Motivation and Engagement
         We   found   that cooking   was  generally  motivating  for the learners.  They particularly enjoyed   the pizza
activity, as demonstrated when each group chose to make pizza for the first Retry Day. Learners were also excited
about the "cool" reactions in their science experiments. For the yeast activity, learners took special interest in their
balloons after they began to rise, constantly monitoring them for changes and debugging (and redoing) them.

         The dough ball activity was particularly engaging for learners who had just completed the task of preparing
their pizzas and cleaning up their workstations after a full school day. Typically, at this time (waiting for their dishes
to bake), learners' attention spans wound down, and their energy levels soared.      They were ready to play! We often
had learners  requesting   to  go   outside during  this time   to play  with other  learners. However,    the interactive
affordances of the dough balls allowed learners to freely talk with one another, see the results of what their friends in
other groups did, and expend their energy.         On the other  hand,   days where the  learners  were not   cooking  (i.e.
planning or just science experiment days), were not as successful at sustaining learners' engagement.

Concluding Thoughts
         We used some of the same examples to illustrate learning and engagement.            That, we think, is a key in
designing informal learning environments: to design activities that engage and promote learning.        While we found
cooking  to  be   an effective lever into science, motivation   and  engagement   were  harder to  sustain on  days when
learners were not cooking.     Clearly, learners demonstrated group-construction and worked jointly on refinement of
mental models, but it is hard to say to what extent individual understanding changed. We designed the scaffolding in
KSI  to  push learners'  exploration   and  mental  model  building   in the  same  manner  that   parents do  for kids  in
museums.    Evidence of children's learning and engagement suggests that we were at least somewhat successful at
that. The literature has shown that parents often have trouble discerning their children's interpretation of evidence in
scientific inquiry due to lack of understanding of their mental models and misconceptions (Gleason & Schauble,

                                                             97                                                  ICLS 2006
1999).   However,    the activities, discussions,  and  learner's   motivation  in KSI  provided a  natural  and authentic
context for learners to articulate their interpretations and make explicit their mental models.    In future work, we will
be exploring more deeply ways to help children make personal connections to their individual interests and enhance
their individual mental models in this engaging collaborative context.

Endnotes
    (1)  All names have been changed.

References
Barron,  B.  J. S., Schwartz,  D.    L., Vye,  N.  J., Moore,   A., Petrosino,  A., Zech, L., et   al. (1998).  Doing with
         understanding:   Lessons    from  research on   problem-   and project-based  learning. Journal  of the Learning
         Sciences, 7(3/4), 271-311.
Blumenfeld,  P.  C., Soloway,  E.,   Marx,   R. W.,    Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M.,  &  Palincsar, A.   (1991). Motivating
         project-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26(3/4),
         369-398.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2000). Learning and transfer. In How people learn: Brain, mind,
         experience, and school (Expanded ed., pp. 51-78). Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Collins, A., Brown,   J. S., & Newman,      S.  E. (1989). Cognitive    apprenticeship:  Teaching the crafts of reading,
         writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of
         Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Crowley, K., & Galco, J. (Eds.). (2001). Everyday activity and the development of scientific thinking. Mahwah, NJ:
         Erlbaum.
Crowley, K., & Jacobs, M. (Eds.). (2002). Building Islands of Expertise in Everyday Family Activity. Mahwah, NJ:
         Erlbaum.
Gleason, M. E., & Schauble, L. (1999). Parents' Assistance of Their Children's Scientific Reasoning. Cognition and
         Instruction, 17(4), 343.
Greeno, J. G., Collins, A. M., & Resnick, L. B. (1996). Cognition and learning. In D. C. Berliner & R. C. Calfee
         (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 15-46). New York, NY: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.
Kolodner, J. L. (1997). Educational implications of analogy. American Psychologist, 52(1), 57-66.
Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., et al. (2003). Problem-based learning
         meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Putting Learning by DesignTM into
         practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495-547.
Linn, M. C., & Muilenburg, L. (1996). Creating lifelong science learners: What models form a firm foundation?
         Educational Researcher, 25(5), 18-24.
Resnick, M. (Ed.). (1998). The Computer Clubhouse: Technological Fluency In The Inner City (Prospects for the
         Positive Use of Advanced Information Technology). London: The MIT Press.
Shaffer, D.  W.  (2004a).  Epistemic     Frames and    Islands  of Expertise: Learning  from  infusion  experiences. Paper
         presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Santa Monica, CA.
Wellington, J. (1990). Formal and informal learning in science: the role of the interactive science centres. Physics
         Education, 25, 247-252.
Zagal, J. P., & Bruckman, A. S. (2005). From Samba Schools to Computer Clubhouses: Cultural Institutions as
         Learning Environments. Convergence, 11(1), 88-105.

Acknowledgements
Funding for the research described here was provided by an NSF ROLE grant to the last author, the AT&T Labs
Fellowship Program, and the FACES fellowship program.           We would like to thank the LST group at Georgia Tech
for their detailed feedback.

                                                              98                                                  ICLS 2006
