   Semiotics: Mediation Tools That Can Fill ELearning Gaps

               Ruth Gannon Cook, Ed.D., DePaul University School for New Learning

     Abstract: ELearning is particularly susceptible to the transference of print documents to the
     web which often only provides text and information tidbits to students. But researchers in the
     learning  sciences are finding dramatic improvements          in student knowledge  acquisition in
     web-based courses that include semiotic tools.     The knowledge gaps that can exist between
     what students know and need to learn can be filled through the use of semiotic mediation
     tools. The research of this study looks at why these tools can provide an important bridge
     between the sociocultural knowledge already existent in students and instructional content and
     discusses  lessons   learned   in  the  compilation          of  the  research  for  this  study.

Introduction
While critics of semiotics as a separate and unique field of study often purport that symbols, narratives, and
text are, de facto, parts of every document and web page, the truth is that many of these critics are not
aware of the impact these semiotic representations have on knowledge acquisition. ELearning is
particularly susceptible to the vagaries of many instructors who simply transfer their textbook documents to
the Web. In these types of information vehicle transformations and transitions, often important aspects of
knowledge transference are omitted from those transmissions. Knowledge gaps can exist that go undetected
and, unless identified, could leave students emerging without retaining the desired learning materials. What
happens is that the students read the new content information presented in this textbook-online
transference, but fail to integrate it into their consciousness.

So, what are the gaps between what the students are presented and what the students absorb and integrate?
This was the question I asked to conduct research on "knowledge gaps" in eLearning. Do gaps exist
between new web-based information and what the learners read and absorb? What are the findings in the
research literature in the field of eLearning that address eLearning and the success of elearning on student
acquisition of knowledge? I researched this topic and also the field of Semiotics and conducted four action
research studies, three at a southwestern public university, and one at a Midwestern private university, to
see if there was a difference between retention in web-based studies created as text-transfer Internet courses
and in courses that were designed to use semiotic tools as mediation devices with students' existing
knowledge.

This roundtable discussion will present the findings of these four studies and compare the findings of those
studies with seminal research in the fields of eLearning and Semiotics. The seminal research studies
include studies of student achievement in higher education and in professional training environments to see
which factors have had the greatest success in learner knowledge acquisition and retention.  It will use both
archival data from cross-disciplinary studies and the action research studies conducted by the researcher
over the last three years, from 2002-2005 (September). While the findings of this study may not
generalizable, the findings suggest further research should be conducted into the incorporation of semiotic
tools into the design of web-based eLearning to mediate new information with students' current knowledge.
Further research could also look at the potential benefits of conscious inclusion of semiotic tools into
instructional designs of eLearning to reduce any knowledge gaps in student learning."

Review of Literature
Research over the last several years has taken a broad look at what factors influence learning in students,
particularly higher or continuing education students using technology in their coursework (Cole, 1985;
Davidov, 1985; DelRio & Alvarez, 1995; Gee, 1990; Greene, 1997; Lee, 1985; Olsen, 1995; Popkewitz,
1998 Warner, 1997). But research in the arena of commerce has found some interesting data on what
influences learning that may shed new light on the importance of semiotics (Zaltman, 1997), and even more
interesting is the research conducted over thirty years ago that pointed to semiotic elements that influenced
language and learning.

                                                    924                                                    ICLS 2006
Often in the creation of a new medium of knowledge communication, such as the Internet, old successful
methods of communication are by-passed (McLuhan, 1968, 1976). The history of the human race is based
not only on the achievements of individual minds but on the recognized forms of representation available to
the ancestors that enabled them to make their ideas and feelings public through culture forms (p.349).

Literacy includes the forms of representation that convey anthropological, historical, artistic, and inherently
recognizable meaning on multiple levels of cognition. Current iconic representations and metaphors used in
technology are rapidly taking on grass-roots recognition among peoples of many cultures and languages.
So, to assure this new evolving "technoculture" is thoroughly integrated into on-line courseware design, the
"old" knowledge must converge with the new (Gannon-Cook, 1998; Gannon-Cook, Crawford, 2006).

Semiotics can provide technology with imprints, familiar symbols, metaphors and narratives that can
mediate with the mind to facilitate learning (Wertsch, 1985). Without finding a way to sift through the
overwhelming amount of raw information on-line, it might be difficult to assess how learners best utilize all
of this information, particularly learners from diverse cultures, socio-economic backgrounds, and learning
styles. Tools that mediate between this technoculture and human consciousness could provide a safety zone
where new blueprints could be drawn for both. Symbols and metaphors can render the process of
relevance-making possible and could be particularly useful in mediating with a rapidly developing global
culture that functions at warp speeds and creates virtual tourists and gypsies, not citizens (Freiberg &
Driscoll, 1995; Gannon-Cook, 1998; Salomon, 1997).

Summary
This study has presented the concept that semiotic tools can facilitate the scaffolding of new knowledge on
primal knowledge through tool mediation and reinforce learning in online courses. More research in this
area could prove invaluable in the contribution to the body of knowledge on web-based learning. Students
who may not be comfortable with online courses may feel differently if there were alternative online
models that offered embedded semiotic symbols, metaphors, and narratives that enlist prior sociocultural
knowledge of the learners. With the planned inclusion of semiotics n eLearning courses, there could be a
broader range of students who can navigate and complete online courses.

References
Cole, M. (1985). The zone of proximal development:     Where culture and cognition create each other. In
J.W. Wertsch (Ed.), Culture, communication and cognition. Cambridge, England:      Cambridge University
Press.
Danesi, M. (1993). Vico, metaphor, and the origin of language. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Dant, T. (1991). Knowledge, ideology and discourse: A sociological perspective. London: Routledge.
Davydov, V. and Radzikhovskii, L. (1985). Vygotsky's theory and the activity-oriented approach in
psychology. In J. W. Wertsch (Ed.), Culture, communication and    cognition. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Del Rio,P. & Alvarez, A. (1995). Changing architectures of mind and agency. In J. Wertsch (Ed.)
        Sociocultural studies of mind. Cambridge, England:    Cambridge University Press.
Gallini, J., Seaman, M., & Terry, S. (1995). Metaphors and learning new text. Journal of Reading
        Behavior, 27(2), 187-191.
Gee, J. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. London: The Falmer Press.
Gannon-Cook, Ruth (1998). Semiotics in Technology, Learning and Culture. Bulletin of Science,
        Technology & Society, 18(3), 174-179.
Gannon-Cook, Ruth, Crawford, Caroline (2006). What Can Cave Walls Teach Us? (A. Edmundson, Ed.).
        Globalized E-Learning Cultural Challenges. Minneapolis, MN: eWorld Learning.

                                                      925                                                 ICLS 2006
