Messy Learning Environments: Busy Hands and Less Engaged Minds

                     Christina M. Gardner, Tamara L. Clegg, Oriana J. Williams, Janet L. Kolodner
                                           Georgia Institute of Technology
                                           85 5th Street, Atlanta, GA 30332
                                     tlclegg, cmgardne, oriana, jlk @cc.gatech.edu

          Abstract: In an environment where learners are engrossed in highly interactive and fun hands-on
          activities, how do we get their minds as engaged as their hands? We have found that busy hands
          help sustain learners' motivation and interest but can distract their minds from doing the necessary
          reflection on  their actions. This   paper  and the accompanying    poster   describe  conditions   and
          affordances of media and prompts that focus and encourage distracted learners reflection.

Introduction
          Sixteen  5th grade   learners scramble    around  the   makeshift kitchen    locating ingredients,  reading   off
instructions, measuring, and mixing up wonderful baked creations. Flour dusts tabletops and everything else in its
path, and hands are sticky with corn syrup. In this messy informal learning environment, children are engaged in
hands-on cooking and science exploration. To learn from these activities, they need to step back from time to time to
reflect on their actions and record observations for later reflection. Through the Kitchen Science Investigators (KSI)
project, we are looking at how to facilitate science learning in such messy environments. One of the emergent goals
of this design study is to understand the affordances of media that will not take the fun out of these interactive
activities while  promoting    reflection-in-action and the note  taking needed    for later reflection-on-action (Schon,
1987). This type of media is needed because it is hard for young learners to disengage themselves from fun activities
to record their experiences, but waiting until an activity is over to record experiences can result in too much being
forgotten for productive learning. We found this to be especially true in an after-school study of 5th grade learners'
engaged in cooking activities to learn the science behind cooking. Where there was often contention for learners'
attention  between   the physical activity of  cooking  and   the cognitive activity   of reflecting, usually resulting in
learners focusing their attention on the cooking. Analysis of learners' responses generated by prompts for reflection
through use of different media, revealed affordances and conditions of use of the media that were successful in
getting learners to reflect and others that were inhibitors. This paper and accompanying poster focuses on getting the
learners   to make   observations to  facilitate reflection-in-action which   is a necessary    condition for  subsequent
reflection-on-action.

The Learning Environment and Description of Media
          We studied sixteen 5th grade learners during an after-school science-cooking club we created in a suburban
private middle school. The learners participated in ten 90 minute weekly sessions where they engaged in cooking
and science    experiment activities with  the goal  of learning  the science behind   the roles of   various leaveners in
brownies, cookies, pizza, and cake. During the first five weeks, their recipes, instructions for experiments, plans for
altering and remaking recipes, and all observations were made using paper-and-pencil media. They were introduced
to using all of their five senses for making observations using a Five Senses Chart on 8 ½ x 11 sheets of computer
paper. Each of the column headers on the chart featured a human sense and each of the row headers was a short
summary of the major activity of a recipe or experiment step and its number.       Learners used these charts to record
observations while they were cooking or experimenting for one session. They then began using large 2 ½ x 3 ½ feet
posters posted on a wall near-by their workspaces to make observations. At first, each poster represented a step with
the same short step summary as described in the five senses charts. Then as learners became more comfortable with
making observations and began making alterations to the recipes, we changed the labels to the step number and then
to just their  group   names.  During the  6th week,  we  introduced   software  that  learners used  while   cooking that
displayed the recipe and strategically placed textboxes for jotting down observations. We used the software for the
remaining four weeks of the program. During the entire ten weeks, we encouraged learners to use cameras to take
pictures while preparing their baked goods as experience memory joggers.         Learners worked in four groups of four
using the different media to make observations.

          The short step summary we used as prompts for learners to make observations are analogous to "stop and
think prompts" and/or "generic prompts" used in Davis (2003). Davis found that generic prompts help middle school

                                                            926                                                  ICLS 2006
learners to reflect (e.g. state what they are thinking) more broadly, allowing them to think about many different
ideas. She  also  found that learners who  used   the opportunities provided   by  the prompts to  identify  where their
knowledge needed improvement had reflection that was more productive for learning. Both Schon (1987) and Davis
(2003) agree that learning requires reflection and cite a number of others that demonstrate this to be true as well.
We couple Davis's use of prompts "to get learners to reflect on many ideas" with Schon's idea of "reflection-in-
action" and Davis's "opportunities for learners to identify their weaknesses" as activities that are associated with
Schon's "reflection-on-action" (Schon, 1987).

           Our use of generic prompts to promote reflection-in action extends Davis's work on placement of generic
prompts within activities. We analyzed the learners' responses to the various prompts (i.e. prompts with different
levels of descriptiveness) against one another for each day, each type of prompt, and each media using the prompt
(within and across groups) and coded the responses based on descriptiveness of articulation. Use of video data and
field notes were used to triangulate these findings. We didn't explicitly set out to explore the affordances of different
media, our initial research goal involved characterizing the learning environment without computer technology and
then characterizing and measuring the introduction and impact of technology on the learning environment. As such
the fading descriptiveness of generic prompts was a byproduct of quick prototyping. The impetus for analysis of
prompts based on the media was an emergent trend found in the learners' responses.

Findings and Discussion of Findings
           Affordances and conditions of media use for success in getting learners to reflection-in-action include: (1)
Making media visible enough that its presence reminds learners to reflect (e.g. media is hanging on a very visible
wall that learners can't miss); (2) Prompts that tell them when reflection is useful (e.g. after you have added an
ingredient or after each step); (3) Use of media for reflection when the cognitive load of the interactive activity has
plateaued   (e.g. when  the initial overwhelming    excitement  of  "we're  cooking"   wears off); and  (4)  Fading  the
specificity of when to reflect as learners become better at remembering to make observations (e.g. they are making
them   more  frequently and  the descriptiveness   in increasing). Affordances  and conditions  for learner  success in
reflection-on-action: (1) Ease of indexing and locating observations, and (2) Fun and contextualized activities that
illustrate the importance   of  good observations   for science  learning. The presence  of  these features  in a  given
medium and learning environment made for more descriptive observations. Inhibitors to reflection-in-action: (1) not
seeing  others explicitly making    reflections and the lack of  presence  of each groups  reflections (e.g. media  that
allows learners to make reflections at their own workstations without being visible to others); (2) reflection that
requires finer levels of granularity while learners are engaged in highly interactive activities; and (3) bad interfaces
for making observations that leads to loss of observations.

           Overall, regardless of the media for observation, the more engaged learners were in the activity, the less
interested they were in doing the kinds of reflection that lead to learning. We are still searching for the right level of
engagement in the cooking that won't sacrifice the fun, sustaining the motivation and interest that is necessary for
implementing science learning interventions. However, these findings show that getting to reflection-in-action is a
function of learners remembering to reflect, followed by knowing when to reflect, and finally having the flexibility
to reflect in ways that are meaningful to them. It is hard to get learners that are cognitively overloaded with the
physical part of the interactive activity to stop and think. Thus, patience and waiting on the part of the researcher and
teacher for  the  grand novelty  of  the highly  interactive physical activity to fade  and/or making   the  appropriate
adjustment in the activity design is needed before abandoning a prompt intervention. It is also equally important to
physically situate the media in the learning environment so that its persistent presence is a reminder to reflect. In this
way, when they have learned to manage the cognitive load of the physical activity then they can start attending to
the reflection part of the activity and see other people doing it as well. The second important affordance of a medium
is to tell learners when to reflect, skillfully reducing this scaffold to allow learners to record their observations at
times they think are valuable, as they are more willing to invest time in describing them.

References
Schön, D. A. (1987).    Teaching artistry through reflection-in-action. In Educating the Reflective Practitioner.   San
           Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Davis, E. A. (2003). Prompting Middle School Science Students for Productive Reflection: Generic and Directed
           Prompts. Journal of the Learning Sciences, Vol. 12, No. 1, p 91-142.

                                                            927                                                ICLS 2006
