         Help-Seeking Behavior and Learning with Hypermedia

Pragati Godbole-Chaudhuri, Fielding I. Winters, Roger Azevedo, Neil Hofman, Dept. of Human Development, 3304
                          Benjamin Bldg.,University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
              pgodbole@umd.edu, fwinters@umd.edu, razevedo@umd.edu, neil_hofman@yahoo.com

         Abstract: The help-seeking behavior of 67 learners (29 low and 38 high conceptual-gain) using a
         hypermedia environment to learn about the circulatory system was investigated in a naturalistic
         tutoring  condition. Results  showed    that participants who    demonstrated   greater  conceptual   gain
         (from pretest to posttest) asked significantly greater number of cognitive questions relating to the
         content   of the material than   context questions   pertaining    to the   environment.   The  study has
         implications for understanding the role of help-seeking behavior during learning with hypermedia
         and the design of hypermedia tools to facilitate help-seeking behavior.

Help-Seeking Behavior
         The ability to identify need for assistance and then obtain help from appropriate sources has been identified
by many as a key behavior for coping with difficulties encountered during learning (Newman, 2002; Pintrich, 2000).
Academic help-seeking requires the learner to be monitoring progress toward the learning goals. If the learner faces
difficulty, she/he  must  become   aware   of  a need    for assistance,   identify  an appropriate    source  for help, and
subsequently communicate this need effectively to obtain the appropriate response from the source of help. Help-
seeking is thus an adaptive behavior that forms an essential part of the arsenal of a learner's self-regulatory skills.
Further, help-seeking behavior serves as the link that ensures that the external regulation provided by a teacher, peer
or some other externally regulating agent (Azevedo, Cromley, Winters, Moos & Greene, 2005) is in tune with the
internal regulation performed by the learner.

         Although, a significant body of work so far has underscored the importance of help-seeking as a learning
strategy, help-seeking has been relatively less studied with interactive and hypermedia environments (Aleven, Stahl,
Schworm, 2003; Graesser & Person, 1994). It has been even less studied for ill-structured tasks, such as learning
about challenging domain-specific topics. Furthermore, most studies have been self-report studies that fail to capture
actual instances of help-seeking and the social-interactional aspect of help seeking behavior.

         The present study evaluated help-seeking behavior of learners in a naturalistic tutoring condition while
learning about  a  challenging   science topic  (the  circulatory system)   from   a hypermedia     environment.   Our study
examined the difference in types of help seeking behavior between learners who gain in conceptual understanding
and those who do not. The study has important implications in understanding the role of help-seeking behavior
during learning with hypermedia and in informing the design of hypermedia tools for learning.
Method
         Our participants were 67 students from an urban, mid-Atlantic middle school, high school and University
and constitute a subset of participants (57%) from a larger study. Twenty-six 7th grade students (mean age = 12.1
years) and 18 high school students (mean age = 14.7 years) received community service credit and 23 University
students (mean age = 21.1 years) received extra credit for a course for participating in the study. These participants
were  chosen   as  a  subset  of the   larger sample    because   all were  classified  as    starting with  low   conceptual
understanding,  based  on  pretest mental  model,    and making    little conceptual   gain  (Low   group), or making    high
conceptual gain (High group), based on post-test mental models of the circulatory system.

         Students   spent 20  minutes    completing   a pretest  (from    Azevedo   et  al., 2005), including  an  essay  for
assessing students' mental models of the circulatory system. An introduction to using the hypermedia environment
was  then   given; showing   the contents  and  features, including    multiple representations     of information, of three
articles most relevant articles for learning about the circulatory system.

         Participants had 40 minutes for the learning task and had access to the instructions and the global learning
goal ("Make   sure   you  learn  about the different  parts  and  their   purpose,  how  they  work    both individually and
together, and how they support the human body") during the period. All participants worked with the same human

                                                             928                                                    ICLS 2006
tutor who facilitated their self-regulated learning by prompting students to activate their prior knowledge, plan their
time and effort, monitor their progress towards goals and to use several strategies such as summarizing, coordinating
informational  sources,   hypothesizing   and drawing.   The   students were  able to engage  in  help-seeking  during    the
learning task but the tutor did not provide knowledge extraneous to the information in the hypermedia environment.
After the learning task, a 20 minute posttest, identical to the pretest, was administered to all participants.
Data Analysis & Results
          The coding and scoring of the pretest and posttest mental models and the segmentation of the participants'
verbalizations during the tutoring session was identical to that of Azevedo and colleagues (2004). For this study,
students' scores on their pretest and posttest mental models were used to categorize them into groups based on how
much they learned during the session. A more fine-grained analysis of students' help-seeking behavior based on the
coded transcription was conducted by the first author, and each instance was coded into one of two types: cognitive
or contextual  help-seeking  behavior.    Cognitive    help-seeking behavior  included   requests by students   for help  in
understanding the content of the hypermedia articles, clarification of an idea, delimiting the task, and confirmation
of understanding (e.g. "Aren't like arteries thicker than veins?").While contextual help-seeking behavior included
requests by students for help in navigating the hypermedia environment, clarification of task and tutor's role,           and
instructions (e.g. "I can take notes you said, right?").

          We  categorized   students based    on   the type of  help-seeking  they engaged  in  most  during    the tutoring
session. We conducted 3X2 chi-square analyses to determine whether the different conceptual understanding groups
differed on their majority type of help-seeking behaviors. The chi-square was significant (2 [2, N = 67] = 7.47, p <
.05) and revealed that 30% of students in the low conceptual-gain group engaged in more context help-seeking than
cognitive help-seeking, compared to only 5% of students in the high conceptual-gain group. Eighty-three percent of
high students engaged in more cognitive help-seeking than context help-seeking, compared to 56% of students in the
low group.   Four students in both groups engaged in equal numbers of cognitive and context help-seeking. These
results demonstrate that higher percentage of students in the high group engaged in significantly more cognitive than
context help-seeking than their low conceptual-gain counterparts, who engaged in more context than cognitive help
seeking compared to students in the high group.
Discussion
          Our  results demonstrate   that in a naturalistic  human   tutoring condition  students engage   in help-seeking
behavior. However, not all help-seeking behavior is alike. This study demonstrates differences between the kind of
help solicited by learners who show large gains in understanding versus help solicited by learners who do show low
or no gains in understanding. It is possible that since students who do not show large gains in understanding after a
learning session engage in more questions regarding superficial details of the learning task that these learners are
unable to formulate appropriate questions that will help them draw closer to their learning goals. While this is an
initial study on the topic of help-seeking while learning with hypermedia, it is expected that with further research
into the correlates of help-seeking behavior can yield a deeper insight on the role of the behavior in mediating self-
and external regulated learning. Future research also needs to focus on ways of facilitating help-seeking behavior in
those who need help most while learning with hypermedia.
References
Aleven, V., Stahl, E., & Schworm, S. (2003). Help seeking and help design in interactive learning environments.
          Review of Educational Research, 73(3), 277-320.
Azevedo,   R., Cromley,    J.G., Winters,    F.I., Moos,   D.C.   & Greene,   J.A. (2005).  Adaptive  human     scaffolding
          facilitates adolescents' self-regulated   learning with   hypermedia. Instructional  Science (Special     Issue on
          Scaffolding Self-Regulated Learning and Metacogntion: Implications for the Design of Computer-Based
          Scaffolds), 33, 381-412.
Graesser, A.C. & Person, N.K. (1994). Question asking during tutoring. American Educational Research Journal,
          31(1), 104-137.
Newman, R. S. (2002).What do I need to do to succeed...When I don't understand what I'm doing?:Developmental
          influences   on students'  adaptive  help    seeking. In  A.  Wigfield,  &  J. Eccles   (Eds.), Development     of
          achievement motivation (pp.285-306). San Diego, CA: Academic Press
Pintrich, P.  (2000).  The  role of  goal orientation   in  self-regulated learning. In  M. Boekaerts,    P. R. Pintrich  &
          Z.Moshe (Eds.) Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 451-502). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

                                                              929                                                 ICLS 2006
