    Design principles for the Knowledge-Practices Laboratory (KP-Lab)
                                                           project
 Hakkarainen, Kai, Muukkonen, Hanni,           Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 9, SF-00014 University of Helsinki,
                       Finland, Email: kai.hakkarainen@helsinki.fi, hanni.muukkonen@helsinki.fi
         Markkanen Hannu, EVTEK University of Applied Sciences, Vanha maantie 6, FIN-02650 Espoo,
       Finland, Email: hannu.markkanen@evtek.fi, and the KP-Lab Research and Development Community

         Abstract:     The  poster  introduces    the design principles   for   the Knowledge-Practices      Laboratory
         (KP-Lab)      project. KP-Lab     is    based  on   technological,    theoretical,   pedagogical,   and    social
         innovations    aimed   at  facilitating  innovative practices    of working    with  knowledge,    "knowledge
         practices", in education and workplaces. In order to be truly productive, collaborative technologies
         cannot fully be specified beforehand but need to co-evolve with social practices and be further
         modifiable according to the users' emerging needs and practices.

Introduction
         Future challenges of European society require policy makers, educators, researchers, technology developers
and  teachers    to devise  ways   to  prepare   learners to engage   in  intensive    work   focused  on   deliberate  knowledge
advancement      (Bereiter, 2000;   Hakkarainen,      Palonen,   Paavola,    &  Lehtinen,    2004).  Knowledge      work   requires
managing   complex      knowledge     through    dynamically     evolving forms     of  collaborative  teamwork     and  sustained
knowledge     sharing.  Innovation     and knowledge      creation   activities are    becoming    commonplace      and  the   most
important sources of new material and intellectual wealth. In terms of the educational practices, a challenge for the
knowledge     society  is  that students,  teachers,    professionals,  designers,     and  researchers    take part   not only   in
knowledge acquisition or social participation processes, but also knowledge creation focusing around shared objects
of  activity. The   Knowledge-Practice     Laboratory      (KP-Lab)   project   will   focus  on   creating the KP-Lab     learning
system aimed at facilitating innovative practices of working with knowledge ("knowledge practices") in education
and workplaces. The system is considered in a number of its real-life instantiations whose data provide feedback for
its continuing    refinement.   KP-Lab     is a  five-year   (2006-2010)     integrated    project concerning   the  Technology-
Enhanced   Learning     (Information   Society    Technologies)      program    of  the European    Community.      University   of
Helsinki and EVTEK University of Applied Sciences coordinate the project, involving 22 organizations from 14
European   countries.   The   design   principles  shaping   the  KP-Lab     project   are as follows:  Principle   1.  Organizing
activity  around      collaborative   advancement      of  knowledge      artefacts;    Principle   2.  "Symmetric      knowledge
advancement" (Scardamalia, 2002) around authentic problems; Principle 3. Deliberate transformation of knowledge
practices; Principle    4.  Co-evolution      of tools,   social practices,  and    agents.   These  design   principles   will  be
implemented throughout the project in order to generate four types of innovation.

Theoretical innovation
         As a theoretical innovation, the KP-Lab represents an approach to human cognition which assists going
beyond   acquisition    (monological,   within    mind    approach)   and    participation    (dialogical,  interactive approach)
metaphors     of learning  to consider  also  knowledge-creation      processes,   and  related  tools and   practices  critical for
answering     the challenges   of  the emerging     innovation   society. According      to  the   knowledge-creation   approach,
cognition is seen to develop through collaborative work in systematically developing shared, conceptual or material
artefacts, such as concepts, plans, products, or social practices (Paavola, Lipponen, & Hakkarainen, 2004, Paavola &
Hakkarainen, 2005). These kinds of processes are considered to be "trialogical" in nature in terms of the participants
activities mediated through jointly developed knowledge artefacts. This kind of approach has deep historical roots,
but their analysis and more importantly their assessment are in the infancy stage. The KP-Lab project will develop
and  explicate    the theoretical  foundations   of   the knowledge-creation     ("trialogical")   approach.    In addition it   will
develop and test concrete models and tools for trialogical knowledge practices in various contexts (higher education,
polytechnics, working life, secondary-level education).

Pedagogical innovation
         Innovative knowledge practices will be facilitated across multiple domains of knowledge by organizing a
series of technology-mediated KP-Lab courses in which students solve complex problems for real customers (i.e.,

                                                                 934                                                     ICLS 2006
enterprises, research communities or public organizations) and pursue field training in professional communities.
This pedagogy    requires    teachers to   function more   like managers    of knowledge-intensive    companies     than simple
distributors of knowledge. Student teams supported by tools of ubiquitous computing are asked to engage in either
concrete or virtual knowledge-creating activities that involve breaking boundaries of their educational institutions
and  building novel     connections   with  professional   communities    and   corresponding     knowledge   practices. These
efforts will create  new     student-expert  partnerships   as  well as novel  networks     of polytechnics,  universities, and
professional communities in terms of shared efforts of advancing knowledge practices throughout Europe.

Social innovation
         KP-Lab's     design     principles emerge     from  two    decades of  educational     and  socio-cognitive   research
concerning   technology-enhanced         learning.  These   investigations   indicate   that   technology-enhanced      learning
transforms educational practices only through transformed social practices. In order to deal with this challenge, KP-
Lab  puts reflective    social   practices  around  shared   knowledge    artefacts into the    core of technology-enhanced
learning. Toward that end, it provides the participants tools for reflecting on, making visible, and transforming their
knowledge practices. The challenge is to design technical tools and solutions that encourage the users to engage in
thinking  and collective     reflection, so as to   promote  organizational    intelligence and   deliberate transformation  of
knowledge practices within the social matrix of knowledge creation. An essential aspect of KP-Lab will be to design
virtual change-laboratory     tools based   on  "change-laboratory"     (Engeström,  Virkkunen,     Helle, Pihlaja, &   Poikela,
1996)   interventions   that will allow   participants, whether  they   are students,  teachers,  or professionals,  to  master,
together, the challenges of the current activity and to work deliberately for innovative redesign of their collective
activities. Participants of KP-Lab, whether they are students of higher education or professionals, will be engaged to
jointly reflect on and make visible their knowledge practices in order to set these up as objects of deliberate change
and improvement.

Technological innovation
         KP-Lab      will be   a  modular,   flexible  and  extensible  system   consisting    of a  cluster of   inter-operable
applications  (i.e., shared      collaborative spaces,   semantic    web  knowledge     services,   communication    platform,
ubiquitous user agents, inter-institutional access) which organize participants' collaborative activity around shared
knowledge artefacts. Ubiquitous user agents provide end-users with inter-institutional access to KP-Lab services
such  as  shared  collaborative     working    spaces,  semantic    web knowledge     repository,   and real-time   multimedia
communication for individuals and groups. The KP-Lab system will be designed according to openness, modularity,
and  compatibility   with    the Semantic   Web    technology.  The   KP-Lab    intends  to  research and    develop a   generic
middleware supporting flexible knowledge management services for learning applications. It will be made available
as an open-source software also for end-user applications beyond the present project. In order to be truly productive,
collaborative technologies cannot fully be specified beforehand but need to co-evolve with social practices and be
further modifiable according to the users' emerging needs and practical innovations. Consequently, the KP-Lab is
intended to be a "laboratory" in terms of providing a testbed for developing transformative knowledge practices for
educational institutions and workplaces. The project will be carried out through several stages that involve iterative
technology development and empirical testing and piloting of KP-Labs technologies and practices. A special effort
will be  invested    to identify  and    analyze  reciprocal   individual and   social transformations     taking place  across
sustained trialogical efforts of knowledge advancement undertaken in KP-Labs.

References
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and Mind in the Knowledge Age. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Engeström, Y., Virkkunen, J., Helle, M., Pihlaja, J., & Poikela, R. (1996). The change laboratory as a tool
         for transforming work. Life Long Learning in Europe, 2, 10-17.
Hakkarainen, K., Palonen, T., Paavola, S., & Lehtinen, E. (2004). Communities of networked expertise:
         Professional and educational perspectives. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of Innovative Knowledge Communities and
         Three Metaphors of Learning. Review of Educational Research 74(4), 557-576.
Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). The knowledge creation metaphor ­ An emergent epistemological
         approach to learning. Science & Education, 14, 537-557.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B.
         Smith (Ed.), Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.

                                                                935                                                   ICLS 2006
