   Enhancing children's learning in museums: A Design-Based
                                        Research Approach

             Tony Hall, Learning Sciences Research Institute, University of Nottingham, UK,
                                         tony.hall@nottingham.ac.uk
   Liam Bannon, Luigina Ciolfi, Paul Gallagher, Kieran Ferris, Interaction Design Centre, University of
                                               Limerick, Ireland,
         Email: liam.bannon@ul.ie, luigina.ciolfi@ul.ie, paul.gallagher@ul.ie, kieran.ferris@ul.ie
              Ruth Mulhern, The Hunt Museum, Limerick, Ireland, ruth@huntmuseum.com
       Nora Hickey, Lewis Glucksman Gallery, University College Cork, Ireland, nora.hickey@ucc.ie

        Abstract: This paper reports research, conducted in collaboration with the Hunt Museum,
        Limerick, Ireland,  which    explored    the  design   and  deployment    of  novel   ubiquitous
        computing to augment children's learning in museums. The paper summarises a Design-
        Based Research    process.  The   poster will  display the  final results of  the  research. The
        authors have presented the initial and interim findings at the previous two ICLS conferences
        (e.g. Hall et al, 2004).

The Design-Based Research Process in the Hunt Museum
    The  aim  of the  research   described here  was   to make  a  difference in  the  way  children  experience
artefacts and museums. Thus, it was of paramount importance that the design process was sensitive to the
museum's many important stakeholders. Previous research (Rogers & Edwards, 2002) had identified lack
of consultation  with educational   and  curatorial  stakeholders  as a major  barrier impeding   the  design of
successful exhibitions in museums. Furthermore, it was decided to adopt a Design-Based Research (DBR)
approach because there is a commitment within DBR both to improve design practice and also to enhance
scientific understanding of how design affects learning (Barab & Squire, 2004) In all, the Hunt Museum
DBR process encompassed six main design activities or consultations:

1.  Technical experimentation (six probes, where the interactive capabilities of a number of innovative
    computer technologies (e.g. RFID, WebCam tracking) were tested, both in lab settings and in the Hunt
    Museum);
2.  Consultation  of  children's  history  and museum     education   policy (as  outlined in the Irish  Primary
    School History Curriculum and the ICOM (International Council of Museums) charter);
3.  Design, development and evaluation of a large-scale interactive museum exhibition, Exploring Digital
    History  at  Nottingham      Castle and    Museum,    which    preceded   and  significantly  informed    the
    development work for the exhibition in the Hunt Museum;
4.  Observational  studies  (of   schoolchildren's   interactions  in two  interactive museum     workshops,   a
    simulated archaeology dig and time machine);
5.  Consultation of museum and Hunt family experts (docents (the museum's specialist guides), curators,
    museum education officers, Hunt family biographer);
6.  Scan and evaluation of physical/spatial constraints of the museum.

As  is characteristic of most    Design-Based    Research, the  design  process   was  closely informed   by  an
orienting theoretical perspective. The conceptual or theoretical framework for the Hunt Museum comprised
eight major design concerns or themes: (1) materiality; (2) narrativity; (3) sociality; (4) activity; (5) multi-
modality; (6) engagement; (7) computer as augmentation tool; and (8) pedagogical activity.

The Design Product: Re-Tracing the Past
         The space limitations of a conference poster proposal constrain the depth of the discussion of the
analytic data, particularly as over sixty hours of video data, (in addition to other data collection activities
and instruments such as questionnaires, interviews and pre- and post-visit school visits), were collected and
analysed. Overall, the evaluation of the exhibition revealed that Re-Tracing the Past had a positive impact
in terms of the  eight   design  themes:  materiality, narrativity, etcetera. For  detailed   discussion of data

                                                       936                                                  ICLS 2006
pertaining to each theme, the authors refer the reader to more comprehensive accounts of the research (Hall
& Bannon, 2005) on which this paper is based. The images below show children interacting with various
features of the highly innovative and successful interactive exhibition. The final design in the museum was
a replica study room and adjoining mysterious room, which contained interactive fittings. The design of the
exhibition in the  Hunt  Museum  embodied   the  theoretical   frame described  previously,  and   children's
experience of Re-Tracing the Past was a highly positive one.

                   Figure 1. Snapshots of children's interactions in Re-Tracing the Past.

References
Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design­Based Research: Putting a Stake in the Ground. In Kolodner, J.,
        Barab, S., Eisenberg, M. (Eds.) The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Hall, T., & Bannon, L. (2005). Co-operative design of children's interaction in museums: A case study in
        the Hunt Museum. CoDesign: International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts, 1(3),
        187-218.
Hall, T., Ciolfi, L., Ferris, K., Bannon, L., Gallagher, P., Hickey, N., Hedman, A., & Tobiasson, H. (2004).
        Tools for Open Interpretation: using novel computing to support multiple perspectives in children's
        historical understanding. ICLS2004: The Sixth International Conference of the Learning Sciences,
        June 22-26, 2004, Santa Monica, California.
Rogers, R., &  Edwards,  S. (2002). The Big Sink:   a   report on the key   factors for designing, building,
        equipping, using and managing   creative spaces   in   galleries, museums   and schools. Group  for
        Education in Museums (GEM) News. No. 86. Summer 2002, 8-9.

                                                    937                                                  ICLS 2006
