                         Cognitive Effects of Chess Instruction on
                           Students At Risk for Academic Failure

Saahoon Hong, William Bart M, University of Minnesota, Department of Educational Psychology, 204 Burton Hall,
                                      178 Pillsbury Dr. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                   Email: hong0083@umn.edu, bartx001@umn.edu

         Abstract: This study examined the cognitive effects of chess instruction on thirty-eight students at
         risk for  academic   failure.   The analysis found   no significant  differences  between   the cognitive
         changes registered by the treatment group and the control group. However, for the chess group,
         participant chess rating was significantly correlated with TONI-3 scores. The findings indicated
         that student acquisition of high chess ratings contributes to the improvement of cognitive skills
         rather than student mere exposure to chess.

Introduction
         Chess  playing   provides  numerous      opportunities for  players to practice   higher order  cognitive skills. It
involves comprehension     of   chess  positions, analysis of   moves  and   their sequences,  and  evaluation of  positions
resulting from certain moves (Bart, 2004; Gobet & Simon, 1996). Higher order cognitive skills play a major role in
enabling students to better establish and attain goals, identify potential response alternatives in the decision-making
process, and achieve self-regulated learning (Wehmeyer, Palmer, Agran, Mithaug, & Martin, 2000). These skills are
considered to be transferable skills (Ericsson & Staszewski, 1989; Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995; Gobet & Simon, 1996)
         Although little research has been conducted to identify the effect of chess, chess instruction shows that it
produces significant effects on student performance in both cognitive and academic tasks. Horgan's (1987) study
was the first study in providing a model for chess instruction, emphasizing teaching of principles, frequent feedback,
and specific chess drills. Research on chess instruction demonstrates that children who play chess improve analytical
reasoning, problem      solving  skills, and even  academic   achievement    (Chrisiaen    & Verholfstadt,   1978; Frank   &
D'Hondt, 1979; Smith & Cage, 2000), while studies on the relation between visuospatial ability and chess skill
showed mixed results (Waters, Gobet, & Leyden, 2002).
         But can chess instruction have salutary cognitive effects with other types of students such as students at risk
or  students  with disabilities?  Storey   (2000)  suggested    that chess instruction   could also  benefit  children with
disabilities, even though only anecdotal evidence is available for the effect of chess play on students with disabilities
(Remsen, 1998; Russo, 1997; Wojcio, 1995). Thus, this study will examine this issue as it concerns various kinds of
students who are at risk for academic failure. A relation between chess skill and higher order cognitive skills will be
investigated to support a model that chess instruction benefits students at risk.

Methods
Participants
         Thirty-eight students, ages 8 to 12, from three elementary schools participated. These schools are located in
Seoul, Korea. Of these students, all students enrolled in an after school program for students at risk. Among them,
six students  received   special education   services at a resource   room   setting, too. Students  at risk were  identified
according to criteria developed by the Korean Ministry of Education.
         They possessed poor math, reading, and writing skills. Approximately 2-3% of students per school fell into
this category. They have significant deficits in more than one area among the domains of reading, writing, and math.
Playing chess was new to most of the students. Although one student stated that he sometimes played chess with his
brother and his knowledge of basic chess rules was shallow.

Procedures
         The study began with administration of the two pretests after the consent forms were returned. A researcher
and a research assistant administered tests in the first week of this study. At the beginning and end of the chess
intervention, Test of   Nonverbal  Intelligence,   Third Edition,    (TONI-3) and   Raven's   Progressive  Matrices  (RPM)
were given to the students.
         The participants were randomly assigned to an experimental (18) or a control group (20). The experimental
group received  a  90-minute     chess   lesson once per week   and   the control  group   students attended regular school
activities after class.

                                                             938                                                   ICLS 2006
         A chess intervention was divided into 12 separate lessons over a 3-month period. Each lesson consisted of
three segments:  reviewing,  lecturing, and  chess  playing.  A  chess instructor provided   a  set of quizzes   after each
lecture. The last six lessons were implemented in a computer lab by using chess software.

Results
         The results of this study indicate no cognitive effect of chess instruction. In the analysis of two cognitive
tests, the experimental group performance on the test was not different from the control group performance.
         For internal analysis of the experimental group, the partial correlation of the TONI-3 Posttest scores and the
Chess Ratings with the TONI-3 Pretest score being held constant was .520, p < .05. However, the effect size for the
experimental group was small (d = 0.29) on TONI-3.

Discussion
         Although there are a few limitations, the results of this study demonstrate that young novice chess players
at risk for academic failure can benefit from chess instruction through improving their chess skills. They require
more time for chess instruction than a twelve-session chess instruction period. One year or more of chess instruction
is suggested for strong salutary cognitive effects on the students at risk.
         In addition, chess instruction should focus on student acquisition of higher chess skill ratings rather than
mere  exposure  to chess. If the chess  instruction   focused on improvements     in student chess   skill ratings through
practicing higher order cognitive skills, then the chess instruction might well engender salutary cognitive effects. For
the development of chess instruction, individual differences and unique needs should be taken consideration.
         Thus,  we recommend     that  the  cognitive effects of chess performance    on students   at risk  for academic
failure continue  to be   studied. The   heretofore-mentioned    methods    for improving    chess  instruction  could   be
incorporated into  such   an inquiry. Chess   instruction specially configured   may   prove   to be   very efficacious  in
producing salutary cognitive effects among students at risk for academic failure in the USA, and elsewhere in the
world.

References
Bart, W. (2004, May). Cognitive enhancement:       An approach to the development of intelligence. Poster
         session presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Society, Chicago, Illinois.
Christiaen, J., & Verholfstadt, D. C. (1978). Chess and cognitive development.    Nederlandse Tydschrift
         voor de Psychologie en haar Grensbebieden, 36, 561-582.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory, Psychological Review, 102, 211-245.
Ericsson, K. A. & Staszewski, J. (1989). Skilled memory and expertise: Mechanisms of exceptional
         performance. In D. Klahr and K. Kotovsky (Eds.), Complex Information Processing: The Impact
         of Herbert A. Simon. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Frank, A., & D'Hondt, W. (1979). Aptitudes and learning chess in Zaire. Psychopathologie Africane, 15,
         81-98.
Gobet, F., & Simon, H. A. (1996). The roles of recognition processes and look-ahead search in time-
         constrained expert problem solving: Evidence from grandmaster-level chess. Psychological
         Science, 7, 52-55.
Horgan, D. D. (1987). Chess as a way to teach thinking. Teaching, Thinking and Problem Solving, 9, 4-11.
Pelts, R., & Alburt, L. (1992). Comprehensive chess course volume 1 (4thedition). New York, NY:        Chess
         Information and Research Center.
Remsen, D. (1998). Churchill school for learning disabilities wins three trophies at nationals. Chess Life,
         53, 622
Russo, A. (1997). Chess versus drugs: When chess is more than a game. Chess Life, 52, 7.
Smith, J. P., & Cage, B. N. (2000). The effects of chess instruction on the mathematics achievement of
         Southern, rural, Black secondary students.   Research in the Schools, 7, 19-26.
Storey, K. (2000). Teaching beginning chess skills to students with disabilities. Preventing School Failure,
         44, 2, 45-49.
Waters, A. J., Gobet, F., & Leyden, G. (2002). Visuospatial abilities of chess players. British Journal of
         Psychology, 93, 557-565.
Wehmeyer, M. L., Palmer, S. B., Agran, M., Mithaug, D. E., & Martin, J. (2000). Teaching students to
         become    causal agents   in their lives: The  self-determining    learning model   of instruction.  Exceptional
         Children, 66, 439-453.
Wojcio, M. (1995). Chess is very special. Chess Life, 50, 767.

                                                           939                                                   ICLS 2006
