      Individual Differences in Sense of Classroom Community
         Fengfeng Ke, Pennsylvania State University, 314 Keller Building, University Park, PA 16802
                                              Email: lilyke@psu.edu

       Abstract. The paper proposed reports a causal-comparative study that were conducted to examine
       whether  the      sense of community  development       differs by  students'  characteristics in both
       traditional and online course setting. Subjects comprise 171 undergraduate students enrolled in a
       major American      university. Specifically, the researchers   investigate whether  students' learning
       preference,  gender,     and peer-acquaintance    level influence  their    sense of community    after
       controlling for initial differences, and whether their sense of community correlates with course
       grades.

Introduction
       The value of social bonds in the learning process has been widely acknowledged in the education field (e.g.
Vygotsky, 1978; Lave & Wenger, 1991). As an endorsement of this observation, building sense of community
within classrooms has become a widely-accepted practice (Palloff & Pratt, 1999). Sense of community, as defined
by McMillan and Chavis (1986), refers to "a feeling that members have of belonging, a feeling that members matter
to one another and to the group, and a shared faith that members' needs will be met through their commitment to be
together" (p. 8). Drawing on this definition, Rovai (2002) have specified four components of a classroom
community as spirit, trust, interaction, and learning.

       For the past decades, quite a few empirical studies have indicated that in a classroom setting, stronger sense
of community promotes both the socialization and learning outcomes of students, such as persistence in courses,
cooperation among members, perceived cognitive learning, and learning motivation (Bruffee, 1993; Dede, 1996;
Moore & Brooks, 2001; Rovai, 2002).

       However, few empirical studies reported on variables that influence students' sense of community. Rovai
(2001) did report that in a virtual classroom female sense of community was significantly higher than that of males,
but his finding was extracted from a small group of participants (18 in the total). Regis (1988) found that the
likelihood of acquaintances predicted the sense of community at a face-to-face setting. His study, however, was
more descriptive than experimental. Graff (2003) concluded that in a blended learning environment, students with
intuitive cognitive style reported a lower sense of community than students with an intermediate or analytic style.
Then, he suggested a replication of his study using more individual differences dimensions.

Research Purpose and Methods
       The research was intended to verify previous researchers' supposition on the relationship between
individual difference and sense of community, by doing empirical studies in both face-to-face and online course
setting. Specifically, this causal-comparative study was conducted to investigate whether the sense of community
differs by students' learning style, gender, and peer-acquaintance level, after controlling for initial differences. The
study also sought to indicate if sense of community would predict students' course grades.

Participants
       Participants comprised 171 undergraduate students (111 males and 60 females, with a mean age of 20.7) in
a major university. 74 of them enrolled in a teamwork-oriented face-to-face course offered by the business school.
The other 97 participants were engineering-majored undergraduate students who attended an ANGEL-based online
science course that was balanced between teamwork and individual project.

Instruments
       Classroom Community Scale (Rovai, 2002) is an instrument to assess students' sense of community and
the extent of community development. The CCS contains 20 five-point Likert-scaled items, ten items each for the
subscales of connectedness and learning. It has a theoretical maximum score of 100, with higher scores reflecting a
stronger sense of community. Rovai (2002) reports the internal consistency of the total scale as .93 and a high
degree of face validity.  A 16-item Likert-scaled solitary/social learning style survey was constructed by the
researchers based on a well-established LSO Learning Styles Inventory (Advanogy.com, 2003). It has a theoretical

                                                          948                                                  ICLS 2006
maximum score of 80, with higher score indicating a more social learning style and lower score indicating a more
solitary style. A solitary-styled learner is more private, introspective, and independent; a social-styled learner, on the
contrary, typically prefers learning in groups or classes (Ke, 2004). A panel of experts consisting of two university
professors in educational psychology has vetted the content validity of the test questions. A pilot study of the survey
was carried out toward a blend of 140 graduate and undergraduate students at the previous academic semester,
indicating a KR-20 reliability of .76. A short survey was also developed to collect students' demographic data,
including gender, race, and year in college. In the survey, participants were asked to self-report their acquaintances
with their teammates in a three-point scale.

Procedure
       Students' demographic data, which include gender and peer-acquaintance level, were collected at the
beginning week of academic semester. Then, measured by Classroom Community Scale (CCS), data of students'
sense of community was collected at the second week and the concluding week of the semester.

Findings
       A 2 x 2 x 3 MANCOVA (with pre-measurement of CCS as covariate) was conducted to examine if
students' learner preference, gender, and peer-acquaintance level would influence their scores at the CCS and each
of its subscales. A correlation analysis then was used to measure the strength and direction of relationship between
sense of community and course grades.

       No main effects of learning style, gender, or acquaintance level were observed for the overall CCS scale.
But a significant interaction effect was found between learning style and gender (F = 4.893, p = .032). A Bonferroni
test of post-hoc comparisons indicated that females with a solitary learning style (M = 65.9) reported a lower sense
of community than all the other groups (p < .01), while females with a social learning style (M = 76.6) reported the
highest sense of community (p < .01). Additionally, a significant effect of learning style was noted for the
connectedness subscale (F = 4.109, p = .021). A Bonferroni test showed that students with a solitary learning style
reported a significantly lower sense of connectedness than students with a social learning style (Msol = 32.5, Msoc =
37.4, p = .014). No effects of learning style were noted for the learning subscale. No effects of gender or
acquaintance level were observed for both of the two subscales.  Because students' course grades are non-parametric
(A, B, C, D, or F), Spearman's Rho correlation coefficient was computed to determine bivariate correlation between
CCS scale score and course grade. The correlation was positive (.49) and statistically significant at the .01 level
(two-tailed).

References
Bruffee, K. A. (1993). Collaborative learning: Higher education, interdependence, and the authority of knowledge.
       Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.
Dede, C. (1996). The evolution of distance education: Emerging technologies and distributed learning. American
       Journal of Distance Education, 10(2), 4-36.
Graff, M. (2003). Individual differences in sense of classroom community in a blended learning environment.
       Journal of Educational Media, 28(2-3), 203-210.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press
McMillan, D. W. & Chavis, D. M. (1986). Sense of community: A definition and theory. American Journal of
       Community Psychology, 14(1), 6-23.
Moore, A., and Brooks, R. (2001). Learning communities and community development: Describing the process.
       International Journal of Adult and Vocational Learning.
Palloff, R. & Pratt, K. (1999). Building learning communities in cyberspace: Effective strategies for the online
       classroom. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Regis, H. A. (1988). Communication and the sense of community among the members of an immigrant group.
       Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 19(3), 329-340.
Rovai, A. P. (2001). Building classroom community at a distance: A case study. Educational Technology Research
       and Development, 49(4), 33-48.
Rovai, A. P. (2002). Development of an instrument to measure classroom community. Internet and Higher
       Education, 5, 197-211.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

                                                          949                                                 ICLS 2006
