       Enhancing Mathematical Discourse in Elementary Classrooms

   Mitzi Lewison, Ingrid Graves, Lenny Sanchez, Indiana University, 201 North Rose Ave., School of Education,
                                                Bloomington, IN 47405-1006
                      Email: lewison@indiana.edu, igraves@indiana.edu, olsanche@indiana.edu

         Abstract:    Using  conversational   formative   routines   among     students,    this study  focuses   on  the
         discursive   practices  found  in  two  fifth-grade   mathematics     classrooms.     The  analysis    considers
         student  identity   work  situated  in  meaningful      engagement      in knowledge     practices.    Particular
         attention is  paid  to  how students   become    proficient    in speaking    the  language    of mathematical
         communities and the relationship this has on their identity within the group.

Introduction
         Accountability-oriented     reforms    present new    challenges     for   elementary   mathematics     instruction.  The
passage of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) act requires increasing percentages of students to score at or above
proficient benchmarks each year on criterion-referenced achievement tests. Additionally, elementary mathematics
lessons are composed of instructional methodology based on I-R-E, Initiate, Respond and Evaluate (Mehan, 1979);
with limited time devoted to mathematical discourse involving students in meaningful peer discourse, supportive
reasoning,  engagement,    and   revision of thinking   intended    to  enhance     metacognitive   awareness.   Herrenkohl     and
Guerra   (1998) propose   that  "engagement     can be  viewed   in  terms    of  discourse   practices   that extend beyond    the
behavior of individual students and involve both social and cognitive activity" (439).

         Additionally, Barnwell, Leung, Morgan and Street (2005) argue the need to view mathematical language
abilities as socially embedded in linguistic practices within the classroom. Gee (2003) points out that much of the
knowledge in academic domains (i.e. mathematics) involves going beyond everyday vernacular and is manifested in
the non-vernacular specialist language of the discipline. As such, students need to be mentored into the discourse of
practice in  order  to become     fluent  in mathematical      reasoning    and   usage    of  mathematical     concepts.  In   this
investigation,  we use  student   talk as  a window     into their  experiences,    competing     perspectives,   and  abilities  to
linguistically engage  in  sophisticated   mathematical   concepts.     We    document     the   social practices and   discursive
models that illuminate the divide between vernacular and scientific linguistic practices in mathematics. In short,
"discursive  acquisition  is the  lynchpin   of schooling.   . . It is  learning    to walk,  talk, write,  and  think. .  . like a
mathematician" (Gallas, 2000).

         This presentation describes the first year of a three year study funded by the National Science Foundation
(NSF)  (Hickey,    Mewborn      & Lewison,    2005)   building     upon    an underlying      multi-level/multi-type   model     for
alignment of instruction, assessment and testing (Hickey & Zuiker, 2005) also funded by NSF. Using informal math
assessments,   to enhance    and inform   teachers' instructional    practices,   this  study  continues    the investigation  into
linguistic practices of elementary students as they engage in small group mathematics discussions.

Method
         This paper focuses on two fifth grade classrooms, each at different schools in the Midwest. The first school
serves a working-class neighborhood with 54% of its students eligible for free and reduced lunch. The second school
is situated within  a middle-class   community    with   16%     of its students    eligible for free   and reduced   lunch.  Both
classrooms use the Everyday Mathematics program (University of Chicago, 2003) for math instruction. Five times
during the  semester,  students   individually   complete    three   open-ended      Math    Investigations.    These items   were
carefully selected from the Balanced Assessment in Mathematics (McGraw-Hill, 2005) and relate closely to what
has been taught in the classroom. In small groups, students discuss how they solved the problems and explain their
rationale.  Once  each semester   the  students   watch   two    animated   video    clips,  which  show    a   group of   students
discussing one of the problems the students in the classroom have just discussed. The students observe and discuss
the differences between vernacular talk and academic mathematical discourse by the video coaches. The whole class
then discusses    how  they    would   rate  each   video  coach    discussion      and  then    identify  the  characteristics   of
mathematical discourse that were embedded in the more academic video clip. Using a rubric, the students go back to
their small groups and informally assess their own math conversations and score themselves as compared to the
ratings they assigned the video coaches. At this point, field notes and videotapes of the small group discussions are

                                                               954                                                       ICLS 2006
analyzed using grounded theory and discourse analysis to assess classroom implementation, students' participation
and growth in mathematical discourse.

Outcomes and Implications
        This   study  explicates the  distance   between   students'  understandings    of mathematical  concepts using
everyday   language   and their  ability to   engage in   authentic, fluent, mathematical   discourse. By  enacting  and
embedding student-led mathematical discourse as a regular part of teachers' instruction, we are able to show how to
fine-tune  individual understandings,    build  collective participation in   mathematical   communities,  and  increase
student achievement. Students and teachers often require explicit coaching on the methods in which to engage in a
particular discourse  community,   in    this case that of  mathematics.     Our findings  extend those of  Southerland,
Kittleson, Settlage and Lanier (2005) who state, "the exercise of power within group-exchanges guided not only
group discussions but also the learning of the individual in those groups and the power of a persuasive speaker, a
power that comes not from empirical grounding but from a learner's need to have ideas explicitly evaluated and
explained."
        Through discourse analysis of small group student interaction, we were allowed to examine how students
take on multiple and varied identities through the uses of informal Math Investigations and video coaches. Osborne,
Erduran and Simon (2005) make a strong argument for "engaging students in argumentation and its evaluation" and
additionally submit that argumentation "offers a means of transcending the dogmatic, uncritical, and unquestioning
nature of so much of the traditional fare offered in classrooms" (p. 1017). This study demonstrates the power of
teaching students to question, argue, and evaluate their own mathematical solutions.

References
Barnwell, R., Leung, C., Morgan, C., & Street, B. (2005). Applied linguistics and mathematics education: More than
        words and numbers. Language and Education, 19(2), 142-147.
Gallas, K. (2000). Story time as a magical act open only to the initiated: What some children don't know about
        power and may not find out. Trend & Issues in Elementary Language Arts, Graham, B. 87-101.
Gee, J. (2003). Opportunity to learn: A language-based perspective on assessment. Assessment in Education, 10(1),
        27-4.
Herrenkohl, L. & Guerra, M.(1998). Participant structures, scientific discourse, and student engagement in fourth
        grade. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 43 1-473.
Hickey,   D., Mewborn,    D., &  Lewison,     M.   (2005,  July). Multi-level  assessment   for enhancing  mathematical
        discourse,   curriculum, and     achievement  in  diverse  elementary    school classrooms. Grant  from  the US
        National   Science    Foundation's     Research   on Learning    Environments      (ROLE)   program to   Indiana
        University.
Hickey, D. T., & Zuiker, S. J. (2005). Engaged participation: A sociocultural model of motivation with implications
        for assessment. Educational Assessment, 10(3), 277-305.
McGraw-Hill. (2005). Balanced Assessments in Mathematics [Website of CTB McGraw-Hill]. Retrieved, Mar 1,
        2006,   from
        http://www.ctb.com/products/product_detail.jsp?FOLDER%3C%3Efolder_id=1408474395217571&bmUI
        D=1121286347770
Mehan, H. (1979). Learning lessons: social organization in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
        Press.
Osborne, J., Erduran, S., & Simon, S. (2004). Enhancing the quality of argumentation in school science. Journal of
        Research in Science Teaching. 41(10). 994-1020.
Southerland, S., Kittleson, J., Settlage, J., & Lanier, K. (2005). Individual and group meaning-making in an urban
        third grade classroom: Red fog, cold cans, and seeping vapor. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
        42(9), 1032-1061.
University  of Chicago  School   Mathematics     Project. (2003).  Every Day   Mathematics   Center. [Homepage    of the
        University    of   Chicago    School       Mathematics     Project].  Retrieved,    October  31,   2005,    from
        http://everydaymath.uchicago.edu

                                                            955                                                 ICLS 2006
