                         Misconceptions in Natural Selection:
     Conceptual Change Through Time in Biology Classrooms

                         Christine Manzey, Kevin Pugh, Kristin Kelly, Victoria Stewart
                        University of Toledo, 2801 Bancroft Street, Toledo, Ohio 43606
         Email:   christine.manzey@utoledo.edu, kevin.pugh@utoledo.edu, kristin.kelly@utoledo.edu

       Abstract:  Our   findings  concurs  with   previous studies  that high  school    biology students  hold
       misconceptions explaining and applying key concepts in natural selection. We explored specific
       misconceptions prior to instruction, immediately following instruction, and five weeks later. We
       found qualitatively    distinct categories of  conceptual    understanding  suggesting    levels in the
       development   of conceptual     understanding and  tracked changes  over   time.  We  found  classroom
       practices can impact    conceptual  change,   with  students possessing   initial misconceptions   often
       developing hybrid understandings.

Theoretical Framework
       In the last few decades, the topic of conceptual change has received considerable attention (e.g., Posner,
Strike, Hewson, & Gertzog, 1982). We now know that students' existing beliefs have a significant affect on their
learning and that instruction needs to address these existing beliefs to be effective (Hewson, Beeth, Thorley, 1998).
Considerable research has investigated students' existing beliefs in regard to core science concepts. Natural selection
is one of the core concepts in biology that students have traditionally failed to grasp and have instead hung on to
their existing beliefs. Clough and Wood-Robinson (1985) found misconceptions centering around natural selection
when they interviewed 12, 14, and 16 year olds.   They contended that even young children have "well established
theories to explain inheritance" which all too frequently include the inheritance of acquired characteristics and
confusions about the term variation. Brumby (1984) studied the misconceptions that medical students had about
natural selection as they applied "intuitive Lamarckian" thought to a series of questions posing adaptive scenarios.
Even the most able science student confidently proclaimed organisms "need" to adapt to changing environments and
then pass these acquired changes to their offspring. These studies are valuable in that they identify specific
misconceptions related to natural selection and illustrate the persistence of these misconceptions. However, the
process of conceptual development over time remains unclear and researchers have yet to define levels of
conceptual understanding. This information is important to understanding the conceptual change process and
addressing practical issues such as assessment and individual student growth over time. The purpose of this study
was to define qualitatively distinct levels of conceptual understanding of natural selection and track conceptual
change from pre-instruction to post-instruction to five weeks after instruction.

Methods
       167 students (33% male, 66% female) enrolled in high school Biology courses during the spring of 2005
participated in the study. A learning assessment targeting two common misconceptions was administered prior to
instruction on adaptation and natural selection (Pre), on the exam immediately following instruction (Post), and five
weeks after instruction (Follow-up). The first misconception targeted was the belief that change in a species is the
result of individuals changing (often intentionally) to fit the needs of their environment, rather than adaptation being
the result of natural selection acting on a population (individual change misconception).  A sample question
(modified from Engel Clough &Wood-Robinson, 1985) involved pale and dark caterpillars in a forest being found
on pale and dark tree trunks. The students were asked to explain how this came about and predict what would
happen if the dark tree trunks began to change. The second misconception targeted was the belief that acquired
characteristics can be passed on to offspring (acquired traits misconception). A sample question (modified from
Brumby, 1984) involved a married couple (who were not particularly talented naturally as runners) who trained hard
to become good runners. The students were first asked whether or not the children would automatically be good
runners and then asked to make a prediction about children in this family after several generations of training.
Categories representing distinct levels of conceptual understanding were develop through a qualitative analysis. All
responses were then coded into these categories by two independent raters. Inter-rater reliability was .91 for items
targeting the individual change misconception and .88 for items targeting the acquired traits misconception.

                                                         958                                                   ICLS 2006
Findings
       Due to the limited space, here we describe the findings for the items targeting the individual change
misconception (results for items targeting the acquired traits are similar and will be presented in the poster). Five
categories emerged for these responses: (1) clear misconceptions (e.g., "The sun in the desert turned the lizards'
skin brown"), (2) misconceptions with scientific language (e.g., "They adapted to their environment. ...If the dark
trees became light then the caterpillars would become light too"), (3) misconceptions competing with correct
understanding (e.g., "The caterpillars learned to blend in with their environment...The dark caterpillars would
probably die off [if the dark tree became light] because they wouldn't be able to survive that environment"), (4)
correct but lacking explanation (e.g., "The caterpillars adapted to the tree...If the color of the tree changed the dark
caterpillars would be vulnerable to predators and die off"), and (5) correct understanding (e.g., "The caterpillars that
lived on the dark trees survived longer if they blended in with their surroundings so they were dark like the
trees....The light ones didn't survive as long because they didn't blend in, so their light-colored genes weren't
passed on, but the dark-colored genes were"). Categories 2 and 3 represent a hybridized understanding. That is, the
students adopt some of the scientific language (e.g., adapt, evolve) or recognize that when the environment changes,
unfit species will die off or become less dominant. However, they still hold onto a belief that individual organisms
change in response to the environment. A large percentage of students possessed clear misconceptions or hybridized
conceptions prior to instruction (see Figure 1). Students showed conceptual growth over time, however, many
students still held onto their misconceptions. Only about 20% were able to fully articulate an understanding of
natural selection after instruction. Detailed analysis of change over time reveals that students possessing a clear
misconception prior to instruction could achieve a correct understanding, however the majority maintained the same
level of understanding or developed a hybridized understanding. See poster for further details.

           P 50
           E
           R 40
           C
           E 30                                                                                  Pre
           NT 20                                                                                 PostFollow-up
           A 10
           G
           E   0
                      1         2              3         4          5      missing

      Figure 1. Comparison of students' understanding of natural selection at the Pre, Post, and Follow-up

Conclusions and Implications
       Our results concur with previous studies indicating that high school biology students arrive to class with
deeply held misconceptions about the mechanism of change in natural selection and acquired characteristics.    Our
study indicates (a) that conceptions of natural selection can be represented by qualitatively distinct levels and (b)
many students incorporate correct understanding of a concept into their faulty framework and construct a hybrid
understanding resulting in misapplications of fundamental principles. These results provide Biology teachers with a
framework for evaluating their students' conceptual level and understanding the process of conceptual change.

References
Brumby, M. N. (1984). Misconceptions about the concept of natural selection by medical biology students.       Science
       Education, 68(4), 493-503.
Engel Clough, E. & Wood-Robinson, C.     (1985).   How secondary students interpret instances of biological
       adaptation. Journal of biological education, 19(2), 125-130.
Hewson, P. W., Beeth, M. E. & Thorley, N. R. (1998).   Teaching for conceptual change. In B. J. K. G. Tobin (Ed.),
       International handbook of science education, part one (pp. 199-218).  London:   Kluwer Academic
       Publishers.
Posner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W., & Gertzog, W. A. (1982). Accommodation of a scientific conception:
       Toward a theory of conceptual change. Science Education, 66, 211-27.

                                                          959                                                 ICLS 2006
