                 Playshop as Space for Emergent Learning

            Yoshiro Miyata, Chukyo University, Toyota, Japan, miyata@sist.chukyo-u.ac.jp
    Nobuyuki Ueda, Doshisha Women's College of Liberal Arts, Kyoto, Japan, nueda@doshisha.ac.jp

    Abstract: We propose a framework for learning as an emergent process where everyone involved
    experiences mutual transformation. We have organized many playshops for emergent learning in
    which people can re-invent their own view of themselves, re-design their own learning environment,
    and discover new potentials in themselves and the environments. Based on a three-phase model of
    trans-cultural collaboration, we discuss and outline how such emergent learning process can be
    facilitated and sustained.

Emergent Learning in Playshops
          We need a new vision for learning in order to capture learning that goes beyond "acquisition of
predefined knowledge and skills" and beyond existing cultures in our increasingly globalized society.  We
have designed and organized many "Playshops" as "space for playful learning" based on a set of concepts
centered around "playful spirit", which means to try to create new meanings by realizing full potentials of
people and objects in any situation.  (Mudpie Unlimited, 1999, 2001) In a playshop, we view learning as
emergent: rather than making explicit goals of learning as in traditional instructional approach, we try to let a
situation emerge where everyone involved experiences mutual transformation.

          In this presentation, we try to illustrate our framework based on playshops we have organized
from 2000 to 2004 on themes ranging from music, cross-cultural collaboration, to artworks, with participants
ranging from primary school to university students. Based on analyses of these examples (Miyata et al.,
2003, 2004 for detailed discussion) we discuss the kind of learning, the processes that supported learning,
and what we have learned from these playshops.

          As Table 1 summarizes, we can understand our playshops as going through three basic phases.
The columns describe: the kind of activities we design (A); the roles the participants tend to assume (B); the
kind of interactions that tend to occur (C); the focus of the participants' awareness (D); and the ways they
tend to view themselves and other people (E).

Table 1. Summary of our framework for playshop

  Phases   (A) Activity          (B) Role          (C) Interaction     (D)Awareness         (E) View
Begin      Getting into        Participant         Communicating       Individual        Disembodied
           the mood            Passive             One-to-one          Awareness of      Individuals as
           Feel familiar       One-way                                 individual        separate
                                                                       characteristics   entities
Continue   Expressing          Facilitator         Supporting          Group             Embodied
           Make and            Help each           Help others to      Awareness of      Individuals as
           share               other               communicate         relationships     situated,
                                                                                         contextualized
Discover   Reflecting          Designer            Meta-Supporting     Whole             Reflective
           Discover,           Redesign            Help others to      Awareness of      Individuals as
           taste               relations           support others.     community         meaning
                                                                                         makers
Below, we discuss those aspects that are especially relevant to emergent learning.

(E) View: From Disembodied to Embodied/Reflective View of the Self:
      We found in each playshop that many participants experienced some kind of transformation of the
way they view music, expression, foreign countries, people, or themselves.     The transformations can be
characterized as shifting from "disembodied view", in which one views oneself as separate from other
people and objects, to "embodied or relational/emergent view" in which one views oneself as realizing one's
potential by relating to other people and objects.

(C) Interaction:  Supporting           Each    Other's      Learning:     In  online  communication   in  a

                                                      964                                                 ICLS 2006
cross-cultural collaboration, involving several high schools and universities from Taiwan and Japan, we
found that the shift to more embodied and reflective view was associated with changes in the nature of
interaction. (Miyata et al. 2005) Through the four months collaboration, increasing number of "support
expressions" were observed, which tried to facilitate communication between other, often less experienced,
members. Moreover, "meta-support expressions" increased, which tried to support "support expressions", in
both experienced and less experienced members.

(B)  Role:   Learner   as      Designer:     The   participants  of the playshop   not  only participated in the
activities provided, but also often found their own goals and roles, involved other people, and tried to design
environments in which to create something meaningful.       The participants of learning environments turned
themselves into designers of learning environments. By actively collaborating with others to create meaning,
they are motivated to create learning environment for others, which in turn becomes their own learning
environment.

Toward    a    Sustainable       Learning       Community:          Moreover,  the  act of   designing  learning
environment seems to propagate to new generations, resulting in a sustainable learning community. It is only
when the environment we create motivates the people to re-create their own environments, that such an
environment  would  become      autonomous   and   sustainable.  Such   an environment    involves not only  the
physical space or software, but also the relationships with the other people and the outside community as
critically important factors.

Reinventing people's personal theories of the self: Dweck and her associates (2000) report
that whether children(people) view intelligence as an expandable competence, or as fixed entity, structure
many aspects of people's achievement and affect regarding learning, especially the goals they try to achieve:
trying "to become smarter" vs. to "look smart".     While Dweck's study has focused on personally-oriented
theories of the self, analyses of our playshops suggest that it can be extended into socially-oriented theories.
We believe that playshop is a space and opportunity for people to redesign their view of the self, so that they
can  re-design the  relations    with other  people  and   objects  in  their own   daily environment     thereby
re-discovering their potentials.

Learning Art: In this sense, emergent learning is an artistic process to awaken the potential for learning,
by viewing one's own environment from new perspectives to discover the boundless potentials hidden there,
and create new meanings by making best use of the potentials.        In our current project "Learning Art", we
explicitly treat participating children as workshop designers for younger children.     Also, in this project, we
view learning  as a dynamic,     artistic process, which   tries to involve   the communities  surrounding   the
workshop so that people can appreciate and evaluate the learning that happens in the workshop.

References
Dweck, C.S.(2000). Self-Theories, Taylor & Francis.
Mudpie Unlimited (1999). Playful Pieces, Child Research Net
Mudpie Unlimited (2001). Connections and Emergence, Workshop in the               18th meeting of the Japanese
     Cognitive Science Society.
Miyata, Y. & Yamaguchi, T. (2003). For Embodied Self View ­ In Multi-Cultural CollaborationProceedings
     of the 4th International Conference on Cognitive Science, p431-436
Miyata, Y., Shinohara, H., Sakakibara, K. & Tsuruoka, A. (2004). Learning and support structure in a
     long-term multi-cultural    collaboration, Proceedings  of  the  21st Meeting  of  the  Japanese  Cognitive
     Science Society, p374-375
Miyata, Y.,  Ueda,  N. &      Weintraub,    H.  (2005). Learning    Support   in  Multi-Cultural   Collaboration,
     Proceedings of EdMedia 2005, Montreal

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank CAMP, Child Research Net, and MEXT for supporting this research.

                                                       965                                                    ICLS 2006
