             Metaskills of Collaborative Inquiry in Higher Education
               Hanni Muukkonen, Minna Lakkala, University of Helsinki, Dept. of Psychology, Finland
                                hanni.muukkonen@helsinki.fi, minna.lakkala@helsinki.fi

         Abstract: Even if learners' expertise is bound to a specific field of inquiry, there are generalizable
         skills and   competencies     that provide   intellectual   resources for  managing    new  problem-solving
         situations. Higher-level skills that emerge through sustained efforts of advancing knowledge may
         be called metaskills, their development being an appropriate long-term goal for higher education.
         Considering these goals, the individual, collective and knowledge-creation aspects of regulation
         of inquiry were examined within a university course.

Collective aspects of regulation of learning
         There is proposed shift to extend the cognitive (individualistic) and social (participatory) approaches on
learning towards   the   inclusion    of a  knowledge-creation   approach    (Hakkarainen,    Palonen,   Paavola,  &  Lehtinen,
2004). The knowledge-creation approach addresses the question how people develop new artefacts and products or
ways of working collaboratively over longer periods. Importantly, it concentrates on the interaction through these
common objects (or artefacts) of activity, not just between people, or within individual minds.

         The   term metaskills     is used  to  describe  metalevel   monitoring    and regulation   of academic   inquiry.    For
Hakkarainen    et al. (2004)    it refers   to higher-level  skills  that  emerge   through   sustained  efforts  of  advancing
knowledge. A way to facilitate the knowledge creation process is to provide a learning community a heuristic model
for engagement in inquiry, as in the model of progressive inquiry (Muukkonen, Lakkala, & Hakkarainen, 2005).

         The present research explores collaborative inquiry in university education by examining the collective
aspects  of regulation   of  learning,   which  are conceived    to  involve   the  exercise of metaskills. Prior  research     on
metacognition takes into consideration the individual actor's metalevel processes or working with a peer, but not the
collective metalevel work toward and through shared knowledge objects. Thus, the units of analysis of personal
epistemology and metacognition have remained firmly located in the individuals' processes. In recent research on
social metacognition, the skills required in interactions with peers have been proposed as a distinct dimension of
metacognition and co-regulation of learning (Jost, Kruglanski, & Nelson, 1998; Salomon & Perkins, 1998; Salonen,
Vauras,  &  Efklides,    2005). There    is a  need for   a more   contextualized   examination   of  metacognitive   processes
(Hofer, 2004). Thus we seek to expand from individual or peer regulation of learning towards a collective artifact-
mediated  and   contextualized     process, where   participants   monitor  and  co-regulate  the    collective process    and the
advancement of objects of inquiry besides exercising individual self-regulation.

Methods and results
         A course was designed to engage undergraduate students in inquiry practices for eleven weeks, following
the progressive inquiry framework. During face-to-face meetings, three tutors used systematic methods to facilitate
development    of the group's   research    questions  and   plans   for a collective final  report. We  carried  out a    content
analysis of  the  database   discourse     within the Future    Learning    Environment   (FLE3;     http://fle3.uiah.fi/) and  of
students' self-reflections provided at the end of the course.

         To  examine     regulation    of   collaborative   inquiry, we    employed   a  framework    that consisted    of    three
encompassing    levels:  (1) monitoring     and  regulating  individual    process, (2) monitoring   and  regulating  collective
process, and (3) monitoring and regulating efforts in knowledge building (Scardamalia, 2002) and advancement of
shared objects. We devoted the least attention to individual monitoring since it has been extensively investigated.
The second   level, the  social    interaction level, is  addressed  by   group dynamics     research or process   management
studies within learning communities. The third level, we hypothesized, would presuppose individuals' exercising
self-regulatory  skills, and require     their commitment    to work     on shared  objects  and intentionally   build     on each
other's ideas.

                                                               966                                                     ICLS 2006
        An   analysis of the database  discourse  suggested    that students' were  aiming  at question-driven   inquiry.
However, differences were found on how the collaboration succeeded in advancing collective understanding and
knowledge-creation versus simply joining separate participants' work under a common heading in the final report.
One of the three groups, distinctively, had lengthy exchanges about how they should proceed both in content and
process. Further, in this group each member at least once rewrote their report instead of merely providing a section,
which we consider evidence for a particular emphasis on a shared object of inquiry.

        For   the self-reflections,  categories  emerged   which    differentiated between   individual   and  collective
commitment,   as  well  as between   individual   and   collective  knowledge  building.   To  illustrate the  two  latter
categories, a student reflecting on her own effort wrote, "At first there was a high threshold for me to start writing
my thoughts on the computer, because I had the feeling that my thoughts were not in a ready form". In contrast, a
student reflecting on the collective knowledge building wrote, "In the final stages, we experienced moments that we
discussed the topic of our work with new concepts and were throwing ideas in the air. We explained unclear points
to each other. I feel I learned a great deal from the other students in my group."

        In sum, only a subset of students gave particular emphasis to collective knowledge building, and those who
succeeded in such collective advancement had, in their self-reflections, also devoted most reflection to the collective
process. The data provided evidence for that the students most advanced in their studies, had, on average, addressed
more often challenges of collective commitment and engagement in collective knowledge building. The students
less successful   in collective knowledge      building were,  however,  active    in explaining  how     --through  their
participation or receiving appropriate guidance-- their collective inquiry could have made more progress, suggesting
that they were considering the challenges of novel inquiry practices introduced by the course.

Conclusions
        As the course setting involved three tutors, it is not an example of an average setting for higher education.
However, the three levels for modeling metaskills helped to explicate qualitative differences in the three student
groups' collective processes and students' self-reflections. Engaging in truly collective inquiry --i.e., using collective
metaskills-- was  a  process only   partially  achieved in the  groups. Such   inquiry,  however,  may    simply  be too
challenging  an endeavor   for  such a tight   timeframe  with  unfamiliar people.    In boarder terms    the course did,
nevertheless, expose participants to practices of developing artefacts collaboratively, which provided an educational
experience on knowledge creation practices.

        To conclude, metaskills of collaborative inquiry are proposed to address commitment to collective, artifact-
mediated, and prolonged inquiry efforts, which are not reducible to individual productions. However, understanding
the characteristics of collective object-oriented inquiry and translating them to pedagogical practices call for further
theoretical and empirical research activities.

References
Hakkarainen, K., Palonen, T., Paavola, S., & Lehtinen, E. (2004). Communities of networked expertise: Professional
        and educational perspectives. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier.
Hofer, B. K. (2004). Epistemological Understanding as a Metacognitive Process: Thinking Aloud During Online
        Searching. Educational Psychologist, 39(1), 43-55.
Jost, J.T., Kruglanski, A.W., & Nelson, T.O. (1998). Social metacognition: An expansionist review. Personality and
        Social Psychology Review, 2, 137-154.
Muukkonen, H., Lakkala, M., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). Technology-mediation and tutoring: how do they shape
        progressive inquiry discourse? The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(4), 527-565.
Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1998). Individual and social aspects of learning. Review of Research of Education,
        23, 1-24.
Salonen, P., Vauras, M., & Efklides, A. (2005). Social interaction ­ What can it tell us about metacognition and
        coregulation of learning? European Psychologist, 10, 199-208.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),
        Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.

Acknowledgements
The work of the first author has been supported in part by a grant (2005) from the Finnish Work Environment Fund.

                                                           967                                                  ICLS 2006
