    Tupelo Enacted: How Teachers Shape Learning Opportunities in
                                     Middle Grades Mathematics

                           Chandra Hawley Orrill, University of Georgia, corrill@uga.edu
                    Holly Garrett Anthony, Tennessee Technical University, hanthony@tntech.edu
                                 Andrew Izsák, University of Georgia, izsak@uga.edu
                             Ernise Singleton, University of Georgia, esinglet@uga.edu

         Abstract:   Building   from  the triangle of  interactions outlined   by  Cohen   and  Ball,  this study
         considers  the  implications of  enactment   for student learning   opportunities in   three classrooms.
         Data  included   classroom   videotapes   and  teacher  interviews   that allowed  the   researchers   to
         understand the implications of three different enactments of the same open-middle mathematics
         problem. . The findings highlight implications of different implementations for the mathematical
         concepts that students had opportunities to learn in each classroom.

Background
         Research in education and psychology has demonstrated that adults and children often understand shared
experiences in very different ways, but much less is known about how teachers and their students understand shared
lessons  or how   classroom  learning occurs  as teachers'  and   students'  understandings   interact over  sequences  of
lessons. In  this poster  we adopt   Cohen  and  Ball's   (1999)  framework    of  interactions that  describes classroom
instruction as a function of interactions among teachers, students, and content as mediated in curricular materials. To
explore this framework, we consider how a single open-middle problem from the Connected Mathematics Program
(CMP; Lappan, Fey, Fitzgerald, Friel, & Phillips, 2002) called the Tupelo Township problem was enacted in three
teachers' classrooms. As with Simon and Tzur (1999), we account for teachers' practices by explaining them from
the perspectives   of the  researchers.   Our initial  research  interest was   to  understand   how     students' learning
opportunities were shaped by the teachers' enactment of the problem.

Methodology
         Data  for  this report were  collected across  one  to four days   of instruction in   each  of three  sixth-grade
classrooms. These data included all days of instruction for the task, which provided a map of a town that was
unequally   divided among    various  landowners   and    asked students  to  consider what   fraction   of the land  each
landowner held. Students had to partition the parcels of land further in order to answer this question. From our
perspective, these  problems    involve  adding  and  multiplying   fractions  but do  not  require   formal  computation
procedures.

         We   used  two  cameras  to  videotape  each  lesson:  one camera   followed  the  teacher   and one   focused on
student and teacher writing. Later the same day, we combined the video and audio using an audiovisual mixer to
create a restored view (Hall, 2000) that captured much of what each teacher and her students said and were looking
at during the lesson. We then videotaped interviews with students from each class and asked them to explain their
reasoning as they solved the problem and to comment on video segments of the lesson that we played back for them.
Finally, we videotaped teacher interviews in which we used video segments of their lessons and their students'
interviews to engage the teachers' reflections on their teaching strategies, goals, and student thinking. We analyzed
the videos using fine-grained analysis of talk, hand gestures, and drawings. These data were drawn from a larger
body of data that included these kinds of data for an entire unit of instruction lasting 6-10 weeks in each classroom.

         We analyzed data in three stages. First, during data collection we identified segments of classroom and
student interview video to include in our interview efforts. Second, we conducted a retrospective analysis using a
version of the constant comparative method described by Cobb and Whitenack (1996) for conducting longitudinal
analyses of classroom video recordings. We analyzed interview transcripts for links among teacher's instructional
actions, students' classroom activity, students' responses and subsequent activity during the interviews, and the
teacher's reactions and reflections on all of the above. Third, we focused the analysis in three key areas based on the
initial findings from the first passes through the data. These three areas were: teacher response to student difficulties

                                                           968                                                     ICLS 2006
(what happens when kids make suggestions that are different from what the teacher had in mind?); the intermediate
goals set by the teacher as part of this experience; and the skills and processes stressed in each classroom. In an
effort to understand how students were making sense of these data, we also looked for evidence of connections
among mathematical ideas.

Findings
         The Tupelo Township investigation allows for multiple approaches for reaching the solution, is exploratory
in nature,  and is cognitively   complex.   Each  of   the teachers    in this study   made  adaptations--with    the intent of
simplifying their students' work, narrowing the mathematical scope of the problem, or managing the class. Ms.
Reese  interpreted  the   investigation as  a stepping-stone   in a    path to  more   important  concepts--operations     with
fractions--and   accordingly    set   the  pace  for  her  students,    providing    intermediate    goals  and  structure   for
accomplishing   the   goal of  the  lesson. She  anticipated   student    difficulties and  organized  the  lesson to  prevent
confusion   and to  limit  time spent   on  what she   thought were    non-constructive     solution strategies. Ms.  Moseley
remained   open  to   the possibility  that her  students  could,  in   individual   groups,  reason  their way   through    the
investigation.  As  a  result, she provided   little upfront structure    but  offered  immediate    and specific feedback   to
groups. Her main task was to keep students focused on a single section of the map and on finding fractional portions
of land--she was not concerned with acreage. Unlike Ms. Reese and Ms. Moseley, the third teacher, Ms. Archer, did
not fully anticipate the challenges embedded in the investigation, and she therefore initially let the problem remain
open to students' interpretations only to guide all of the students to do it her way as they progressed through the
activity. Ms. Archer's students pursued many dead-ends that were met with guidance to "extend the lines" and led to
Ms. Archer announcing hints to prevent the rest of the class pursuing the same erroneous paths.

         In our analysis, we found important differences between classrooms (e.g., how one teacher set a series of
intermediate   goals  that limited  the   open-ended     possibilities of   the problem,    while another   left  the problem
completely open to student interpretation) and explored the mathematical implications of those differences (e.g., one
teacher told struggling students to focus on what they already knew and another told similar students to begin by
extending the lines). In so doing, we tie our results back to the interaction triangle (Cohen & Ball, 1999) noting the
nuances embedded in the triangle that have not been previously explicated and articulated. By looking at these three
cases closely, we begin to understand how teachers make sense of open-ended problems, student understanding, and
their roles as  teachers.  We    also  make   strides  toward  a  better   articulation  of the factors    impacting  teachers'
instructional decisions when teaching with open-ended problems.

References
Cobb, P., & Whitenack, J. W. (1996). A method for conducting longitudinal analyses of classroom videorecordings
         and transcripts. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 30(3), 213­228.
Cohen, D. K., & Ball, D. L. (1999). Instruction, capacity, and improvement (No. CPRE­RR­43). Philadelphia, PA:
         Consortium for Policy Research in Education.
Hall, R. (2000). Videorecording as theory. In A. E. Kelly & R. A. Lesh (Eds.), Handbook of research design in
         mathematics and science education (pp. 647­664). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lappan,  G.,  Fey,  J. T., Fitzgerald,    W., Friel,  S. N., &   Phillips,  E.  D. (2002).   Connected     mathematics  series.
         Glenview, IL: Prentice Hall.
Simon, M, & Tzur, R. (1999). Explicating the teacher's perspective from the researchers' perspectives: Generating
         accounts of mathematics teachers' practice. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 30(3), 252-
         264.

Acknowledgements
This  research  was   funded   by  the  National Science    Foundation     under  Grant   No. REC­0231879.       The  research
findings and opinions described here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF. The
authors wish to thank members of the CoSTAR team for their efforts in the data collection efforts. The authors also
extend their gratitude to the three sixth-grade teachers and their students for allowing us to learn about fractions with
them.

                                                              969                                                     ICLS 2006
