          Learning Communities and Laptops: A Design Experiment

                         Todd C. Reimer, Felicia Rader, The University of Texas, Austin, Texas
          Department of Curriculum & Instruction, 1 University Station Stop D6500 Austin, Texas 78712
                               Email: t-reimer@mail.utexas.edu, frader@mail.utexas.edu

         Abstract:    In order   to  create a technologically     fluent community    of  learners, one  College   of
         Education implemented a Laptop Initiative for pre-service teachers. The laptop requirement was a
         design   experiment   created   to form   a community     of practice   within the College   of   Education,
         centered around ubiquitous computing and situating technology use into the classroom practice.
         The experiences of a cohort of foreign language pre-service teachers are highlighted as an example
         of this situated community of practice.

Introduction
         This poster focuses on a "design experiment" (Brown, 1992; Collins, 1992; Collins, Joseph, and Bielaczyc,
2004) in the form of a laptop initiative for pre-service educators set forth by a College of Education at a major
research institution in the American Southwest.

Needs Assessment
         The  laptop  requirement      came about  for primarily   two   reasons  within  the College   of Education:  (1) the
administration  recognized    the need   to prepare   future   teachers  to meet  state technology   competencies,    (2) they
perceived a disconnect between the existing computing tools course and using technology as an integrated part of
one's teaching practice.    Research    indicates  pre-service    teachers  are not being  prepared  adequately   to  integrate
technology   in their teaching.      A 1995   study  by the    Office of   Technology   Assessment    and  a national  survey
conducted by Morsund and Bielefeldt (1999) reported the stand-alone courses offered in the majority of university
teacher preparation programs were not as effective as integrated approaches to technology training.             Both studies
indicated pre-service    teacher programs    were  not training   future  teachers  adequately due   to the  types of courses
offered, the lack of faculty modeling and use, and lack of use in field experiences.          By the fall of 2003 there were
13.6 million computers in schools, creating a ratio of 1 computer for every 4 students (Cattagni, 2001).           Despite the
availability of computers,    emerging    research   indicates technology   is  being systemically  underutilized  (Tyack   &
Cuban, 1995; Cuban, Kirkpatrick, & Peck, 2001).        These authors consistently found that teachers use technologies to
enhance   regular instruction,   but rarely use  technology    to transform  their  teaching.  Instead, these authors report
teachers  made  infrequent  and   limited   use of  computers   and   typically  used computers  to  maintain  and   reinforce
current classroom practices.

Design Solution: The Laptop Initiative
         The  Laptop   Initiative   was  created  to form a    community    of  practice  within the  College  of  Education,
centered around ubiquitous computing and situating technology use into the classroom practice (Lave & Wenger,
1991; Rogoff, 1994).     Every student enrolled in the pre-service program was required to purchase a laptop.              The
entire education building was made wireless, allowing students and faculty to use their laptops anywhere in the
building or surrounding areas.      The college's technology center was re-organized so students and faculty would be
supported "just in time" via a student help-desk.      A support-center was created for faculty, providing instructional
staff to model and support ways technology can be incorporated into one's teaching practice.               Additionally, other
resources such as access to online tutorials for individualized learning and peripheral equipment were secured so
students could utilize their laptops as part of their pre-service teaching requirement.         The computing tools course
was phased    out and    each faculty   within  the  college   became    responsible  for integrating   technology   into their
curricula. By providing both students and faculty with equal access to technology and support, the administration
wants each   pre-service  cohort    to form a  learning community     (Brown     &  Campione,   1996;   Bielaczyc  &  Collins,
1999), sharing their collective struggles and successes integrating technology into their classroom practice.              The
Laptop Initiative  is based   largely  on a  pedagogical  model    of learning   via enculturation, or  legitimate peripheral
participation (Lave & Wenger, 1991), with faculty and pre-service teachers experimenting with ways to integrate
technology both at the university and out in the schools.

                                                               974                                                   ICLS 2006
Findings and Discussion
          The data reported in this poster was collected as part of a year-long qualitative study during the end of the
second and beginning of the third year of the Laptop Initiative.   The study focused on a cohort of pre-service foreign
language teachers and their computer experiences in the field during student teaching.        In order to document the
entire design experiment, from development through implementation, administrators and faculty were interviewed
and observed throughout this time.    The findings are preliminary due to on-going efforts to analyze this large data
set and triangulate developing assertions with study participants.

          Of the pre-service foreign language teachers participating in the study, the portability of the laptop was
most often mentioned as a positive feature of the college's initiative.    During student teaching, they reported using
their laptops for researching lesson ideas, investigating cultural information, and creating lesson plans.   There were
two other uses of the laptop frequently reported during student teaching:        (1) computer-based activities for their
students utilizing the Internet for research, and (2) in-class grammar presentations using the laptop. The ways in
which the  pre-service   teachers used their  laptops have  been   reflective of the models  observed   from  university
courses and faculty modeling. However, many of the pre-service teachers report never taking their laptop to school.
Repeatedly, the pre-service teachers commented that knowing how to use the computer does not equal knowing how
to use the computer to teach.  In the field, the pre-service teachers felt restricted in their student teaching because of
either a lack of school computer resources, or due to working with teachers who did not use computers in their
practice.  More   significantly,  many  participants report not  being adequately    prepared in  their content area to
integrate technology in ways appropriate for the subject.    In conclusion, the ways that pre-service teachers report
using technology   at the  university may  be beginning  to transform   their  practice; however,  how  this developing
expertise is being transferred to their field experiences is inconclusive.

Next Steps
          At this stage  of analysis, this study indicates  simply  requiring  each  student to  purchase a  laptop and
providing institutional support does not ensure technology usage will be situated in the field outside of the college.
If pre-service teachers   are to  become   technologically  fluent in their   teaching practice, their experiences  with
technology must go beyond the community of practice established within the walls of the college. In particular,
more research needs to be conducted in how technology is being integrated into pre-service teachers subject matter
classes, outside of the College of Education at the university level. Additionally, the design experiment needs to be
revised to include providing support for schools and teachers supporting the pre-service teachers in the field as part
of their student teaching.

References
Brown, A., & Campione, J. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments. In L.
          Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in Learning:    New environments for education (pp. 289-325).
          Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cattagni, A., & Farris Westat, E. (2001). Internet Access in U.S. Public Schools and Classrooms: 1994-2000. U.S.
          Department of Education Office of Educational Research and Improvement.
Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design Research: Theoretical Issues and Methodological Issues.
          The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.
Cuban, L., Kirkpatrick, H., & Peck, C. (2001). High access and low use of technologies in high school classrooms:
          Explaining an apparent paradox. American Educational Research Journal, 38(4), 813-834.
Cuban, L., & Tyack, D. (1995). Tinkering Toward Utopia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
          University Press.
Moursund, D., & Bielefeldt, T. (1999). Will New Teachers be Prepared to Teach in a Digital Age? A National
          Survey on Information Technology in Teacher Education: Milken Exchange on Education Technology.
Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners. Mind, Culture, and Activity,
          1(4), 209-229.
Teachers and Technology: Making the Connection. (No. OTA-EHR-616)(1995). Washington D.C.: U.S. Congress,
          Office of Technology Assessment.

                                                           975                                                 ICLS 2006
