                         A Comprehension Tool for Mathematics?:
                The Math Forum@Drexel's Online Mentoring Guide

                            K. Ann Renninger, Lillian S. Ray, Ilana Luft, Erica L. Newton,
                           Swarthmore College, 500 College Ave., Swarthmore, PA, 19081
     Email: krennin1@swarthmore.edu, lsray1@gmail.com, ilanaluft@yahoo.com, erical1813@gmail.com

       Abstract: Two studies of the Math Forum's Online Mentoring Guide (OMG) address whether and
       how online comprehension tools might support mathematics learning. In Study 1, the culture of
       the   preservice  teachers'  (PTs') mathematics    classroom and   their work    with the OMG     and   its
       impact on their developing comprehension of mathematics and mentoring is described.            In Study
       2, the impact of content-informed scaffolding of PTs' work with the OMG is investigated.

Introduction
       Nason      and  Woodruff     (2004)  recently  suggested   that  computer    supported    collaborative     learning
environments have been unsuccessful in their support of mathematics learning because they do not include rich
problems    and tools that support  the development   of  comprehension.   Given  the   identified  ability of the  online
environment to both engage and provide a source of direct dissemination of reform practices to teachers (Renninger
& Shumar,    2004), the  potential to develop online  comprehension    tools for mathematics   seems   likely. The   open
question is of what such tools need to consist.   In order to explore this question, two studies of preservice teachers'
(PTs') work with the Math Forum's Online Mentoring Guide (OMG, mathforum.org), a research and development
project, were undertaken.   The studies focus on elementary and middle school PTs' use of the OMG and both their
mathematical content knowledge and their ability to scaffold solutions to nonroutine challenge problems online. In
particular, three questions are addressed:    (a) Can PTs  who    have weak   mathematics    skills assess  strengths and
weaknesses   of pupil  submissions  and  use this information  to mentor  effectively?   (b) Given some weakness in
mathematics, are PTs' abilities to mentor mediated by their level of interest for mathematics or their stance toward
problem solving? (c) And, what would an online mentoring guide need to provide in order to support PTs to develop
their mathematics abilities and be an effective collaborative mathematics comprehension tool?

Background on the OMG
       The      OMG   is an asynchronous    collaborative tool for  supporting   PTs to  learn   how  to  provide   online
scaffolding to elementary pupils working with nonroutine challenge problems, as a way to help PTs to learn how to
scaffold their future students. Lessons in the OMG each include a 4-phase process of doing, reflecting/discussing,
interacting with  an   experienced  mentor,  and  synthesizing the  experience   of  the previous   three   phases.  After
completing the lessons in the OMG, PTs are assigned elementary student submissions (threads) to the Math Forum's
Fundamental Problem of the Week (FunPoW) to scaffold.         PTs draft a response to the solution, which is read over
by an approver who either sends it back to the PT with feedback about the needed revisions or sends it on to the
elementary student. All data from PT work is archived, allowing analysis of both the process of this work and its
outcomes.

Design
       Two studies of the OMG are reported.        In the first, 27 PTs' (2M, 25 F) online work with the OMG and
class assignments were studied to describe the culture of their classroom.    In the second, an intervention conducted
with students from the same university in the same course during the following year, one half of the PTs (14: 14 F)
served as controls and were approved by their professor as they were in Study 1, and one half of the PTs (14: 2M, 12
F) were scaffolded by trained mentors using a content-informed scaffolding rubric in which mathematics provided
the basis of the exchange (Renninger, Ray, Luft, & Newton, 2006).

Results and Discussion
       In    Study  1, combined    methods   were  employed   to  address the   culture of the   preservice  mathematics
classroom and its impact on what PTs might need from an online extension of the classroom. The problem-solving
stance, or mathematical beliefs, of this group of PTs suggests that their prior experience of mathematics has led
them to focus on accuracy (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2003).     They are, as a group, in need of support to develop their

                                                          976                                                   ICLS 2006
mathematical content knowledge (Hill, Rowen, & Ball, 2004).         While working together on problem solving in the
classroom   provides  the PTs    with important   and/or needed    support  for  mathematics   and    problem  solving,  the
professor comments that the OMG allows her to push the PTs further than she could if she were not using the OMG
as part of the course.   This feedback, coupled with findings indicating that (a) on exam problems the professor
provides the PTs with the methods they should use to set up and solve the problems independently; and (b) the
professor gives  the  PTs  high  grades   when   they follow  through   to  do  what she   suggests,   indicates that more
consistent support for scaffolding in the online environment may help PTs to develop their understanding of and
readiness to scaffold the elementary students' work with the FunPoW.

         In Study 2, combined methods were employed to consider the impact of content-informed scaffolding on
PTs' mathematical thinking and scaffolding of elementary students. Findings from this intervention indicate that
target PTs experienced gains in mentoring and control PTs did not.       Analysis of target PTs' scaffolding reveals that
they learned to respond to two groups of students: those who had little idea of what a problem asked or those who
had a full understanding of the problem. Their abilities to work with elementary students who had only a basic
understanding of the FunPoW did not change. Given that in the OMG the PTs were provided with a number of
possible solution  strategies, this finding   appears to reflect their  own limited  understanding     of mathematics   and
ability to do the types of error analysis required. While the target PTs' work with FunPoWs from the beginning of
the course to the end of the course suggests increases in mathematical thinking, they did not reach significance.
Patterns of PT performance appear to be mediated by interest for mathematics and problem-solving stance (see Ray
& Renninger, in preparation).

         To   summarize,   answers    to  the questions  guiding   the  two  studies suggest     that (a)  PTs   with weak
mathematics skills are not very effective at assessing strengths and weaknesses of pupil submissions and using this
information to scaffold.  However, targeted mathematical scaffolding does support them to improve the quality of
their scaffolding; (b) PTs' abilities to scaffold are constrained by their interest for mathematics and their stance
toward problem solving; and (c) changes to three aspects of the OMP appear warranted: (1) the professor could
make  work    with the OMG     congruent    with  classroom   practice, (2) the  students  could  be   assigned  additional
mentored work with the FunPoW prior to working with the OMG, and (3) online modules might be developed to
accompany the OMG, which would provide support for PTs to develop their mathematics skills through work with
specific problem content, error analysis, and live scaffolding.    Importantly, the PTs and professors in both studies
reported liking work with the OMG and recommended its use in subsequent classes.           Thus, despite the challenges of
its mathematical   content, these   data  suggest that   the OMG    has  good    potential as a  tool  for   comprehension
monitoring.   Considering   that PTs  who   received  mathematical   scaffolding  improved    in their own   scaffolding of
mathematics, it seems possible that with appropriate modules in place, the OMP could become a powerful online
comprehension tool for mathematics.

References
Bereiter  C., &  Scardamalia,    M.   (2003).  Learning  to  work   creatively  with knowledge.       In  E. De  Corte,  L.
     Verschaffel, N. Entwistle, & J. van Merriënboer (Eds.), Powerful learning environments: Unravelling basic
     components and dimensions (pp. 55-68).      New York: Pergamon
Hill, H. C., Rowan, B., & Ball, D. (2005). Effects of teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching on student
     achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 42(2), 371- 406.
Nason, R., & Woodruff, E. (2004). Online collaborative learning in mathematics: Some necessary innovations. In T.
     Roberts (Ed.), Online collaborative learning: Theory and practice (pp. 103-131). London: Infosci.
Ray,  L. S.   & Renninger,  K.   A.   (in preparation).  Preservice    teachers' readiness  to   engage   content-informed
     scaffolding for mathematics: Interest and mathematical beliefs as explanatory constructs.
Renninger, K. A., Ray, L. S., Luft, I., & Newton, E. L. (2006).    Coding online scaffolding of mathematical thinking.
     Special issue, New Ideas in Psychology.
Renninger, K. A. & Shumar, W. (2004). The centrality of culture and community to participant learning at and with
     the Math Forum. In S. Barab, J. Grey, & R. Kling (Eds.), Designing for virtual communities in the service of
     learning (pp. 60-95). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgements
We appreciate the assistance of Math Forum staff members Claire Meade and Annie Fetter and the participating PTs
and their professors. Support for this study was provided by National Science Foundation Grant #9618223.

                                                             977                                                  ICLS 2006
