    Justification of Socioscientific Claims as the Basis for Assessing
                                                   Argumentation

                                            Troy D. Sadler, University of Florida
                     2403 Norman Hall, PO Box 117048, Gainesville, FL 32611 tsadler@ufl.edu

         Abstract: This investigation introduces a novel rubric for the assessment of argumentation quality
         relative to socioscientific issues and presents results from a field test of its application. Forty-five
         students  participated    in interviews   designed    to  elicit socioscientific argumentation      regarding
         genetic   engineering  issues.  A   five point    rubric was  developed   to assess  how    well  individuals
         justified the claims they advanced. Implications for the use of this tool for advancing research
         agendas in the learning sciences will be discussed.

         Toulmin's (1958) philosophical exploration of argumentation has had profound impacts on the study and
assessment   of  argumentation  particularly    with  respect  to science  education.   Toulmin's    Argument   Pattern   (TAP)
provides   a framework   for   analyzing    argument    structure  and specifies  features  such   as claims,  data,   warrants,
backings, and rebuttals. TAP has served as the primary analytic tool for many (probably most) studies which have
sought to  evaluate  the quality   of  arguments   offered     by students  in scientific and socioscientific   contexts  (e.g.,
Osborne, Erduran, & Simon, 2004; Sadler & Zeidler, 2005). Despite its frequent use, TAP presents a number of
methodological limitations. Chief among the problems associated with TAP is the ambiguous nature of argument
structures identified by TAP (Osborne, et al., 2004; Kelly, Druker & Chen, 1998). Distinguishing what counts as
data, warrants, and backings can be particularly tricky leaving the reliability of TAP-based assessment schemes
questionable. Some of the most recent advances in the application of TAP to science education (Osborne et al.,
2004) have minimized the problems associated with the ambiguity of argument structures by collapsing the most
problematic categories (i.e., data, warrants, and backings) and focusing heavily on the emergence of rebuttals. While
this approach is certainly powerful for some research contexts, it presents its own methodological limitation in that it
can only be applied to group discussions.
         Research    focused   on  group    discourse   is certainly  important  for  the  study   of  science  education  and
argumentation;   however,   it typically    positions a  group,   and  not an  individual  as the    unit of analysis. In some
instances, particularly in the current era of scientifically-based research, it is necessary to gauge individual student
aptitude, epistemic orientation, and progress. If argumentation is a key element to scientific literacy and educators
need methods for documenting change in the scientific literacy of individual students, which they surely do given
the calls for evidence-based research, then assessment schemes which reliably evaluate the quality of arguments
offered by individual students is necessary. This study proposes such an assessment scheme and applies it in order to
answer questions relative to factors which influence socioscientific argumentation.

Methods
         The development of the assessment scheme was grounded in Kuhn's (1991) work on informal reasoning
and argumentation,   Osborne    et    al.'s (2004) modifications    of    TAP, and  the   author's   previous work   related to
socioscientific  argumentation     (Sadler  &   Zeidler, 2005).   Participants  were  engaged     in interviews  and   asked to
articulate positions in response   to  three    genetic engineering   issues (gene  therapy   for Huntington's   disease, gene
therapy to improve intelligence, and reproductive cloning). The discussion of each scenario was preceded by a short
written description providing details and context. An interviewer provided additional verbal prompts to encourage
participants  to articulate a  position     and justification. Responses    to each  of the   three  scenarios  were   analyzed
according to justification themes.
         Forty-five interviews were conducted with individuals in both high school and college. Fifteen high school
students participated along with 15 non-science major college students and 15 college students majoring in biology.
An a priori framework, based on results of previous work, was used to establish the basis of the argumentation
quality rubric, and inductive analyses of the data were employed in order to refine the rubric and clarify distinctions
among levels within the rubric. Inter-rater reliability exceeded 90%.

Results
         Table   1 presents    the argumentation      assessment   rubric  and  interview  excerpts    representative  of each
category.

                                                               978                                                     ICLS 2006
Table 1. Argumentation quality rubric
Score - Description     Excerpt
0 - No justification    In response to the reproductive cloning scenario: "Yes, I think so [reproductive
                        cloning should be developed]."
1 - Justification       In response to the gene therapy for Huntington's Disease scenario: "If they can
with no grounds         stop someone from suffering, then sure."
2 - Justification       In response to the reproductive cloning scenario: I don't think it's right because if
with simple             you're not able to have a child, it's not God's will.          If God wants you to have a
grounds                 child, you should have a child, and you will have a child.            But if it's not for you to
                        have a child, I mean, I think you shouldn't tamper with it.
3 - Justification       In response to the gene therapy for intelligence scenario: "They will develop a
with elaborated         dichotomy even more so than we see now with the rich and poor. Now we will
grounds                 have the smart vs. the stupid or those who can afford this procedure and those who
                        cannot.   And   that    will create  all kinds  of sociological    problems.   I  think  that is
                        meddling too much."
4 - Justification       In response to the gene therapy for Huntington's Disease scenario: "I think that
with elaborated         gene therapy, it should be actually used very sparingly because what it does is
grounds and a           narrows   the   diversity--like     everyone   gets the     good   copy now    so  that   is not
counter-position        necessarily good because then we do not have a backup for anything.               But in cases
                        like this, where the only cure would be replacing the actual gene, then it could be
                        beneficial... If there are no other treatments for it, that would be the only way that I
                        would support using gene therapy for something like that...

Conclusions & Educational Significance
        If argumentation is to become a significant aspect of science education as advocated in progressive calls for
the enhancement of science education, then researchers require tools for documenting the effectiveness of curricula
and pedagogies.   Likewise,   teachers require  tools for documenting    individual  student  growth  and success.   The
assessment scheme developed as a part of this study provides such a tool. It does not provide assessment of all
aspects of  argumentation  (and  given  the  complexity   of argumentation  a  single  strategy  for doing  so is  likely
impossible), but  it does provide a    tool for the  evaluation  of justifications offered in support of claims,   which
represents a fundamental aspect of argumentation. In this particular study, the rubric was applied to interview data,
but it could also be used with data collected through classroom conversations, writing assignments, or technology
enhanced argumentation opportunities.

References
Kelly, G. J., Drucker, S., & Chen, K. (1998). Students' reasoning about electricity: Combining performance
        assessment     with   argumentation     analysis. International  Journal    of Science   Education,    20,   849-
        871.
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Osborne, J., Erduran, S., & Simon, S. (2004). Enhancing the quality of argumentation in school science.
        Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41, 994-1020.
Sadler,  T.  D., &   Zeidler, D. L. (2005).     The   significance  of content     knowledge   for informal reasoning
        regarding socioscientific issues. Science Education, 89, 71-93.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

                                                           979                                                 ICLS 2006
