Personalized Identity, Mentoring and Mathematical Conversation: The
                         Math Forum's Online Mentoring Project

                   Wesley Shumar, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104, wes@drexel.edu

           Abstract: Drawing on current thinking about identity, social group boundary and informational
           technology, the research presented in this poster discusses a unique online interactive project at
           the Math Forum called The Online Mentoring Project. The importance of this work for digital
           libraries will be highlighted.

The OMG
The  Online  Mentoring   Project  (OMP)    at The  Math  Forum    developed  a curriculum   structure   called the Online
Mentoring    Guide (OMG)     where    pre-service  teachers learn   to think about  math    problems    and the    idea of
mathematical thinking. They then learn to mentor by first mentoring each other followed by instruction on how The
Math Forum thinks about mentoring. Finally, they have a "pre-field" experience mentoring K-12 students in The
Math Forum's Problem of the Week (PoW) environment and reflect upon their mentoring experience.

Theory: Hybrid Social Worlds
The Internet has made possible the transformation of social space such that individuals can craft the spaces in which
they operate and the times that are convenient for them to operate.     This space/time transformation makes possible
the re-imagination  of  the community      that one operates   within  and the   identity that one presents    within that
community (Shumar & Renninger, 2002).         The transformation of social space brought about by brining the online
world into communication with the f2f world is at the center of the vision of the OMP.

Learning and Identity Work
Digital libraries can be used by people to reorganize their social lives in new ways allowing them to "personalize"
the communities to which they belong (Wellman, 2001). Further the transformation of the learning space that an
interactive digital library allows makes it possible for teachers and students to rethink their identity as learners as
part of the learning process (Cobb and Hodge, 2003).        Central to the process of learning for students (perhaps as
well as teachers) is a process of boundary crossing and identity work where one has to safely imagine oneself as a
valuable  member   of  a community    of   practice in  order  to collaboratively construct    knowledge  with   an other
(Anderson, 1991; Cobb and Hodge, 2003; Harlen and Doubler, 2004).           In this way an individual's knowledge can
grow rather than being channeled into a struggle to maintain an identity in the face of an uncaring system.

Method
Modeled after much design-based research project (Design-based Research Collective, 2003; Hoadley, 2002) the
OMP   collected  survey  data from  pre-service   teachers  after they used  the  Online  Mentoring   Guide    (OMG)    the
curriculum unit that linked pre-service teachers to the Math Forum's Problem of the Week (PoW) environment.
Further, staff members of the OMP discussed in detail and regularly the experiences of the pre-service teachers with
the university faculty who were supervising the teachers. The university faculty themselves took an "approver's
version"  of the OMG    so  that they would   have  direct experience  with  the guide their   students used.   They also
approved the mentoring work of their students and so were directly involved in the mentoring experiences of their
students.  OMP staff met regularly taking the survey results from students who used the guide and interview data
from the faculty to think about the potential impact of online curriculum units like the OMG on f2f courses in math
education.

Discussion
For many pre-service teachers, especially elementary teachers, the OMG instills them with a sense of confidence
around math and technology. Further they get an opportunity to think deeply and critically about mentoring, math
and technology. Feedback from pre-service teachers suggests that online environments like the OMG not only can
train students efficiently but it allows them an opportunity to connect with a different kind of community of practice,
in  this instance  The   Math    Forum.   Those   kinds of  connections,   coupled  with    increased   opportunities   for

                                                           984                                                   ICLS 2006
communication, create the potential for students like the pre-service teachers to overcome their fear and resistance to
learning and engage with others in new and productive kinds of ways. While the OMG helped students with their
confidence in math and technology, evaluation has shown that problem solving skills and mathematical thinking has
not improved much (Renninger et al., 2006). This is not surprising in that the goal of the OMG was originally just
to provide training in mentoring. And yet it is clear that mentoring and content-knowledge cannot be separated.
Future versions of the guide are  being planned that would    include new problem      writing  and problem solving
components to further enhance the ability of the online world to positively impact f2f classes.

References
Anderson, B. (1991). Imagined Communities: reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism. London; New
   York: Verso.
Cobb, P. & Hodge, L. L. (2003). Students' Construction of Identities as Doers of Mathematics in the Context of
   Statistical Data Analysis. Talk presented as part of the session Identity, Equity and Mathematical Learning in
   the Context of Statistical Data. Chicago, IL. American Educational Research Association, April 23, 2003.
Design-Based Research Collective (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educational inquiry.
   Educational Researcher 32(1)5-8.
Harlen, W. & Doubler, S. (2004). Can teachers learn through inquiry on-line? International Journal of Science
   Education, 26:1, 1- 21.
Hoadley, C. P. (2002). Creating context: Design-based research in creating and understanding CSCL. Proceedings
   of Computer Support for Cooperative Learning (CSCL) Boulder, CO.
Renninger, K. A. et al. (2006). A Comprehension Tool for Mathematics?: The Math Forum@Drexel's Online
   Mentoring Guide. Poster presentation at ICLS to be published in the Conference Proceedings of ICLS 2006.
Shumar, W. & Renninger, K. A. (2002). On Conceptualizing Community. In K. A. Renninger & W. Shumar (Eds.)
   Building Virtual Communities: Learning and Change in Cyberspace. NY: Cambridge University Press.
Wellman, B. (2001). Physical place and CyberPlace: The rise of personalized networking. International Journal of
   Urban and Regional Research, 25.

Acknowledgments
National Science Foundation funding to The Math Forum (grant #0127516) supported the work overviewed in this
poster. Interpretation of these data does not necessarily represent the views of the National Science Foundation. Our
thanks to the Math Forum at Drexel staff for their continued support on this project.

                                                        985                                                  ICLS 2006
