       Facilitating Social Creativity through Collaborative Designing
 Pirita Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, Savonlinna Department of Teacher Education, University of Joensuu, P.O. Box 86,
                         Savonlinna, Finland, Email: Pirita.seitamaa-hakkarainen@joensuu.fi
        Uotila, Minna, Faculty of Arts, University of Lapland, P.O. Box 122, SF-96101 Rovaniemi, Finland
                                            Email: minna.uotila@ulapland.fi

         Abstract. The present study introduces the "Facilitating Social Creativity through Collaborative
         Designing" project, an undertaking aimed at developing and testing Virtual Design Studios (VDS)
         in education    and  professional  communities.     VDS   is  a  pedagogical   approach   supported     by
         collaborative technologies, focused on engaging learners in the co-design of various artefacts. The
         present poster provides a synthesis of results concerning multiple design experiments regarding
         VDS at the elementary, higher educational and professional levels. The reviewed data generally
         support  the usefulness  and   benefits  of  VDS,   and  indicate the  areas  where  improvements     are
         desirable.

Introduction
         Virtual and   networked    working   practices,  which   allow   sharing   of expertise  and    competencies,    are
becoming more and more common, both in workplaces and in education. The increased need to rely on information
networks and virtual design studios (VDS) is likely to radically transform the work of designers and students. 'VDS'
refers to a computer-supported environment or www-based resource that allows communities separated by time and
space to work   with  shared  design  objects  (Maher  et  al., 2000). The   purpose   of the project "Facilitating  Social
Creativity  through  Collaborative  Designing"    was  to   develop   pedagogical   practices  and   models   that  promote
collaborative designing  in   education and   in  the  practices  of professional   design, and   to gather   data  on their
fruitfulness and efficacy, as well as participants' experiences in the design process in this new medium (Lahti et al.,
2004). The project examined how social creativity can be integrated by means of probe collaboration models and
tools supporting distributed  work.   More  generally,   the present  investigators developed   virtual  design   studios  in
education  according  to the  following  objectives;  1) to  develop  and  implement    authentic and  meaningful    design
contexts in VDS, 2) facilitate creation of shared design ideas in design teams, 3) support participation of end users in
VDS, 4) provide expert-support for the virtual design process, 5) create scaffolds for design thinking based on a
progressive inquiry   model,  and  6) carry   out empirical   case   studies at the elementary,   higher  educational     and
professional levels, to gather data on the effects and effectiveness of the VDS's and document their process.

Longitudinal studies at the elementary level
         The first longitudinal school project at elementary level was organized in close collaboration between the
class teacher and the  researchers.  The aim   of the  "Artifact  project"   (Seitamaa-Hakkarainen    et al., 2004)  was   to
create a collaborative knowledge-building culture in an elementary education setting and to develop knowledge-
building practices by using a progressive-inquiry model. The aim of the second school project, the "Architecture
project", was to continue to use the knowledge building practices in students' collaborative design process. In the
second  project  the students  participated in architects'   professional  working  practices  and   engage   in solving  an
authentic and challenging design task. In the school projects, both the material and the conceptual aspects of artifacts
were  productively   involved. The   parallel  pursuit of   these two  aspects   of artifacts was    greatly  facilitated by
Knowledge Forum (KF), a computer-supported environment that helped to put students' ideas into the center of
discussion (Scardamalia, 1999).
Design experiments at higher education
         The first VDS experiment in higher education focused on examining how the progressive inquiry model of
collaborative designing (see Seitamaa-Hakkarainen et al. 2001) bears fruit in these settings. Collaborative computer
use, working to produce shared artefacts, characterizes advancement of designing in VDS (Seitamaa-Hakkarainen et
al., in press). In addition, the researchers were interested in how members of design teams develop shared design
ideas and organize their collaborative activity within VDS. The second VDS experiment focused on examining the
role of participatory design in design education. The researchers looked at what roles users come to have in design
process. In the third experiment, researchers looked for means of integrating support of domain experts as a part of

                                                            986                                                    ICLS 2006
VDS. The aim was to analyze how the virtual design studio supports multi-professional design teams in order to
achieve mutual understanding and transform design ideas into desired products.

Professional designing
        In professional level collaborative design, we carried out studies through the "Intelligent Clothing Design
Project", which was divided into three main phases: design, prototyping and evaluation of the concept. The project
provided an opportunity to explore an authentic collaborative design process in which the end-users of the product
also participated. In the concept-design   phase,  the objective   was to examine  how   end-users  and experts could
participate in the concept-design process in VDS. The researchers were interested in what role the VDS would play
in the communication with the design-team members and the kinds of collaborative processes taking place between
the team members. Another goal was to use the VDS to experiment with ways of representing the concept so as to
get feedback from team members. In the prototyping phase, the study examined how the VDS would facilitate the
prototyping process   and communication     between  members     of the   prototyping team,  design team,  and project
personnel. In the concept evaluation phase, the intent was to inquire how the visual prototype and representation
would succeed in taking the evaluation process forward and in how informative the visual prototype was in terms of
the concept's functional, expressive and aesthetic properties. In addition, the research studied how usable the actual
visual representation was,    as seen from the end-users' and   the researchers' points of   view.  We summarize the
findings in the next section.

Summary of Results; Conclusions
        The students and professionals involved in team-related activities during the processes of design undertake
complex multifaceted activities. As design projects become more complex, relationships and roles become more
varied. The extent and character of virtual design can be affected a number of variables, including the distance
between members, the length of time the virtual team has functioned together, and the experience with technical
skills of the team members. The research findings revealed that the mode of collaboration can vary from constant to
intermittent collaboration. Further, the results showed that there are various ways to implement user-centered or
participatory design in VDS. The design experiments provided evidence that it is important for the design process
that students and participants construct a coherent design context and specify design constraints by structuring the
process iteratively, together. The collaborative design process is not just designing the products, but also jointly
designing the process itself. In all, the findings of the various design experiments provide a clearer understanding of
the implications for working collaboratively in the VDS and evidence regarding desired outcomes. The collaborative
virtual design process is different from traditional team-work. The differences between traditional team-work and
virtual design team are encapsulated in collaboration between participants when creating a new artefact, creating
sharable externalizations and organizing the process. Our evidence shows areas where further improvements are
desirable. In further studies, we need to analyze participants' situational awareness, styles and strategies in order to
improve virtual design. Further, we will need to deepen our understanding of how to motivate the end-users and
experts to actively participate in the participatory design processes, and how to get end-users' and other experts'
implicit knowledge into an explicit form using the VDS.

References
Lahti, H.,  Seitamaa-Hakkarainen,       P. &   Hakkarainen,     K.  (2004).  Collaboration    patterns  in computer-
        supported collaborative designing. Design Studies, 25/4, 351-371.
Maher, M. L., Simoff, S. J. & Cicognani, A.: 2000, Understanding Virtual Design Studios, Springer-
        Verlag, London.
Scardamalia,  M.    (1999)    Moving    ideas  to  the  center.    In  L. Harasim     (Ed.), Wisdom     &  Wizardry:
        Celebrating the pioneers of online education (pp. 14-15).Vancouver, BC: Telelearning Inc.
Seitamaa-Hakkarainen,      P.,   Engeström,    R., Kangas,     K.,  Bollström-Huttunen,      M., &  Hakkarainen,   K
        (2004) The Artifact Project: Hybrid Knowledge Building in a Networked Learning Environment.
        A paper presented the Scandinavian Summer Cruise at the Baltic Sea, June 18-21, 2004.
Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P, Lahti, H. & Hakkarainen, K. (2005, in press) Three Design Experiments for
        Computer Supported Collaborative Design. Art, Design and Communication in Higher
        Education.
Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., Raami, A., Muukkonen, H., & Hakkarainen, K. (2001). Computer-support for
        collaborative designing. International Journal of Technology and Design Education, 11, 181-202.

                                                           987                                                ICLS 2006
