   Learning Science by Participating in Design: A Case Where Multiple
              Design Subgoals Interfere with Systematic Progress

                    Eli M. Silk and Christian D. Schunn, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
                                        Email: esilk@pitt.edu, schunn@pitt.edu

         Abstract: Two contrasting teams were analyzed qualitatively in a science unit in which students
         collaborate in teams to learn science concepts through a design project. The unit was focused on
         learning concepts of electricity by designing an electronic alarm system. The difference in the
         success of one of the teams to learn the science content can be attributed to their ability to focus
         systematic efforts on exploring one lower-level design goal at a time.

Introduction
         There are an increasing number of science education researchers who investigate the use of classroom
design projects as a method for learning science (Fortus, Dershimer, Krajcik, Marx, & Mamlok-Naaman, 2004;
Puntambekar & Kolodner, 2005). We further elaborate on the conditions necessary for students to learn science
through design by investigating an eighth grade science unit in which students learn about the nature of electricity
by working in teams to design an electrical alarm system. The task is both open-ended, as each team chooses their
own alarm to design based on a personal need from their everyday lives, and authentic, as electronics components
and electricity concepts are, for the most part, only introduced when they are useful for solving particular design
challenges. In general, we have observed that students who participate in this unit are more engaged, improve their
design process skills, and learn more abstract knowledge of the physics of electricity than students who engage in a
more traditional scripted inquiry approach (Mehalik, Doppelt, & Schunn, 2005). Despite these successes, some
students who participate in the unit acquire considerably more knowledge of the science content than others. In
order to come to a greater understanding of how all students may benefit from learning science through design, we
have attempted to look in depth at two contrasting teams as they underwent their design process in this unit.

Theory
         A considerable amount of work has been conducted recently in the context of making design projects more
effective for student learning of science. Fortus et al. (2004) designed a curriculum in which students participate in
multiple iterations of  a design    cycle, each  focused   on  different content, in  order to   help students transfer.
Puntambekar   and  Kolodner  (2005)    designed  scaffolds to  provide students  with multiple opportunities   to justify
decisions in individual work and in whole class discussions. Baumgartner and Reiser (1998) articulated a set of
teacher strategies important for helping students stay on task and managing the complexity of the design process.

         In addition to focusing at these levels, students spend a considerable amount of time collaborating with
their team members, so it is useful to take the team as a unit of analysis. A major task of individuals when working
in teams  is to negotiate  shared   conceptual  structures through   conversational  interaction (Roschelle,  1992).  In
addition to the cognitive level, there are added social factors that determine the success of a collaborative team, such
as the willingness to accept or discuss explanations versus ignoring or rejecting them (Barron, 2003). Although
explanatory activities through conversation are necessary for team members to learn effectively, by themselves the
explanations  are  not  sufficient unless  accompanied   by data  from   crucial  experiments  required  to support  the
explanation (Okada & Simon, 1997). In the case of design activities, the crucial experiments are manifested in the
physical artifacts that embody     the design. Our purpose  for this research was    to consider cognitive,  social, and
material level factors together by analyzing a contrasting case of collaborative design teams in detail.

Curriculum Context
         All teams participating in the Alarm System unit maintain the high-level design goal of creating a working
alarm system. Along the way to their high-level design goal, teams are forced to solve a variety of low-level design
goals that are challenging. These lower-level design challenges include: getting an indicator component to work
(i.e., a bulb to light or a buzzer to sound), getting a indicator component to be louder or brighter, getting a detector
components to work (e.g., have a light detector affect the brightness of the bulb), incorporating an on/off switch that
doesn't short circuit the batteries, limiting what is passed through a component so it doesn't get overheated or so it
turns all the way off when the detector is activated.

                                                           988                                                 ICLS 2006
Methods
        The data was collected in the classroom of one teacher's four sections of eighth grade science. In each
section, two student teams were randomly assigned to be videotaped for a total of eight teams. Each team was
recorded with a dedicated camera that was positioned to record talk, gestures, and the physical circuit designs that
were created. Each team consisted of three or four students. At the end of the unit, teams presented their final system
to the class and took a post-test intended to measure their science concept knowledge. The final presentations were
also videotaped, and the post-tests and student design portfolios were collected as well. We chose to focus on two
teams at the extremes of the post-test performance for this analysis.

Results
        Both teams were from the same eighth grade section. Team 1 included two males both of whom attended
the school districts' gifted program, and one female who did not attend the gifted program. Team 2 included one
male who attended the gifted program and three females, two of whom attended the gifted program. Team 1 had a
mean score of 48% on the post-test, and Team 2 had a mean score of 75%. As a result, we are contrasting two
groups of   similar status  as high-achievers   according  to district standards, but with  stark contrast in terms  of
performance on the post-test for the unit. One major factor by which the two groups differed is in the amount of
circuit designs that they created and tested. Team 1, the low-performing group averaged 13 circuit designs per day
over the four-day period. Team 2, on the other hand, averaged over 35 circuit designs per day. Although clearly,
Team 2 covered a considerably larger portion of the design space than Team 1, and therefore that factor alone may
explain the difference in performance, there may also be some mediating factors involved.

        The additional factor that distinguishes these two groups was the systematicity by which they explored
lower-level design   goals. Team    1  had  a difficult time focusing  on one lower-level  design  goal at a  time, and
therefore did not explore as many combinations of designs as was required to understand the underlying conceptual
ideas. For instance, they had difficulty separating the design challenge of getting the bulb brighter with that of
eliminating short circuits. Because of that, they never considered putting batteries in series and made claims that the
bulb could not get any brighter. On the other hand, Team 2 was much more focused on one design challenge at a
time. They solved the short circuit challenge first and only after all members of the team understood it, did they
move on to the challenge of making the bulb as bright as possible. While pursuing one design challenge at a time,
the team was able to consider thoroughly the majority of ideas suggested by the team members as possible solutions.
They were also much less likely to stop their exploring and say that the design challenge was not possible with the
given materials.

Discussion
        Our findings suggest that there is an important influence of design goals on the systematicity by which
teams collaborate to explore design challenges. Focusing efforts on one lower-level design goal at a time may be a
mediating factor in allowing teams to consider a greater portion of the design space, and this lead to greater overall
learning of the science concepts.

References
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307­359.
Baumgartner, E., & Reiser, B. J. (1998). Strategies for supporting student inquiry in design tasks. Presented at the
        Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, 1998, San Diego, California.
Fortus, D., Dershimer, R. C., Krajcik, J., Marx, R. W., & Mamlok-Naaman, R. (2004). Design-based science and
        student learning. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(10), 1081­1110.
Mehalik, M. M., Doppelt, Y., & Schunn, C. D. (2005). Addressing performance and equity of a design-based,
        systems   approach     for teaching   science in eighth grade.  Paper presented at the annual   meeting of  the
        American Educational Research Association, 2005, Montreal, Canada.
Okada, T., & Simon, H. A. (1997). Collaborative discovery in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 109­
        146.
Puntambekar, S., & Kolodner, J. L. (2005). Toward implementing distributed scaffolding: Helping students learn
        science from design. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(2), 185­217.
Roschelle,  J. (1992). Learning     by collaborating:    Covergent conceptual  change.  The Journal   of the  Learning
        Sciences, 2(3), 235­276.

                                                            989                                                ICLS 2006
