                                             Adaptive Simulations

 Mark K. Singley, Tracee Vetting Wolf, Peter Fairweather, and Richard B. Lam, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research
                                      Center, Yorktown Heights, New York 10598
                               Email:   {ksingley, tlwolf, pfairwea, rblam} @us.ibm.com

         Abstract:     We propose a new kind of learning environment called an adaptive simulation that
         more   deeply   explores   and exploits   the potential   synergy between    simulations    and  intelligent
         tutoring systems.     In an adaptive simulation, the simulation environment is not fixed but rather
         can be modified by a tutoring agent for optimal pedagogical effect.         Types of adaptations include
         manipulations   of simulation    time  and  state, changes in  representation   to  facilitate explanations
         and/or task performance, and adjustments in simulation complexity by the addition and/or removal
         of  components.    Open     research issues  include   how to  perform    these adaptations    and when    to
         employ them for optimal effect.

Simulations as Learning Environments:                         Unrealized Potential?
         There is a long history of interest in simulations as learning environments, primarily because of their ability
to support  learning-by-doing    in  authentic, risk-free,  immersive   settings.  Indeed, this interest only appears to be
growing: One study by IDC projects that, whereas simulations comprised 8-10% of corporate learning content in
2004, that number will grow to 40% by 2008.          Although widely regarded as having great promise, if deployed in
isolation,  simulations  have  a   number    of associated   learning   problems,   primarily  having    to do   with   learner
understanding and management of system complexity and the lack of built-in instructional support.                   To remedy
these problems, simulations may be supplemented by an instructional component; sometimes this takes the form of
an  intelligent tutoring   system.    When    present,  the  tutoring   component    typically has   been   used    to provide
performance support in the form of hints and corrective feedback on actions taken by the learner, as well as the
progressive selection and sequencing of tasks based on estimates of learner proficiency.             Performance support of
this type and task sequencing both serve to keep the learner on track toward instructional goals, maximizing the
productive use of time and minimizing confusion and frustration.         Thus, to be truly effective, it seems simulations
must know something about the learner and the task the learner is trying to accomplish (Fletcher, 1999).

         However, even when an instructional component is present, it may have been added as an afterthought once
the simulation itself had been built in isolation.  This necessarily restricts the kinds of synergies that can be exploited
between the two systems.      In  our work,   we   are striving for a   much  tighter linkage  between    the simulation    and
instructional components.    Specifically, we are considering what value may result if the simulation is put under
much more direct and masterful control of the tutor.        We are developing a vision of "adaptive simulations" that we
think may better realize the true promise of simulations as learning environments.

Radical Adaptation
         As   mentioned    above, in  the standard  pairing  of   simulation and   tutoring  components,    adaptation   to the
learner  is achieved   primarily through  task  monitoring   and   task selection  by the tutor.  However, the simulation
environment itself is largely fixed.    The only things that change are the tasks and the guided paths through them.
However,    we  believe  there   are many    other  potentially more    powerful   kinds  of  adaptation    that are   possible,
adaptations   that involve  more     radical kinds  of  reconfiguration   of  the  simulation  environment       by  the tutor.
Specifically, we are investigating three different broad categories of adaptation:

1. Tutorial Control of Simulation Time and State
         The tutor should be able to arbitrarily set the simulation's time and state for its own pedagogical purposes.
(This goes beyond the standard simulation tactic of time compression in order to achieve future states faster than
real time).  We are envisioning a system that can "rewind" the simulation to an earlier critical juncture and either
step through  what   happened    with the learner   as a   form of review  or to   give  the learner another  opportunity    to
practice with   either the same   simulation  state first  encountered  or a  similar one.    Another potential use of this
capability would be to provide episodic summaries of learner behavior to an interested third party such as a teacher,
mentor, or fellow learner cast in the role of critic.

                                                              990                                                    ICLS 2006
          To do this effectively, we need to employ not only a good theory of task structure but also a good theory of
reminding:   If we take the learner back in time, what cues are required to re-establish context?   How do we artfully
re-tell what happened so that the main points are summarized and the appropriate inferences and reflections are
fostered? We are striving for what might be termed "intelligent replay."

2. Tutorial Adjustment of Simulation View and/or Representation
          In order to  promote  perceptions  of authenticity as well as    maximize  the  overlap between    training and
performance environments, simulations often strive for a high-fidelity representation of the system and/or setting
being modeled.     However, such realistic representations might not always be best for instructional purposes.        In
some circumstances, it may be beneficial to expose the hidden workings of a device or the internal state of a process.
Additionally,  it  may be beneficial  to strip away  what might   be considered   the extraneous   detail of a  complex
situation and  focus  on  the truly important  and  meaningful  elements.    Such  representations  that  expose   hidden
elements  and  remove    extraneous details might  be termed   "schematic."   The tutor should be able to change the
outward view or representation of the simulation, moving along the realistic/schematic continuum to suit the current
pedagogical goal.

          Aside from swapping in more schematic representations of the simulation model, we are also exploring the
use of scaffolding   representations  of learner tasks to provide  transitional   support during  all phases  of   learner
behavior.    Here  are some   brief examples:    (a)  Perceiving:  In     complex situations where    there are multiple
information  streams   distributed throughout  the environment  whose     monitoring and  integration is  critical to task
performance, a useful simplification might be to reconfigure the interface so that these sources are placed together in
a prominent position.    (b) Planning:   In order to support tutorial discourse about the learner's plans and goals, it
might be useful to reify them as trees or networks in the interface. (c) Acting:   Learner action can be scaffolded by
activating only task-appropriate controls, and conveying this action space through highlighting, shading, or some
other graphical technique.

3. Tutorial Selection of Simulation Components
          Finally, aside from  just changing   the outward   representation,  the tutor  should be able   to change    the
underlying deep structure of the simulation as well.   By adding and/or removing components, the tutor should be
able to adjust simulation complexity and focus attention on current instructional goals.   The challenge here is author
the simulation in such a way as to enable this kind of decomposition and modular assembly on the fly.         This is the
focus of much current work on simulation in the learning objects community

          All of these factors combine into what might be called a "scaffolding gradient," a multi-dimensional space
of possibilities that can be navigated by the tutoring agent for optimal pedagogical effect.      Just how, when, and
where to navigate in this space is a subject of active research interest.

References
Fletcher, J.D. (1999). What have we learned about intelligent tutoring systems and what do we need to do next?
          Proceedings of the NASA Workshop on Advanced Training Technologies and Learning Environments.

                                                           991                                                  ICLS 2006
