                Conflicts in Pedagogical and Technical Knowledge:
         Pre-service Teachers' Understanding and Misconception of
                        Integrating Technology into PBL Lessons

                  Hyo-Jeong So, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University
                                1 Nanyang Walk Singapore 637616, hjso@nie.edu.sg
                                     Bosung Kim, University of Missouri, Columbia
                                303 Townsend Hall MO 65211, bkq22@mizzou.edu

         Abstract: Fifty-one pre-service teachers' understandings and misconceptions of Information and
         Communications      Technology       (ICT)  and   Problem-based    Learning    (PBL)    integration    were
         examined in this study. Data from questionnaire and student projects were analyzed to identify the
         conceptual   and  practical difficulties  integrating ICT   tools into  PBL   lessons. While   participants
         showed    good theoretical   understandings     of PBL   approaches,    their lesson   designs   showed     a
         mismatch     between   ICT     tools and    learning  objectives,  indicating   conflicts   in   translating
         pedagogical knowledge into technology-integrated lessons.

Introduction
         In order  to prepare pre-service     teachers to  effectively integrate technology    into their future  classrooms,
teacher development programs have implemented a variety of technology integration courses. However, one critical
problem in various technology courses is that they have not adequately prepared future teachers to understand how
to integrate pedagogical and technology knowledge (Moursund & Bielefeldt, 1999; Vannatta & Beyerbach, 2000).
For instance, although stand-alone technology courses have exposed pre-service teachers to a variety of technology
to some  extent   and have provided     them  with   the opportunity   to learn  and  practice  technical skills, it has been
criticized that exposing to a number of technical tools does not necessarily mean that pre-service teachers can learn
an ability  to design effective technology-integrated       lessons. Conversely,   focusing solely   on   pedagogical   issues
without  teaching  foundational  technical    skills can   create frustrations  in designing    and  delivering   technology-
integrated instruction (Mehlinger & Powers, 2002).

         Indeed,  there is a need    to understand   how    teacher  development   programs     should  provide   pre-services
teachers with   a balance  between   pedagogical     and  technical  knowledge.    To  meet this need,    it is important  for
learning sciences researchers to identify pre-service teachers' conceptual understandings and practical difficulties in
integrating pedagogical and technical knowledge. The main purpose of this research, therefore, was to examine how
pre-service teachers integrated their knowledge of information and communications technology (ICT) tools into the
design  of pedagogically-sound   lessons      for teaching  high-order  skills. The   pedagogical   knowledge,    specifically
examined in this study, was problem-based learning (PBL).

Methods

Data Collection and Analysis

         Participants were 51 pre-service elementary teachers in Singapore. Thirty-nine students were females while
12 students were males. Their average age was 26.6 with approximately 7 months of contract-teaching experiences
in schools. Participants took a twelve-week module on the ICT integration for teaching and learning. One of the
assignments that pre-service teachers worked on was to designing a PBL lesson with the integration of ICT tools.
Regarding previous exposure to PBL, 31 students indicated that they had learned PBL in other modules such as
educational psychology and mathematics. A questionnaire with 5 demographic items and 5 open-ended items was
developed to identify participants' understandings, misconceptions, and difficulties on the integration of ICT and
PBL. Two coders identified types and frequencies of common themes emerged from student responses. In addition
to self-reported data from the questionnaire, student projects on the ICT-based PBL lessons were analyzed to further
understand how pre-service teachers applied their knowledge of PBL and ICT integration into designing lessons on
various topics in elementary education.

                                                             994                                                     ICLS 2006
Results
         Overall, participants showed good theoretical understandings on PBL. Student teachers listed a) authentic
problems (n=20), b) student-centered approach (n=17), c) teacher's role as a facilitator (n=16), and d) collaborative
learning (n=13) as important characteristics of PBL. Next, the two areas that participants had the most difficulties
with   designing  PBL  lessons  were     a) generating   problem    statements   (n=19)    and b)   integrating  ICT  tools  and
resources (n=18). Participants expressed that they were not sure about what components should constitute problem
statements and how to make problems concise, interesting, and authentic. Additionally, a number of the participants
reported that they had no or lack of experiences using ICT tools, and they had difficulties selecting appropriate tools
and resources.

         Results from the analysis of ICT-based PBL lessons revealed pre-service teachers' lack of understanding
on two major areas: a) technology integration to better support students' PBL and b) teachers' role as a facilitator.
First, student   teachers tended   to use   technology   as   a  mere delivery   medium    rather   than  an instructional   tool
supporting  cognitive  activities. For   example,    several    pre-service  teachers' PBL     lessons simply    consisted  of a
presentation of problem statements and a collection of websites. Secondly, lack of understanding on teachers' roles
confused pre-service teachers about how much and what kinds of scaffolding strategies they needed to design ahead
in their PBL lessons. For instance, while some of pre-service teachers pre-specified all of the learning activities with
the belief  that teachers needed   to  scaffold  the entire   learning process,    some pre-service    teachers  provided   little
scaffolding since PBL lessons was meant to be independent and discovery learning where students had to find their
own resources and answers.

Conclusions and Implications
         An    important  question to  ask  based   on   data in this research   is "why   student  teachers  have   difficulties
translating their theoretical  knowledge    of  PBL    and  ICT  integration  to   designing  technology-integrated   lessons."
Overall, the analysis of student teachers' projects showed that there was a mismatch between the use of ICT tools
and  the learning  goals  specified   in their  lessons. One    possible explanation   about   this problem   is related  to the
complexity of designing a lesson for teaching high-order thinking skills. Designing a PBL lesson is challenging to
pre-service teachers who have little previous exposure to such student-centered and independent types of learning.
When technology is added to this challenge, designing a lesson becomes even more complicated. Thus, many pre-
service teachers ended up adding technology, instead of integrating it into their lessons.

         This  study  has  implications     to the current  practices  in   teacher training   education. In  order   to resolve
conflicts in pedagogical and technical knowledge, pre-service teachers should be continuously exposed to new and
innovative  teaching  practices    throughout    their teacher     training. Previous   studies  have    shown   that teachers'
understanding and implementation of new teaching practices are affected by their epistemological beliefs and prior
knowledge (Schraw & Olafson, 2002). Considering that most student teachers come to the teacher training programs
with little previous exposure to student-centered and technology-integrated learning, teacher education should be
structured  in a  way that  allows    pre-service  teachers   to change   their limited thinking    within   exiting  models   of
teaching and learning. Designing a series of integrated modules, providing student teachers with situated practice for
formative   feedback  and   epistemological     reflection, and    presenting  various  examples    of   technology   integrated
lessons with their impacts on student learning would be possible ways to help pre-service teachers achieve deeper
connections between pedagogical and technical knowledge.

References
Mehlinger,  H.   D., &    Powers,  S.  M.   (2002).  Technology      and  teacher   education:  A   guide  for   educators   and
         policymakers. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Moursund, D., & Bielefeldt, T. (1999). Will new teachers be prepared to teach in a digital age?: A national survey
         on information technology in teacher education. Milken family foundation.             Retrieved June 14, 2003, from
         http://www.mff.org/pubs/ME154.pdf
Schraw,  G.,   &  Olafson,  L. (2002).   Teachers'   epistemological     worldviews    and   educational  practices.  Issues   in
         Education, 8(2), 99-148.
Vannatta,   R. A., &  Beyerbach,    B.   (2000).   Facilitating  a  constructivist  vision of  technology    integration among
         education faculty and pre-service teachers. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 33(2), 132-
         148.

                                                                995                                                   ICLS 2006
