                                       Engineering girls gone wild:
                  Developing an engineering identity in Digital Zoo
                                    Gina Navoa Svarovsky, David Williamson Shaffer
                          University of Wisconsin, 1025 W. Johnson St., Madison, WI         53706
                               Email: mnsvarovsky@wisc.edu, dws@education.wisc.edu

        Abstract:     In  the Digital  Zoo  epistemic game,   middle   school girls  work  as   engineers to design
        virtual, ambulatory creatures. The activities of the game were based on an ethnographic study of
        an undergraduate engineering design course. As a result of gameplay, the girls demonstrated an
        increase   in  thinking  of    themselves as engineers.   Moreover,   both   the girls  and undergraduates
        linked   their engineering     identity development   to  meeting with   ­  and  getting feedback    from ­
        external clients and experts.

        The "incredible shrinking pipeline" (Camp, 1997) of women engineers ­ the decreasing number of women
graduating with bachelors degrees in engineering ­ is attributed in part to girls being unable to envision themselves
as successful    engineering   professionals.   Initiatives such  as  "Introduce   a Girl  to   Engineering   Day"  and   the
"Engineering Girl!" website (www.engineergirl.org) provide young women with information about the profession,
but do little in the way of engineering identity development. Here, we examine a different approach to helping girls
see themselves as engineers. In the Digital Zoo epistemic game (Shaffer, in press), middle school girls work as
engineers by engaging in activities modeled after an undergraduate engineering design course. In this poster, we
analyze how gameplay based on the profession of engineering can foster the development of engineering identity in
young women.

Theoretical Framework
        Becoming      an  engineer  means   developing  the   epistemic  frame   (Shaffer, in   press) of engineering   ­ the
particular combination of skills, knowledge, values, identity, and epistemology that characterizes the profession.
Like most professionals, engineers develop this frame in a practicum: a structured learning environment in which
new members of a profession work on authentic problems under the guidance of an experienced mentor. The theory
of epistemic games suggests that a game which simulates the conditions of a professional practicum ­ such as an
engineering design course ­ can help young players develop the epistemic frame of a profession. Designing such a
game requires a detailed understanding of how the curriculum, tools, and interactions contribute to the development
of the epistemic frame in the professional practicum.

        In this study, we look at a key element of an epistemic frame, professional identity, and how it is cultivated
both within an epistemic game and in the professional practicum on which it is based. Specifically, we investigate
how  undergraduates    in an   engineering  design   course  and  the players in Digital  Zoo   come   to see themselves   as
engineers.  We   ask:  1) whether   conducting    an ethnographic   study of  an engineering    practicum  uncovers   salient
processes through which an engineering identity is developed; 2) whether creating and implementing an epistemic
game for   girls based   on these results  help  them develop    an  engineering identity, and   3) whether   the process  of
professional identity development for the students in the practicum and girls in the epistemic game is similar.

Methods

Ethnographic study
        An ethnographic study was conducted on Biomedical Engineering (BME) 201, a design course at a large
Midwestern state university. During the semester, sophomore engineering students work in teams on actual design
problems   from   external    clients. Data was   collected   in  observational  field   notes, individual   interviews with
professors, and  three   focus groups.   Data   was  analyzed within  a grounded    theory framework     (Strauss & Corbin,
1998).

Epistemic game
        The design of Digital Zoo was based on the ethnographic study of BME 201. In the game, students develop
wire-frame prototypes of ambulatory characters for an upcoming animated film within a computational spring-mass

                                                              996                                                  ICLS 2006
modeling environment. At the end of each week, formal design reviews are held with external engineering experts
who provide players with input and feedback on their designs. In the summer of 2005, seven middle school girls
played Digital Zoo during a three-week summer program. Six of the players were students of color. Clinical pre- and
post-interviews with the players were transcribed and analyzed within a grounded theory framework.

Results

BME 201 undergraduates developed an engineering identity
        One emergent theme from the focus group data was the development of engineering identity throughout
BME 201. Of the 12 focus group participants, 10 (83.3%) responded positively to the question "Do you feel like an
engineer?", and 7 of 12 (58%) students linked their engineering identity to client interaction. In addition, there was a
statistically significant correlation between student references to client interaction and receiving client feedback (r =
0.85, p<0.01). For example, in response to the "Do you feel like an engineer?" question, one student said:
        Yeah, I do, especially when talking to the client. Coming in [to their office] and asking them to see what to
        do is helpful. A lot of [engineering] comes down to communication with the client.
In other words, meeting with the external client and receiving feedback on their design work were essential to the
process of engineering identity development for the undergraduates.

Digital Zoo players developed an engineering identity
        The number of Digital Zoo players who indicated they had thought of themselves as engineers increased
from pre- (2/7, 29%) to post-interview (7/7, 100%, p<0.01), with all players responding positively to the "Have you
ever thought of yourself as an engineer?" question in the post-interview. Five players (71%) linked their engineering
identity to external expert interactions. In addition, there was a statistically significant correlation between player
references to expert interaction and receiving expert feedback (r = 1.00, p<0.01).  For example, when asked whether
she had ever thought of herself as an engineer in the post-interview, one student responded, "Yeah, during Digital
Zoo." When asked when specifically she felt like an engineer, she replied:
        Like  the  [Friday] presentations and the  presentation  at the  end.   That was   when    I saw  myself  as an
        engineer...I liked presenting my things and showing everybody what I made... I learned that there were
        things I could change about [my designs] because they like they had certain things to say about it ­ like
        some things worked better than like another thing...    so then I could like... make mine even better.
In other words, meeting with the external engineering experts and receiving feedback on their virtual creatures were
essential to the process of engineering identity development for the Digital Zoo players.

Discussion
        Both the undergraduates in BME 201 and the players in Digital Zoo developed an engineering identity, and
interacting with clients or experts external to the learning environment contributed to that development. Moreover,
the significantly high correlations between client/expert interaction and client/expert feedback suggest that it was not
only the external interaction, but also the content of the interaction, that impacted both groups.

        The  close  alignment  between    the engineering    identity development    experiences     of the  BME   201
undergraduates and the Digital Zoo players suggests that: 1) conducting an ethnography of an engineering design
course is a useful way to   uncover the salient  activities and  interactions that contribute to   professional identity
development, 2) designing and implementing an epistemic game based on this ethnographic study can help middle
school girls develop and cultivate an engineering identity, and 3) the processes of identity development for epistemic
game players  and  practicum  students were,  in fact, similar. Thus, by helping   girls see themselves   as engineers,
epistemic games such as Digital Zoo are potentially powerful and transformative tools for addressing the lack of
women in engineering.

References
Camp, T. (1997). The incredible shrinking pipeline. Communications of the ACM, 40(10), 103-110.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research (second ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
        Publications, Inc.
Shaffer, D. W. (in press). Epistemic games. Computer Education.

                                                         997                                                   ICLS 2006
