 Formative Assessment: Reducing Math Phobia and Related Test
              Anxiety in a Geology Class for Non-Science Majors

  Vanessa Svihla, The University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station, Austin, TX, vsvihla@hotmail.com

         Abstract:   Math   and  test anxiety are    common    in  science  classes for  non-science    majors.
         Formative assessment was used to prepare such students for exams.              This included weekly
         quizzes  that were challenging,  graded     harshly,  and completely    correctable  (corrected   grade
         completely  replaced   original grade).   By  the   midterm, 100%   of    the students  mastered    rate
         calculations, and when retested at the final, 80% of the students retained the ability to solve the
         rate calculations. Students also reported feeling less math phobic.

Math and Test Phobia
    Students in science classes for non-science majors often excel in other academic areas but believe they are
not able to do math or to do well on science tests, and this disabling math and test anxiety prevents students from
learning. This recursive cycle serves to confirm what the students already believe about themselves: they are
poor at math and science.   Math and test anxiety can be characterized, regardless of the original source, as an
inability or unwillingness to engage in risk-taking behavior (Williams, 1988).         The main causes stem from poor
preparation and negative feedback, and in some cases, teachers run the risk of spreading the "communicable
disease of math anxiety" that they themselves are carriers of (Williams, 1988).        An estimated two thirds (Jackson
and Leffingwell, 1999) to 93% (Burns, 1998) of Americans have negative associations with math.               Test anxiety
may  result from  poor  study skills, the setting  of  unrealistic goals,  hostile test environments,    and  impromptu
testing, such as pop-quizzes (Sogunro, 1998).

How can math and test anxiety be reduced?
    Previous research has suggested both pedagogical and therapeutic techniques for reducing math and test
anxiety. Pedagogical techniques include creating positive experiences to replace the negative ones that fostered
the anxiety, and using informal and ongoing assessment (Steele and Arth, 1998) with "regular and constructive
feedback"   (Sogunro,  1998).    Therapeutic  techniques     include  confronting   negative   experiences,   journaling,
various types of counseling, and offering personal stories of success to offer students hope.          We are cautioned
that "changing negative beliefs is a slow process" (Dodd, 1992).

Formative Assessment
    Formative    assessment provides   a  space  for students  to  practice intellectual risk-taking    behavior.   When
feedback is provided, followed by time to revise thinking, learning is promoted because the assessment is not
seen only as a measure of success/failure (Black and Wiliam, 1998).          Because formative assessment helps to
make the student thinking more visible, the teacher may respond to specific needs or discover that a topic may
need to be retaught.

Methods and Interventions
    Participants were University of Texas students with regular attendance (fewer than 5 absences) enrolled in
spring 2003   sections of Earth, Wind,   and  Fire,  a geology  class  for  non-science  majors   (N=50).    66% of the
students were  female,  though   gender   turned   out not to  be  a significant predictor    of math   and  test anxiety.
Students  are expected  to  master    calculations of  rate, area, and  unit conversion     as   tools for understanding
geology, but experience with this course in previous years suggested that rather than serving to elucidate, these
math problems    act as blocks.   Participants   were   surveyed   about   math  and   test anxiety    and the  instructor
discussed the purpose   of formative   assessment    and  math  and  test anxiety.  Quizzes were given weekly and
graded   harshly without  indication  of  where    errors had  been   made.   New      topics  were    added weekly  and
troublesome   topics were  repeated.   The   approximate     average  quiz  grade   each week     ranged   from   40-60%.
Students were then encouraged to correct the quizzes; the new grade completely replaced the original grade.
Students reported using various methods to correct the quizzes: Instructor office hours, notes and book, groups,
and a few even copied/cheated (However, this was not entirely a negative effect because to get full credit, work
had to be shown.  Therefore, a student who is copying an answer is effectively taking notes).          Grades on quizzes

                                                           998                                                    ICLS 2006
and number   of quizzes corrected      by students  were tested  for correlations with the midterm    and final exam
grades.

Results
    All participants mastered the math by the midterm exam, and most (80%) were still able to do the math on
the final exam. Mastery of math in sections not using this method of formative assessment ranged from 40% to
70%  on  the midterm  exam      and 30%   to  60%  on  the final exam.   There is  a significant positive correlation
between number of quizzes a student corrected and midterm and final exam grade (r = 0.346, n=50, p<0.01),
and there is also a significant positive correlation between average quiz grade and midterm and final exam grade
(r = 0.41, n=50, p<0.01).  There were no significant gender differences.

    Additionally, students reported feeling less nervous about the exam, compared to how they felt about other
exams science and math exams.       Comments from students' course evaluations suggest that they understood the
reasoning behind the quizzes:       "I really like the policy of correcting quizzes  and having   them  often." "She
teaches exactly how school should be taught, less emphasis on grades (because she allowed corrections) and
more on learning which is what class is all about anyway."       Prior to the midterm, many students left questions
completely unanswered when they were unsure, but after their success on the midterm, most of the students
made some sort of attempt to answer all questions, even if they were unsure.         This suggests that the quizzes
opened up a space for students to engage in intellectual risk-taking behavior.

Conclusions and Implications
    Students with math and test anxiety can be given successful experiences to replace past failures through
formative assessment.  A supportive environment enables students to understand the purpose of the quizzes: to
instruct, not just to evaluate. By frankly discussing math anxiety, a safe environment was created for students to
engage in intellectual risk-taking behavior.   The quizzes helped to interrupt damaging practices common among
math anxious students by making them aware that they are not the only ones who struggle and by showing them
that they can do the math. This method also relieves test anxiety because students get opportunities to learn the
instructors' assessment style, to receive feedback, and to assess what they still need to study.

References
Burns, M.(1998). Math:Facing an American Phobia. Sausalito, CA: Math Solutions Publications.
Dodd, A. (1992, Apr.) Insights from a Math Phobic. Mathematics Teacher. 85(4), 296-98.
Jackson, C., Leffingwell, R. (1999, Oct.)      The Role of Instructors in Creating Math Anxiety in Students from
         Kindergarten through College. Mathematics Teacher. 92(7), 583-86.
Sogunro,  O.  (1998,  Win.).    Impact    of  Evaluation Anxiety   on  Adult Learning.   Journal   of Research   and
         Development in Education. 31(2), 109-120.
Steele, D.,  Arth, A. (1998,     Jan-Feb).    Math  Instruction  and  Assessment:  Preventing    Anxiety, Promoting
         Confidence. Schools in the Middle. 7(3), 44-48.
Williams, W. (1988 Feb.). Answers to Questions about Math Anxiety. School Science and Mathematics. 88(2),
         95-104.

                                                          999                                                 ICLS 2006
