Beyond Access: Informed Participation and
Empowerment
Ernesto G. Arias

Center for LifeLong Learning & Design and Institute of Cognitive Science
Department of Computer Science
College of Architecture and Planning
University of Colorado, Boulder

Hal Eden, Gerhard Fischer, Andrew Gorman, and Eric Scharff

Center for LifeLong Learning & Design and Institute of Cognitive Science
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado, Boulder

      Abstract: This paper is based on the fundamental claim that one of the
      major roles of new media is not to deliver predigested information to
      individuals, but to provide the opportunity and resources for social debate
      and discussion. For most design problems (ranging from urban design to
      graphics design and software design) that we have studied over many
      years, the knowledge to understand, frame, and solve these problems does
      not exist, but is constructed and evolved during the process of solving
      them, exploiting the power of the "symmetry of ignorance" and
      "breakdowns." From this perspective, access to existing information and
      knowledge (often seen as the major advance of new media) is a very
      limiting concept. Many social and technological innovations are limited to
      provide primarily better access, leading to "consumer" cultures. Our
      approach focuses and creates support for lifelong learning activities
      grounded in informed participation and empowerment, allowing learners
      to incrementally acquire ownership in problems and contribute actively to
      their solution.

      To illustrate our approach, we present the Envisionment and Discovery
      Collaboratory (EDC), an integrated physical and computational
      environment supporting informed participation through new forms of
      knowledge creation, integration, and dissemination. The EDC empowers
      users to act as designers in situated learning and collaborative problem-
      solving activities. It addresses the integration of the userís consumer and
      designer roles, not by translating them into an "either-or" type of support,
      but rather by providing users with the flexibility to move along this
      spectrum according to needs, opportunities, and personal interest and
      engagement in particular learning situations.
      Keywords: integrated physical and computational spaces, shared
      knowledge, active participation, distributed cognition, participatory
      design, CSCL in community and informal settings

Introduction

Many social and technological innovations are focused upon providing better access to
resources, leading to "consumer" mindsets (Fischer, 1998a). Our approach creates and
expands support for lifelong learning activities grounded in informed participation
(Brown et al., 1994) and empowerment (Engelbart, 1995; Norman, 1993), allowing
learners to incrementally acquire ownership in and to actively contribute to the resolution
of problems (Arias, 1996).

Cultures are substantially defined by their media and their tools for thinking, working,
learning, and collaborating. A large number of the new media are designed to see humans
only as consumers. Television is the most obvious medium that promotes this mindset
and behavior (Postman, 1985). Unfortunately, a consumer mindset does not remain
limited to television, but in many cases extends to other activities and domains in our
culture. For example, in our educational institutions learners are often treated as
consumers of information and instruction, creating that mindset for the rest of their lives.
As citizens they often feel left out in policy-making decisions, denying them
opportunities to take an active role.

Unfortunately, most current computational environments do not allow users to act as
active contributors and designers. Yet, computational media have the unique potential to
assist people in becoming incrementally more actively involved. To move beyond "gift-
wrapping" (Fischer, 1996), we need to rethink our learning environments (for school,
work, home, community) in ways that support learning and designing by facilitating the
integration of the userís consumer and designer roles. This integration should provide
users with the flexibility to move along the consumer-to-designer spectrum. This implies
environments in which self-directed as well as peer-to-peer collaborative learning is
supported; in which the teacher/expert acts as a "guide on the side" rather than as a "sage
on the stage" (Guzdial & Weingarten, 1995), in which we learn through breakdowns
(Fischer, 1994), and in which learning activities such as courses are considered as seeds
rather than finished products (Fischer, 1997). Such models of learning and education will
require innovative computational support that will share many of the requirements and
challenges articulated here.

Access AloneóA Limiting Mindset

In today's workplace, people need to know how to access information. This need is
represented by the M1 model in Figure 1, in which a class of experts controls the
production of information and individuals act as consumers whose only need is that of
access. Although there is value in such a model, its focus is incomplete. For example, in
the Presidentís Information Technology Advisory Committee report (PITAC, 1999),
there is a call for ubiquitous information access. This call for accessibility needs to be
extended to include the understanding that the key to the future lies not only in greater
access to information, but in greater support for knowledge construction (Scardamalia &
Bereiter, 1994)

          Figure 1: Supporting the continuum from consumer to designer

The next step in the information age is to move toward models that support not only the
consumption of information, but also the construction and integration of knowledge as
afforded by the M2 and M3 models in Figure 1. For example, we have asked the
question, "Why is it that city planners do not use SimCity as a design tool?" Our research
points to the observation that systems that users cannot extend to incorporate new
knowledge are limited (at best) in solving real-world problems because these problems
are by nature open-ended (Fischer, 1998b). Complex collaborative design problems, such
as those found in real-world settings, cannot be supported by a closed, M1-like system,
because collaborators need to fully participate in the construction and use of knowledge.
In the M2 model, a Webmaster is still a custodian and the user is still primarily a
consumer; however, the use of email or feedback forms allows users to react and
contribute to the information in a limited way. The M3 model, typified by tools such as
discussion groups or chat rooms, works toward providing the level of openness need for
collaborative design problems.

We do not propose a binary choice between accessibility and informed participation.
Each has its place and value. However, we argue that the "access-only" mindset is
limiting because although access to information and technology is necessary, it is not
sufficient, because it does not always support the goal that consumers can and should
support to be active contributors. Therefore a focus on access alone may lead to a
consumer culture that wrongly assumes that the knowledge it seeks already exists, and
that knowledge can always be accessed by those who need it.

This emphasis on access results in part from the impoverished conception of education
"where omniscient teachers tell or show unknowing learners something" (Bruner, 1996).
This mindset is deeply engrained into our educational culture. As learners in this system,
we are trained to passively absorb information rather than engage in self-directed and
collaborative learning, focusing on mutual dialogs and joint knowledge construction
enhanced by the creation, discussion, and evolution of artifacts (Koschmann, 1996).
Therefore, as the teacherís role changes, so too must the media supporting education. For
example, teachers facilitating self-directed learning must be supported with
computational systems and other educational resources suitable for the distributed self-
directed process. Interactive systems for self-directed learning such as simulation and
modeling environments (Roschelle et al., 1999) will provide students with new ways to
formulate and reason about problems. Dynamic resources such as group memories and
dynamic Web sites (Guzdial, 1999; Ostwald, 1999) will provide frameworks supporting
individual and collaborative efforts.

Given our view of learning as a dynamic activity shaped by the situation, we do not take
"either-or" positions regarding the three models aboveóeach has its place and value for
different learning situations. This view, in turn, challenges us to design frameworks and
tools that go beyond access to allow for the flexible support along the consumer-designer
continuum, depending on the learning activity and setting. Therefore, these constraints
and concerns from an access-only view have led our research to focus on the construction
of theories and the design of systems that go beyond "accessibility of technology and
information" to support "informed participation" and the "empowerment of users" in
designing the future.

Beyond Access: Informed Participation and Empowerment

      How can more than 261 million individual Americans define and reconcile
      their needs and aspirations with community values and the needs of the
      future? Our most important finding is the potential power of and growing
      desire for decision processes that promote direct and meaningful
      interaction involving people in decisions that affect them. Americans want
      to take control of their lives (PCSD, 1996, p.7).

This finding of the President's Council on Sustainable Development (PCSD) warrants the
claim that something more is needed than access alone. Creating new forms of civic
discourse rooted in informed participation and shared understanding will support the
goals articulated in the above quote by providing citizens with greater ownership and
control over their futures (Arias, 1989; Arias, 1996; Illich, 1973). Therefore, an important
challenge for future information technology is in the empowerment of citizens through
the support of informed participation (Brown et al., 1994).
To make informed participation a reality, we need support for new forms of knowledge
creation, integration, and dissemination. Humans seldom (if ever) explore large
information spaces in the abstract (Fischer et al., 1996; Moran & Carroll, 1996). Instead,
information is typically sought in response to breakdowns encountered during
meaningful, real-life activities (Fischer, 1994; Popper, 1965). By overcoming such
breakdowns, new knowledge is created, which then must be integrated with any
knowledge that may have been generated during prior breakdowns. This cycle leads to
the creation and evolution of rich information spaces that can empower interested
community members as they "take control of their lives."

Knowledge Creation. One aspect of supporting organizations and social groups in
creating knowledge is the externalization of an individualís tacit knowledge (Polanyi,
1966). This knowledge includes attitudes, values, and perspectives, which are difficult to
formalize. Providing a means for capturing this knowledge is important for three reasons:
(1) doing so causes us to begin to move from vague mental conceptualizations of an idea
to a more concrete representation of it; (2) the externalization provides a means for others
to interact with, react to, negotiate around, and build upon the externalized idea; and (3)
the externalization provides an opportunity to create a common language of
understanding around a particular problem (Resnick et al., 1991). Such a setting is
governed by a symmetry of ignorance (Rittel, 1984) in which all stakeholders are aware
that even though they each possess relevant knowledge, none of them has all the relevant
knowledge; each of them must act as a reflective practitioner rather than as an all-
knowing expert (Schön, 1983).

Knowledge Integration. A challenge for supporting informed participation is in
providing a mechanism that allows various participants to integrate their perspectives
(Stahl, 1993) in a meaningful way. To do so, it is important to support the process of
reflection-in-action (Schön, 1983): As participants act upon a problem, breakdowns occur
due to incomplete understanding of the underlying problem, conflicts among
perspectives, or the absence of shared understanding. By supporting the process of
reflection within this shared context, opportunities arise for building upon these
breakdowns in ways that integrate the various perspectives and expertise while enhancing
shared understanding. Supporting informed participation requires processes that integrate
the individual and the group knowledge through collaborative constructions (Arias,
1996). Information spaces need to be constructed collaboratively Scardamalia & Bereiter,
1994) and integrated into the work and social practices of the community (Lave, 1988;
Rogoff et al., 1998). These collaborative constructions result in work products that are
enriched by the multiple perspectives emerging through community discourse.

Knowledge Dissemination. The knowledge created and integrated during collaborative
design sessions needs to be made available for on-demand learning (Fischer, 1991) and
on-demand use (Fischer, 1991) during subsequent sessions. Because humans have
limited cognitive resources, they need less decontextualized information, but they do
need resources and assistance to make information relevant to the task at hand. By
integrating the processes of working and learning as collaborative practices, learning
webs (Illich, 1971) are created that support the availability of and access to knowledge
that is needed.

Our Perspectives on These Processes. Our research is focused on complex, real-world
problems in which the knowledge for resolving these problems does not exist a priori,
but is generated though collaboration among stakeholders. We have found, specifically in
our work with physical games, that the use of external representations (such as game
pieces) and processes (such as game rules) serve to focus discussions upon relevant
aspects of the framing and understanding of the problem being studied (Arias, 1996;
Brown, 1997). This derives from the concept that designers engage in a "conversation
with the material" (Schön, 1992), they interact with the problem at hand, and the situation
talks back to them.

Requirements for Systems Supporting Informed Participation and Empowerment

Effectively supporting informed participation and empowerment is a socio-technical
problem in which the social support and the technical infrastructure for open-ended
problems go hand in hand.

At the technical level, providing access to information cannot imply allowing users to
simply select from preexisting information. Passive technologies (television, closed
systems) offer some selective power, but they are fundamentally limited by the inherent
model of the system: they can not be extended in ways that the designers of the systems
did not already foresee. In closed systems, the essential functionality is anticipated when
the system is created. Important activities and changes that were not anticipated by
designers are not only lacking from the closed systems, there is no way for non-designers
to accomplish these activities. Closed systems force individuals into consumer roles
because of their implicit constraints.

In contrast, open systems provide opportunities for significant changes to a system at all
levels of complexity. Creating the opportunities to shape the system allows the owners of
the problems (not just the system designers) to be involved in changes that are essential
in using a system to address real problems. Our experiences in applying some of our
systems in real contexts (Brown, 1997; Fischer, 1998b) have helped us support a number
of principles for designing open systems. First, software systems must be able to evolve.
Because problems are inherently open and software developers cannot fully anticipate
every context in which software will be used, all software must be able to change as new
situations and demands arise. Second, software must be able to evolve at the hands of the
users. Giving the owners of problems in charge the opportunity to effect changes creates
a situation in which users can take part in addressing the problems that they encounter.
Finally, software systems must be designed for evolution (Fischer, 1998b).

By providing the opportunity for people to change systems, we encourage users to
become owners of problems. Of course, not all users want to be intimately involved in all
phases of a problem-solving activity. Fostering communities in which individuals can
spontaneously find appropriate roles and responsibilities is important (Nardi, 1993).,
People are not going to accept responsibility without understanding what costs, benefits,
and other motivating factors they will encounter. People are motivated to participate if a
problem affects them and if they see a benefit to participating (Grudin, 1994). Supporting
authentic problems in which people have a personal stake is an essential part of
motivating a community. There must also be a reward for investing time and effort to
becoming knowledgeable enough to act as designers. The nature of these rewards may
range from a feeling of control over the problem, to being able to solve or contribute to
the solution, a passion to master tools in greater depth, an ego-satisfying contribution to a
group, or a sense of good citizenship in a community (Raymond, 1998). While we
understand that systems should provide these affordances for informed participation and
empowerment, we also realize that its use rests on the predisposition (e.g., needs and
motivation) and competencies (e.g., intellectual, physiological, educational, or economic)
of the individual in each learning context (Arias, 1989; Gans, 1968).

The Envisionment and Discovery Collaboratory (EDC)

To move beyond frameworks that provide more than access to existing information, we
are developing the Envisionment and Discovery Collaboratory (EDC), which
addresses the goals of informed participation, empowerment, and the social and technical
challenges that these goals present. The central theoretical vision of the EDC is to
provide contextualized support for reflection-in-action (Schön, 1983) within
collaborative design activities. Figure 2 shows the current realization of the EDC
environment. Using the horizontal electronic whiteboard, participants work "around the
table" to incrementally create a shared model of the problem. They interact with
computer simulations in the action space by manipulating three-dimensional, physical
objects, which constitute a language for the domain. The position and movement of these
physical objects are recognized by means of the touch-sensitive projection surface. In the
figure, users are constructing a neighborhood through the use of a physical language
appropriate for the problem by placing objects representing houses, cars, traffic lights,
and so on. This construction then becomes the object through which the stakeholders can
collaboratively evaluate and prescribe changes in their efforts to frame and resolve a
problem. In the upper half of Figure 2 is a second electronic whiteboard that serves as the
reflection space, where information related to the problem-at-hand can be presented,
explored, and reframed. In the figure a user is filling out a survey constructed from the
model presented in the action space. The results of this survey are stored in the reflection
space (for future exploration) and are also fed to the action space, where the ramifications
of the decisions specified in the survey can be explored.
                      Figure 2: The EDC Environment

Utilizing novel computational and physical tools is a critical part of supporting this
dynamic face-to-face interaction. Languages of physical objects provide affordances for
the construction of shared, tangible representations that are used to frame problems in a
collaborative manner (Alexander et al., 1977; Arias et al., 1997). In both the action and
reflection spaces, creating an open seed (Fischer, 1998b) that can evolve through use is
an essential element. The computational model is driven by AgentSheets, an open, user-
extensible simulation environment (Repenning & Sumner, 1995). The reflection space is
built using DynaSites, a substrate for evolving and maintaining dynamic Web-based
information spaces (Ostwald, 1999). The action and reflection spaces are independent
computational entities that utilize the Web as a communication medium. The EDC
focuses on face-to-face collaboration when possible, but provides opportunity for
distributed collaboration by allowing people to participate at a distance and by providing
a persistent representation of what takes place at individual meetings.

Using the EDC to Move beyond Access

The vision behind the EDC is to shift the focus of future developments away from the
computer toward an increased understanding of the human, social, and cultural system
that defines the context in which systems are used. The EDC instantiates the conceptual
frameworks and requirements outlined earlier and serves to create an immersive social
context in which a community of stakeholders can create, integrate, and disseminate
information relevant to their lives and the problems they face.
The EDC supports stakeholders in creating knowledge in a form that other people can
understand. The use of a shared physical context is one of the important ways to help
people articulate their knowledge and communicate with others. Integrated physical and
computational systems are interesting because of their power to elicit tacit
communication (Arias et al., 1997; Eisenberg & Makay, 1996; Kato et al., 1997). In the
EDC, the physical representation serves as an external object through which users can
express their views. It allows a group of neighbors to create an explicit understanding of
what lies within their neighborhood. Through the common physical representation, users
can utilize the language of objects to collaboratively determine what features are parts of
their neighborhood.

Computational mechanisms support the integration of knowledge by analyzing the
physical construction and pointing out things on behalf of participants who are not
around the table. For example, if we are worried about bus-stop placement, neighbors
who cannot be at a public meeting might create a "virtual stakeholder" that represents
their point of view, checks to see if a bus stop has been created near their homes, and
flags a problem if the bus stop is placed in a detrimental location. The creation of virtual
stakeholders is one example of the integration of existing knowledge (created by the
neighbor), and new knowledge (created around the table.) Another example is the survey
shown in Figure 2. When neighbors fill out a survey, the simulation gets updated with
new information. This new information changes the situation, and the corresponding
computational model changes. However, this might have unexpected consequences. For
example, if neighbors say they are willing to wait a certain amount of time to take the bus
and the bus does not come by that frequently, then they may go back and use their cars.

The EDC supports knowledge dissemination by providing contextualized access to
information. The failure of a bus to circulate often enough triggers the dynamic creation
of information (in the action space) that synthesizes an explanation of the problem,
shown in Figure 3. This explanation combines a description of the issues, some
contextualized information about the ramifications of the issue, and a collection of local
information about the issue. These pieces of information were contributed or constructed
over time and are presented in a contextualized manner, thus facilitating the growth of
information over time and the use of this information when appropriate.
           Figure 3: Dynamically Triggered, Contextualized Information

Rather than dissemination being the end of the process, the evolvable nature of the EDC
supports a synergy between the dissemination of information and the creation of new
knowledge. For example, the information presented in response to this situation can grow
over time by allowing users to add their comments, new factual information, or related
Web links associated with the issue. These capabilities of the EDC (as summarized in
Figure 4) create a range of support for users to engage in informed participation.

    Figure 4: Summary of Support Provided by the EDC for Informed Participation
Implications and Challenges

Empowering users by creating open environments has proved to be an important and
rewarding experience. In his discussion about Open Source Software, Raymond describes
how communities of developers work together to create software that addresses their
unique needs. The success of Web sites such as Gamelan (Gamelan, 1999), the
Educational Object Economy (EOE, 1999), and Educational Software Components of
Tomorrow (ESCOT, 1999; Roschelle et al., 1999) shows that interested users may be
motivated to share when there is a perceived benefit. However, even these systems often
create a model of control that separates producers and consumers. In Gamelan, resources
are contributed by the community, but only the small number of Web site administrators
have the ability to accept, categorize, and evaluate new submissions. In contrast, systems
such as the Behavior Exchange (a collaborative forum in which developers can share
components for use in AgentSheets simulations (Repenning et al., 1998), the role of the
"gatekeeper" is kept to a minimum, relying instead on members of the community
(Fischer, 1998b).

There are a number of challenges when attempting to both empower users and create a
forum where they are informed through their participation. In some situations, the goals
of empowerment and providing useful information seem to be in direct conflict. If anyone
can contribute, how can we guarantee that the information contributed is valuable or
reliable? Although this is a problem, this issue is not unique to open computer
environments. In some situations, creating a public forum and encouraging group
participation acts as a filter for contributions (Terveen et al., 1997). As the group
encounters information, people reflect and determine how much of this information is
relevant to them. Although the physical representations used in the EDC have been used
extensively in authentic real-world planning situations (Arias, 1996), the tools involving
integrated physical and computational support are relatively new and, with the amount of
work needed to make tools useful for the community, are beginning to reach the level
necessary for supporting intense collaborative work. In one project, we have begun to use
and evolve the EDC with the Boulder County Healthy Communities Initiative (BCHCI)
to help citizens understand and collaborate around indicators that shape the city (BCHCI,
1998; Gorman, 1999b). By using these community indicators (such as crime statistics,
water use, pollution, and so on) we are exploring the idea of "citizenís corners," locations
around the city where citizens can interact with the EDC to learn about problems as well
as provide their own input to these community-wide issues. In another application of the
EDC, we support the construction of a new academic building, the Discovery Learning
Center at CU Boulder (Gorman, 1999a). In the construction of this building, architects,
academic tenants, administrators, and students will collaborate in the design of a new
space for teaching and learning. Critical elements of this design will involve designing
the building to evolve over time and creating an academic environment that features
discovery learning (Brown & Campione, 1994).
Conclusions

Supporting existing models that dichotomize consumers and active contributors
encourages a mindset that learning is essentially a one way street. Providing access is an
important contribution of new technologies, but it is limited to cover the full range of
human activities. Without acknowledging needs such as empowerment and informed
participation, we will not address the challenges faced by authentic real-world learning
situations. The EDC provides a first step to move beyond providing access toward
creating a forum that empowers users and enhances informed participation around the
table and beyond.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Taro Adachi, Josh Emhoff, Rogerio dePaula, Shigeru Kurihara, Kelli
Murphy, Jonathan Ostwald, Alexander Repenning, Stefanie Thies, and Jessica Witter for
their work conceptualizing, implementing, and supporting the EDC. They are also
acknowledged for their assistance with the preparation of this paper. This work is
supported by NSF grants CDA-9529549 and REC-9631396.

Bibliography

Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., Silverstein, M., Jacobson, M., Fiksdahl-King, I., & Angel, S.
(1977) A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford University Press,
New York.

Arias, E. G. (1989) "The Contingent Nature of Participation and Housing Research.,"
Guru Nanak Journal of SociologyóSpecial Housing Policy Issue, 10(1-2), pp. 81-99.

Arias, E. G. (1996) "Bottom-up Neighborhood Revitalization: Participatory Decision
Support Approaches and Tools," Urban Studies JournalóSpecial Issue on Housing
Markets, Neighborhood Dynamics and Societal Goals, 33(10), pp. 1831-1848.

Arias, E. G., Eden, H., & Fisher, G. (1997) "Enhancing Communication, Facilitating
Shared Understanding, and Creating Better Artifacts by Integrating Physical and
Computational Media for Design," In Proceedings of DIS'97: Designing Interactive
Systems: Processes, Practices, Methods, & Techniques, ACM, New York, pp. 1-12.

BCHCI (1998) Quality of Life in Boulder County 1998 - A Community Indicators Report,
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO, At
http://home.ucar.edu/bchci/3q98/whatsnew.html.

Brown, A. L.& Campione, J. C. (1994) "Guided Discovery in a Community of Learners,"
In K. McGilly (eds.), Classroom Lessons: Integrating Cognitive Theory and Classroom
Practice, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 229-270.
Brown, D. M. (1997) Understanding Urban Interactions: Summary of a Research
Workshop, National Science Foundation, Washington D.C., At http://www.nsf.gov/cgi-
bin/getpub?sbe981.

Brown, J. S., Duguid, P., & Haviland, S. (1994) "Toward Informed Participation: Six
Scenarios in Search of Democracy in the Information Age," The Aspen Institute
Quarterly, 6(4), pp. 49-73.

Bruner, J. (1996) The Culture of Education, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Eisenberg, M.& Makay, W. (1996) "Real Meets Virtual: Blending Real-World Artifacts
with Computational Media," CHI '96, Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 159-
160.

Engelbart, D. C. (1995) "Toward Augmenting the Human Intellect and Boosting our
Collective IQ," Communications of the ACM, 38(8), pp. 30-33.

EOE (1999) Educational Object Economy, At http://www.eoe.org.

ESCOT (1999) Educational Software Components of Tomorrow, At
http://www.escot.org/.

Fischer, G. (1991) "Supporting Learning on Demand with Design Environments," In L.
Birnbaum (eds.), International Conference on the Learning Sciences (Evanston, IL),
Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education, pp. 165-172.

Fischer, G. (1994) "Turning Breakdowns into Opportunities for Creativity," Knowledge-
Based Systems, Special Issue on Creativity and Cognition, 7(4), pp. 221-232.

Fischer, G. (1996) Making Learning a Part of Life ó Beyond the "Gift Wrapping"
Approach to Technology, At http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~l3d/presentations/gf-wlf/.

Fischer, G. (1997) "Evolution of Complex Systems by Supporting Collaborating
Communities of Practice," In International Conference on Computers in Education,
Kuching, Malaysia, Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education
(AACE), pp. 9-17.

Fischer, G. (1998a) "Beyond 'Couch Potatoes': From Consumers to Designers," In IEEE
(eds.), 1998 Asia-Pacific Computer and Human Interaction, APCHI'98, IEEE Computer
Society, pp. 2-9.

Fischer, G. (1998b) "Seeding, Evolutionary Growth and Reseeding: Constructing,
Capturing and Evolving Knowledge in Domain-Oriented Design Environments,"
Automated Software Engineering, 5(4), pp. 447-464.
Fischer, G., Lemke, A. C., McCall, R., & Morch, A. (1996) "Making Argumentation
Serve Design," In T. Moran & J. Carrol (eds.), Design Rationale: Concepts, Techniques,
and Use, Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 267-293.

Gamelan (1999) GamelanóThe Official Java Directory, At http://www.gamelan.com.

Gans, H. J. (1968) People and Plans: Essays on Urban Problems and Solutions, Basic
Books, New York.

Gorman, A. (1999a) Discovery Learning Center Home Page, At http://discovery-
learning.colorado.edu.

Gorman, A. (1999b) The Envisionment and Discovery CollaboratoryóUrban Planning,
At http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~l3d/systems/EDC/architecture/urban-planning.html.

Grudin, J. (1994) "Groupware and social dynamics: Eight challenges for developers,"
Communications of the ACM, 37(1), pp. 92-105.

Guzdial, M. (1999) "Collaborative Websites to Support an Open Authoring Community
on the Web," Journal of the Learning Sciences (Submitted), .

Guzdial, M.& Weingarten, F. W. (1995) Setting a Computer Science Research Agenda
for Educational Technology , (CRA Report No. 1995). National Science Foundation.

Illich, I. (1971) Deschooling Society, Harper and Row, New York.

Illich, I. (1973) Tools for Conviviality, Harper and Row, New York.

Kato, H., Yamazaki, K., Suzuki, H., Kuzuoka, H., Miki, H., & Yamazaki, A. (1997)
"Designing a Video-Based Collaboration System Based on a Body Metaphor," CSCL 97,
pp. 142-149.

Koschmann, T. D. (Ed.) (1996) CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm,
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.

Lave, J. (1988) Cognition in Practice, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Moran, T. P.& Carroll, J. M. (Ed.) (1996) Design Rationale: Concepts, Techniques, and
Use, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Mahwah, NJ.

Nardi, B. A. (1993) A Small Matter of Programming, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Norman, D. A. (1993) Things That Make Us Smart, Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, Reading, MA.

Ostwald, J. (1999) DynaSites, At At http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~ostwald.
PCSD (1996) "Sustainable America: A New Consensus for Prosperity, Opportunity, and
a Healthy Environment for the Future," In President's Council on Sustainable
Development (ed.), Washington, D.C.: President's Council on Sustainable Development.

PITAC (1999) "Information Technology Research: Investing in Our Future," In
President's Information Technology Advisory Committee (ed.), Arlington, VA: National
Coordination Office for Computing, Information, and Communications.

Polanyi, M. (1966) The Tacit Dimension, Doubleday, Garden City, NY.

Popper, K. R. (1965) Conjectures and Refutations, Harper & Row, New York,
Hagerstown, San Francisco, London.

Postman, N. (1985) Amusing Ourselves to DeathóPublic Discourse in the Age of Show
Business, Penguin Books, New York.

Raymond, E. S. (1998) The Cathedral and the Bazaar, At
http://www.tuxedo.org/~esr/writings/cathedral-bazaar/cathedral-bazaar.html.

Repenning, A., Rausch, M., Phillips, J., & Ioannidou, A. (1998) "Using Agents as a
Currency of Exchange between End-Users," Proceedings of the WebNET 98 World
Conference of the WWW, Internet, and Intranet, Orlando, FL.

Repenning, A.& Sumner, T. (1995) "Agentsheets: A Medium for Creating Domain-
Oriented Visual Programming Languages," IEEE Computer, Special Issue on Visual
Programming, 28(3), pp. 17-25.

Resnick, L. B., Levine, J. M., & Teasley, S. D. (Ed.) (1991) Perspectives on Socially
Shared Cognition, American Psychological Association, Washington, D.C.

Rittel, H. (1984) "Second-Generation Design Methods," In N. Cross (eds.), Developments
in Design Methodology, John Wiley & Sons, New York, pp. 317-327.

Rogoff, B., Matusov, E., & White, C. (1998) "Models of Teaching and Learning:
Participation in a Community of Learners," In D. R. O. a. N. Torrance (eds.), The
Handbook of Education and Development, pp. 388-414.

Roschelle, J., DiGiano, C., Koutlis, M., Repenning, A., Phillips, J., Jackiw, N., &
Suthers, D. (1999) "Developing Edcuational Software Components," Computer, 32(9),
pp. 50-58.

Scardamalia, M.& Bereiter, C. (1994) "Computer Support for Knowledge-Building
Communities," Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), pp. 265-283.
Schön, D. (1992) "Designing as reflective conversation with the materials of a design
situation," Knowledge-Based Systems Journal, Special Issue on AI in Design, 5(1), pp. 3-
14.

Schön, D. A. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action,
Basic Books, New York.

Stahl, G. (1993) Interpretation in Design: The Problem of Tacit and Explicit
Understanding in Computer Support of Cooperative Design, Ph.D. Dissertation.,
University of Colorado at Boulder.

Terveen, L., Hill, W., Amento, B., McDonald, D., & Creter, J. (1997) "PHOAKS: A
System for Sharing Recommendation," Communications of the ACM, 40(3), pp. 59-62.

Authors' addresses

Ernesto G. Arias (ernie@colorado.edu)
College of Architecture and Planning; ENVD152, CB314; University of Colorado at
Boulder; Boulder, CO, 80309. Tel (303)492-6914
Hal Eden (haleden@cs.colorado.edu)
Department of Computer Science; ECOT 717, CB 430;University of Colorado at
Boulder; Boulder, CO, 80309. Tel (303)492-7104
Gerhard Fischer (gerhard@cs.colorado.edu)
Department of Computer Science; ECOT 717, CB 430;University of Colorado at
Boulder; Boulder, CO, 80309. Tel (303)492-1502
Andrew Gorman (agorman@cs.colorado.edu)
Department of Computer Science; ECOT 717, CB 430;University of Colorado at
Boulder; Boulder, CO, 80309. Tel (303)492-1677
Eric Scharff (scharffe@cs.colorado.edu)
Department of Computer Science; ECOT 717, CB 430;University of Colorado at
Boulder; Boulder, CO, 80309. Tel (303)492-1218
