"It's not just programming:" Reflection and the Nature
of Experience in Learning Through Design
Cynthia Carter Ching

Graduate School of Education & Information Studies, University of California, Los
Angeles

      Abstract: When students with varying levels of expertise collaborate on
      computer-based design projects, different roles for experienced and
      inexperienced designers often emerge. The goal of this study was to
      determine if students with different levels of experience, knowledge, and
      skill in learning through design are aware of these differences; and also if
      they are aware of how this variation affects their collaborative
      interactions. Toward this end, sixty-two fourth and fifth-grade designers
      with varying levels of expertise in design and programming were
      interviewed following their participation in a 10-week learning through
      design project. Students were asked to identify differences between
      experienced and inexperienced designers. Their responses were classified
      via an emergent coding scheme. Results showed that students were aware
      of differences not only in requisite skills, but also how these skills
      contributed to collaborative interactions. Students cited knowledge and
      interaction differences in relation to visible skills like programming more
      often than other meta-design skills, such as planning and project
      monitoring.

      Keywords: learning through design, discourse analysis, assessment of
      learning

Introduction

Researchers in CSCL are currently striving to document the effectiveness of technology-
infused curricular interventions such as project-based learning, learning through design,
inquiry-based learning, and a whole host of other models for meaningful reform in
mathematics and science education. Evaluations of such curricula have focused on
content mastery in mathematics, science, or engineering (e.g., Brown, 1991; Kolodner,
1998; Roth, 1998); technology skill acquisition (e.g., Harel, 1991; Kafai, 1995; Lehrer,
1992); studentsí self-monitoring and project management (Carver, et. al., 1992; Marshall
& Kafai, 1998); and student interest and motivation (e.g., Fredricks & Blumenfeld,
1997). In all four of these areas, research has yielded encouraging results. Several
questions still remain, however; one of these is the extent to which students themselves
are aware of developments in their knowledge and skills after experiencing these kinds of
projects. Another question takes this notion of self-awareness one step further and asks: if
students do realize their own experiential gains, how reflective are they about the ways
this prior experience affects their subsequent performance and collaborations in similar
projects? This study represents a preliminary attempt to address these questions through
an analysis of interviews with students in a learning through design project.

In learning through design, as distinct from project-based or problem-based learning,
students develop deep understanding of academic content by creating meaningful
products that reflect their knowledge of subjects such as mathematics (Hall & Stevens,
1995; Harel, 1991; Kafai, 1995), science (Hoadley & Cuthbert, 1998; Kafai, Ching, &
Marshall; 1997; Kolodner, et. al., 1996), engineering (Roth, 1995), and social sciences
(Lehrer, 1992; Ianodou, Reppening, & Zola, 1998; Yarnall & Kafai, 1997). These
projects require that students not only learn the subject matter well enough to represent it
in a final design, but also that they master the particular means of production used to
create the product itself. Production means can include physical model-making, scale-
model drawing, or the creation of software via programming and/or multimedia
authoring. Acquiring these concrete design skills is therefore a crucial part of the learning
gains that students make in such projects.

Students experiencing learning through design come away with more than academic
knowledge and model-building or computer skills, however. Another set of skills, less
tangible and more difficult to document, plays a crucial role in studentsí success in
learning through design. These skills emerge from practices in which students plan,
manage, monitor, revise, and reflect on their emerging products (Blumenfeld, et. al.,
1991). Such meta-practices have been included in the overall notion of the nature of
design experience as discussed by researchers (e.g., Carver, et. al., 1992; Roth, 1998;
Schon, 1986); however, systematic efforts to document actual gains in these skills have
been rare (c.f., Marshall, 1998).

A question for this research was whether or not students themselves are aware of their
own developing skills and understandings in regard to fluency in the means of production
for their design (i.e., programming and multimedia authoring) and design meta-practices
(i.e., reflective planning and design monitoring). A related study on studentsí "mindful
practices" in learning through designing software found that when asked to talk about
their competencies with programming and planning, students were able to engage in
fairly sophisticated discussions about these topics (Kafai, under revision). Additionally,
research demonstrates that both structured activities and clinical interviews designed to
support studentsí reflections on abstract, metacognitive properties of their science
learning experience can affect studentsí content learning (Ackerman, 1995; White &
Frederiksen, 1998). In the current study, rather than prompting students to talk or write
about specific issues, I wanted to find out what skills and practices they would
spontaneously mention when considering the nature of experience in learning through
design. The focus here is not only on how students conceive of design "experience" as a
property of individuals, but also their awareness of how this experience comes into play
in their design collaborations with others. Lave emphasizes the importance of attempting
to "locate learning throughout the relations of persons in activity in the world," (Lave,
1993, p. 27). It is this directive that influenced the choice here to ask students to reflect,
not about skills or competencies in the abstract, but on the different ways of knowing and
doing exhibited by individuals with varying amounts of design expertise as they worked
in the design project.

As an example of how this type of reflective awareness might look, consider the
following case. Brian, a fifth grade student (all names have been changed), contributed to
the title of this paper. During fall of 1998, he and sixty-three other fourth- and fifth-
graders participated in a research project examining apprenticeships among students with
varying levels of experience in learning through design (Ching, 1999). The studentsí task
was to design and program simulations about marine biology in collaborative teams. In
Brianís classroom, teams contained fifth-graders with prior design experience and fourth-
graders with no design experience. When asked in the final interview if there were any
differences between how fourth- and fifth-graders worked on the simulation design
project, Brian replied:

        Brian: Well, we [5th graders] have experience, so sometimes we help them
        [4th] with the simulations.

        Researcher: How do you mean? With programming?

        Brian: Yeah, (pause) but itís not just programming, ëcause Melody [a 4th
        grader] pretty good at that. But, like, if I see something thatís not planned
        well, or maybe over-scheduling, then Iíll say something about that.

In his answer Brian asserts that the difference between students with and without
experience in learning through design is that experienced students sometimes help the
inexperienced ones create their collaborative simulations. This is not surprising. His
subsequent response to the interviewerís prompt, however, demonstrates that this "help"
does not consist solely of programming assistance, but also help with design plans and
time management. Brianís conception of "hav[ing] experience" is thus more complex
than technology skill acquisition or knowledge about a particular science topic. But how
representative is Brianís answer of his entire cohort of sixty-three students? Are all
student software designers as aware of their own skills in addition to programming, and
how do they conceptualize the effects these skills have on their collaborations with
others?

In this study it was hypothesized that students with previous design experience would be
able to draw on their own experiences as newcomers to design when they were asked to
consider the design experience from the perspective of their inexperienced collaborators.
Additionally students who collaborated with others having significantly more or less
design experience than themselves were expected to report the most differences in
computer-specific skills such as programming. It was expected that they would also
report differences in meta-practices such as design monitoring and planning, as in Brianís
example above. Students who collaborated with others having only a minimal difference
in design experience from themselves were expected to notice these variations less and
thus report fewer distinctions in skills and meta-practices. Our findings yielded that
students with previous experience were indeed more facile with perspective shifting.
Interestingly though, while the results suggest that experience variations in meta-skills
contribute to studentsí perceptions of overall differences between novice and expert
designers, students rarely mention differences in meta-skills specifically, particularly in
comparison to their prolific citing of programming and computer skills.

Methods

During fall of 1998, two classes of fourth and fifth-grade students participated in a
learning through design project in which they learned marine biology and designed
collaborative software simulations about that topic for a ten-week unit. Both science
classes were taught by the same teacher. In the focus classroom, all fifth-graders (n = 17)
had participated with our research team in a design project during the previous year as
fourth-graders, when they learned neuroscience (see Kafai & Ching, 1998; Marshall &
Kafai, 1998). These students-"oldtimers"-thus had experience in all the facets of our
version of learning through design: integrating learned science content with design,
planning and monitoring in collaborative teams, and programming with Logo
Microworlds. All of the focus fourth-graders-"newcomers"-were new to learning through
design (n = 16), and all but one had not learned Logo programming previously. In the
comparison classroom, all of the fifth grade students (n = 15) had learned a minimal
amount of programming during 1997, but none of them had participated in a full-scale
design project before. As in the focus class, none of the comparison class fourth grade
students had experienced design previously either (n = 15).

Collaborative teams of between three and five students each were created in both classes,
with experienced and inexperienced students distributed equally across groups. This
composition of students across classrooms and teams is ideal for examining studentsí
conceptions of themselves and others as designers, in that students with more experience
in various facets of design regularly collaborate with inexperienced students to create
their simulations. Students thus have ample opportunities to observe the ways in which
prior knowledge and skills affect not only individual experience but collaborative
patterns as well. The question is whether or not students will reflect on these issues when
asked to talk about the nature of design experience.

The data for this study comes from a set of post-interviews conducted with all sixty-three
students in both classrooms. One studentís interview was left out of analysis due to faulty
sound recording (a female newcomer) for a total of 62 interviews. All interviews were
videotaped. During the post-interviews students answered questions about multiple
aspects of the design project. This study focuses only the last three questions, which dealt
with student impressions of differences between fourth- and fifth-graders. Specifically,
students were asked the following questions:

   1.  Can you think of any differences between 4th and 5th graders in terms of how they
       worked on the simulation design project? What are they?
   2.  What does it mean to be a 4th grader working on this simulation design project?
  3.   What does it mean to be a 5th grader working on this simulation design project?
All students were asked all three questions, such that students had opportunities to reflect
on their own situation as well as that of students in the other grade level. Oldtimers are
distinct, however, in that when answering the second question they can draw on their own
experiences as a newcomer to design during the previous year, in addition to reflecting on
the perspective of fourth-graders in the current project.

The portions of student interviews containing these last three questions were all
transcribed completely. A subset of the interviews was used to create an emergent coding
scheme for the qualities that students spontaneously mentioned which distinguished
experienced and inexperienced designers. It became obvious while creating the scheme
that studentsí discussions of the nature of design experience were not limited to the
confines of particular questions. The three questions together elicited a comprehensive
range of answers, but each question did not seem to capture a unique aspect of studentsí
reflections. For this reason, the entire interview segment containing student responses to
all three questions was coded thematically, rather than coding each question separately.
Each utterance that raised a particular theme was coded; therefore, students could
mention several types of differences between fourth and fifth graders and have their
variety of responses captured by the scheme.

The three main qualities students in the scheme-creation subset named as distinguishing
experienced students from inexperienced students were as follows: (a) knowledge
differences, (c) affective differences, and (d) differences in social roles within
collaborative groups. There was also a fourth code for (e) no difference. Some of these
umbrella codes were broken down further to represent more detail; this will be discussed
in the following section. After the scheme was determined, the interviews used for
creating the scheme were randomly dispersed throughout the rest of the data set, and all
interviews were coded by two separate coders. Twenty percent of the interviews were
coded for inter-rater reliability by both coders, and the results yielded that raters had
reliable agreement (alpha = .9276).

Results

Students in both classrooms seemed fairly aware of the effects that previous knowledge
and skills had on the personal experiences of individuals in the design project and also on
collaborations within teams. There were interesting differences in several areas between
oldtimers and newcomers, and between the focus and comparison classes. Reporting of
results has been broken down into: the emergence of categories and subcategories in
student responses, breadth of characteristic awareness, differences in affect and reported
knowledge, and differences in reported social roles. Each will be discussed in turn.

Emergent codes for types of difference

As cited above, the main codes that emerged from student responses were affective
differences, knowledge differences, and social role differences. There was also a fourth
code for "no difference." The descriptions students gave of knowledge and social role
differences were more multifaceted than could be captured by a single code, however. In
terms of knowledge differences, the different types of knowledge students cited were as
follows: (a) general or unspecified knowledge [e.g., "fifth-graders seemed to know
more"], (b) knowledge about programming specifically [e.g., "they were newer to
Microworlds than us"], and (c) knowledge about specific aspects of design other than
programming [e.g., "fourth-graders didnít know how to spread out the work"]. The social
roles code refers to differences students mention in regard to how fourth- and fifth-grade
students interacted with each other. Most often students phrased this difference in terms
of giving or receiving help with some aspect of project work. As with knowledge
differences, the picture painted by students was more complex than the initial category.
They cited the following types of social roles: (a) general or unspecified giving and
receiving help [e.g., "we had to help the fourth-graders to know what to do"], (b) giving
or receiving help with programming [e.g., "you could always ask a fifth-grader if your
animation wouldnít work"], and (c) giving or receiving help with other specific aspects of
design [e.g., "fourth-graders couldnít make the schedule by themselves"]. Together with
the single code of affective difference, these sub-codes for knowledge and social role
differences make up seven types of observations students spontaneously cited as
distinguishing fourth and fifth grade designers. That students could spontaneously discuss
differences in such a complex and sophisticated manner supports the argument that
design provides students a rich context in which to learn and interact with tools, artifacts,
and with each other.

Breadth of characteristic awareness

In order to assess the breadth of characteristic differences students cited between fourth
and fifth-grade designers, each studentís entire set of responses for all three interview
questions was examined as the unit of analysis. Student interviews were analyzed for the
total number of difference types students mentioned. For example, a newcomer who
mentioned receiving help with programming, fifth graders knowing more, and it feeling
harder as a fourth grader would receive a total score of 3. Oldtimers spontaneously
generated more types of difference (M = 4.000, SD = 1.368) than newcomers (M = 2.800,
SD = 1.082), comparison fifth-graders (M = 2.933, SD = 1.387), or comparison fourth-
graders (M = 3.200, SD = 1.265). Analysis of variance revealed that oldtimersí breadth of
citations was significantly greater than that of any other group (MS = 4.713, F = 2.855, p
< .05).

While breadth of awareness demonstrates studentsí understanding of designís complexity,
occasionally students did in fact cite no differences at all between fourth and fifth grade
designers at some point. Most of these students either contradicted themselves later or
explicitly changed their minds in response to a subsequent question in the interview; thus
it is tempting to throw out the "no difference" responses. Capturing these utterances,
however, yields some insight into how salient such differences were, that students would
even consider "no difference" as an answer. The proportion of comparison fifth-graders
reporting "no difference" at some point (60.0%) was much larger than that of any other
group (see table 1). This result suggests that these fifth-graders did not perceive that their
previous programming experience represented a significant difference between
themselves and their fourth-grade counterparts. Since both fourth and fifth-graders in the
comparison class had never experienced full-scale design before, this result supports the
argument that skills other than programming play an important role in constituting design
expertise.

                Table 1. Perceived differences by class and grade level.

Differences in affect and reported knowledge

One area in which there were notable differences between grade levels in the focus class-
-between students with prior design experience and those without--was in terms of
mentioning affective differences. Focus fifth-graders cited differences in "how it feels" to
be a fifth-grader versus fourth-grader in the design project over twice as often (41.2%) as
fourth-graders did (20.0%). This result suggests that affective differences may be more
salient to oldtimers, because they can draw on their own experiences as fourth-grade
designers in the previous year for their reflections. Indeed, after examining oldtimersí
responses a second time, it appears that many of them did compare their own experiences
during the two consecutive years. Consider the following example:

      Researcher: What does it mean to be a fourth-grader working on this
      simulation design project?

      Lena: Well, I remember you feel kinda stupid at first. Like, you donít
      know what to do.

      Researcher: And then what does it mean to be a fifth-grader working on
      this simulation design project?

      Lena: You feel more in contol, I think. You can tell whatís gonna happen
      next.

In contrast to the focus class, comparison fifth-graders (33%) and fourth-graders (26%)
had similar estimations of affective differences between experienced and inexperienced
students in their classroom. Comparison fifth-graders also rarely talked about their own
experiences learning programming the year before in reflecting on the perspective of
fourth-graders in the design project. A possible explanation for this result is that because
fifth-gradersí prior knowledge was skill-based rather than practice-based, it was therefore
not as comparable to the current design project.
In discussing skills or knowledge-based differences between experienced and
inexperienced designers, students in both classrooms were fairly similar in their
impressions. Interesting differences arose from this analysis, both between classrooms
and in the total population among sub-codes. Students in both classes cited differences in
general knowledge and programming knowledge relatively frequently. Differences in
knowledge about specific design skills or practices other than programming, however,
were cited very infrequently by comparison. Interestingly, the only group of students to
mention differences in knowledge of meta-practices was fourth-graders in the Novice
Class (16.6%). This result is somewhat surprising, in that the specific design skills and
practices other than programming are precisely those things that distinguished oldtimers
from newcomers. One might expect that these differences would be cited more often, at
least among oldtimers.

Differences in social roles

In the focus class, differences in programming roles were cited by a much larger
percentage of oldtimers (28.1%) than newcomers (15.6%). A similar pattern to that of
knowledge differences emerged across categories in the total population. Differences in
general social roles and social roles related to programming help were cited by a large
proportion of all students. Again, differences in social roles related to help with meta-
design skills or practices were rarely mentioned. In contrast to knowledge differences,
however, here in their discussions of social role differences, the only students to cite
differences in help giving or receiving in meta-practices were oldtimers (13.0%). This
result is more in line with what was expected, but it is puzzling why meta-practices were
not cited more often.

Discussion

The goal of this study was to determine if students in a learning through design project
were aware of significant differences between experienced and inexperienced designers,
in regard to their individual experiences and knowledge, and also how that experience or
lack thereof affects interactions with others. The results suggest that students are aware of
these differences and can talk about them in multiple ways: in affective terms, in terms of
individual knowledge, and in terms of resulting social roles. Oldtimers seemed to have
more of a multifaceted understanding of the various ways in which design experience
affects collaborative interactions, as evidenced by their receiving significantly more
difference codes. Furthermore, prior participation in a complete design project seemed to
make much more of an impression on students about experience differences than prior
programming knowledge, as seen by the much larger proportion of students in the focus
class who said that there were differences between fourth- and fifth-graders. Students
with this prior design experience were also able to talk more about affective differences
and perspective-taking due to recalling their own feelings during the previous year.

While these are encouraging results, other findings of this study raise still more
questions. Why were there no notable differences between focus class and comparison
class students on their impressions of experience-based knowledge and social role
distinctions? One would expect that the distinction between prior design experience and
prior programming knowledge would have more of an effect on these areas. Further, why
did most students virtually ignore the planning, monitoring, and facilitation aspects of
design in their discussions of knowledge and social role differences? Following is an
attempt to provide possible answers for these questions.

One possible explanation for both the questions raised above stems from the issue of
what knowledge and skills are most valued by students. Previous research demonstrates
that computer use and skills tend to be highly valued by students in technology-infused
classroomsómore so than other practices which also contribute to project-based work
(Ching, Kafai, & Marshall, 1998; Kinnear, 1995). Thus it could be that students notice
these differences more in practice due to their status value, which explains why they
specifically mention programming more than other design skills in the interviews.
Alternatively, students may take note of the differences in other design skills, but do not
mention them to interviewers. Perhaps students lump these planning and monitoring
skills in with "general" knowledge or help in their discussions but point out only
programming specifically. Since fifth-graders in both classrooms had prior programming
knowledge, differences in prior experience with other design practices may have been
overshadowed by the higher status valence of programming skill.

A different explanation for studentsí neglect of planning, monitoring, and revising skills
in their discussions deals with the visibility of such practices in the design environment.
These activities are strongly situated within the design project itself and its
interconnected practices; consequently, they may be difficult for students to think about
in abstract terms on a continuum of skill. Lave and Wenger argue that in communities of
practice, the breakdown of practice-specific activity into component "skills" is an
artificial construct imposed on the community by researchers and evaluators. In everyday
activity, the authors claim, such abstract "theories of practice" have little relevance to
conceptions of learning and doing in these communities (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Thus it
could be that students in design projects, when prompted to talk specifically about their
"skills" in planning and revising designs, are able to make these "artificial" distinctions.
When they spontaneously generate characteristic identifiers of experienced and
inexperienced designers, however, these distinctions in meta-design skills remain bound
to specific practices and are not seen as abstract properties of individuals.

This study has demonstrated that students can reflect on the nature of experience in
design projects in multiple ways. This research, along with other interview studies of
students in design (Kafai, under review) and other project-based environments (Roth,
1998), contributes toward our understandings of what kinds of skills, knowledge, and
experiences students obtain from these curricular interventions.

References

Ackerman, E. (1995). Construction and transferance of meaning through form. In L.
Steffe & J. Gale (Eds.), Constructivism in education. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 341-
354.
Blumenfeld, P., Soloway, E., Marx, R., Krajcik, J., Guzdial, M. & Palincsar, A. (1991).
Motivating project-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning.
Educational Psychologist, 26, 369-398

Brown, A. (1992) Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological issues. Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 1-37.

Carver, S., Lehrer, R., Connell, T., & Erickson, J. (1992). Learning by hypermedia
design: Issues of assessment and implementation. Educational Psychologist, 27, 385-404.

Ching, C. C. (1999). Tools of the trade: Apprenticeship and artifacts in childrenís
software design. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational
Research Association. Montreal, Canada.

Fredricks, J., Blumenfeld, P., & Bass, K. (1997). The relationship between motivation,
thoughtfulness, and group processes: An exploration of gender in project based science
classrooms. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research
Association. Chicago, IL. 1997.

Hall, R. & Stevens, R. (1995). Making space: A comparison of mathematical work in
school and professional design practices. In S. L. Starr (Ed.), The cultures of computing.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers.

Harel, I. (1991). Children designers. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Hoadley, C. & Cuthbert, A. (1998). Designing desert houses in the Knowledge
Integration Environment. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
Educational Research Association. San Diego, CA. 1998.

Ioannidou, A. Reppenning, A., & Zola, J. (1998). Posterboards or Java Applets? In A.
Bruckman, M. Guzdial, J. Kolodner, & A. Ram (Eds.), Proceedings of the International
Conference on the Learning Sciences. Atlanta, GA. 1998.

Kafai, Y. B., Ching, C. C., & Marshall, S. (1997). Children as designers of educational
multimedia software. Computers and Education, 29, 117-126.

Kafai, Y. B. (under revision). The development of mindful practices in software design
projects. Manuscript under revision for publication.

Kafai, Y. B. (1995). Minds in play: Computer game design as a context for childrenís
learning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Kinnear, A. (1995). Introduction of microcomputers: A case study of patterns of use and
childrenís perceptions. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 13, 27-40.
Kolodner, J., Crismond, D, Gray, J., Holbrook, J., & Putembakar, S. (1998). Learning by
design: From theory to practice. In A. Bruckman, M. Guzdial, J. Kolodner, & A. Ram
(Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on the Learning Sciences. Atlanta,
GA. 1998.

Kolodner, J., Hmelo, C. & Narayanan, N. (1996). Problem-based learning meets case-
based reasoning. In D. Edelson & E. Domoshek (Eds.), Proceedings of the International
Conference on the Learning Sciences. Charlottesville, VA: AACE.

Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.
Cambridge University Press

Lave, J. (1993). The practice of learning. In S. Chaiklin & J. Lave (Eds.), Understanding
practice: Perspectives on activity and context. Cambridge University Press.

Lehrer, R. (1992). Authors of knowledge: Patterns of hypermedia design. In S. Lajoie &
S. Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Marshall, S. (1998). Planning in context: A situated view of childrenís management of
science projects. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of California, Los
Angeles.

Marshall, S. & Kafai, Y. B. (1998). Childrenís development of planning tools for
managing complex software design projects. . In A. Bruckman, M. Guzdial, J. Kolodner,
& A. Ram (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on the Learning Sciences.
Atlanta, GA. 1998.

Roth, W. M. (1998). Desigining communities. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

Roth, W. M. (1995). Inventors, copycats, and everyone else: The emergence of shared
resources and practices as defining aspects of classroom communities. Science
Education, 79, 475-502.

Schon, D. (1986). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. NY:
Basic Books.

White, B. & Frederiksen, J. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making
science accesssible to all students. Cognition & Instruction, 16, 3-118.

Acknowledgments

This research is sponsored by a grant from the National Science Foundation to Yasmin B.
Kafai, (REC 9632695). Manuscript preparation was supported in part by a dissertation
year fellowship from UCLA. Thanks to Cathleen Galas and her students at UCLAís
University Elementary School for their participation. Conversations with Sue Marshall
and Chris Hoadley have been instrumental to my understanding of meta-skills as a
learning goal for students in design projects. Jennifer Cao assisted with the transcription
and coding of the student interviews. Thanks also to Yasmin Kafai and Noel Enyedy for
their helpful and insightful comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript.

Authors' Address

Cynthia Carter Ching (cching@ucla.edu)
2128 Moore Hall, Box 951521; UCLA Graduate School of Education & Information
Studies; Los Angeles, CA 90095-1521. Tel (310) 794-9503.
