Infusing Engaged Learning Strategies and Modeling
Software into Sixth Grade Classrooms: The Achieving
High Academic Standards Project (AHAS)
William H. Conrad, III, Raul Zaritsky, Michael Munroe

      Abstract: The Achieving High Academic Standards Project (AHAS) of the
      Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE) is an ongoing in-service and
      dissemination project that provides an engaged-learning professional
      development program for sixth grade teachers using modeling tasks. The
      project included thirty-eight sixth grade classrooms (approximately 1000
      students) in eight public school districts and three private schools
      throughout Illinois. The classrooms selected are all low SES, high
      mobility and high special education enrollments. The project provided
      classrooms with a new computer, pedagogy and technology for model
      building. The educational goals were selected to achieve the math
      standards of data collection, representation, and interpretation. Results
      indicate an actual cost, including a new computer and wiring, of $225 per
      student participating in the project. Teacher surveys and observation in
      classroom visits indicate over 80% active use of modeling software by
      students in modeling energy systems within their schools. Over 70% of
      teachers report that they will continue using the modeling software beyond
      the project end. The AHAS Project is a collaboration among the National
      Computational Science Alliance (NCSA), the North Central Regional
      Technology in Educational Center (NCRTEC) and the participating school
      districts. Funding for $0.25 million is from the ISBE. Partial funding and
      support are also provided by NCRTEC.

      Keywords: Collaboration (university/school/industry), Improving
      Classroom Teaching, Modeling Tools and Activities in Education

Introduction:

The Achieving High Academic Standards Project (AHAS) is a collaborative partnership
between 8 public school districts, 3 private schools throughout the state of Illinois, the
ISBE, NCSA and NCRTEC. This collaborative partnership seeks to infuse technology
into the ecology of sixth grade classrooms in order to help students access and attain
mathematics standards. The project has six main goals:

   ·  Facilitate staff development in the use of engaged learning strategies and
      modeling software with students

   ·  Coordinate continued research of modeling technology use in in-service
      professional development
   ·     Provide action research projects for teachers

   ·     Facilitate further development and dissemination of Modeling and Visualization
         curriculum materials by NCSA Education Outreach and Training Division (EOT)
         and the NCRTEC

   ·     Coordinate the development of teacher- and student-generated web sites to
         communicate ideas and strategies learned in technology-rich engaged learning
         units

   ·     Facilitate development of a system of outcome measurement and accountability to
         the Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE)

Engaged learning in professional development

The thirty-eight teachers participating in the project attended five workshops throughout
the year to develop engaged learning units around the topic of electrical energy
conservation within their school, the development of action research questions and plans,
the use of computer based tools such as spreadsheet and modeling software within the
context of the engaged learning unit, and the creation of web sites for communication.
Teachers also received just-in-time support for implementing the project and for using a
distributed interpersonal communications multi-user, collaborative work environments,
the NCSA Habanero technology (), provided by the third author, a graduate student from
the University of Illinois. Additionally, teachers received in-person support plus
instructional videotapes produced by the principal investigators about how to use
spreadsheet software, modeling software, and web development software.

School selection process

Schools were selected to participate in this project based upon a matrix that represented
low SES, mobility rate, bilingual population, and special education %. A summary of
these percentages per school follows:

Table 1: School Selection Process Data

District           School       Total      Hispanic Black  Low      Limited   Truant
                              Enrollment                  Income    English
                                              %     %             Proficiency  Rate
                                                             %
                                                                       %        %
Aurora East    C. F. Simmons 729          72      12.9    55      18.7        17.8
Aurora East    H. W.          497         51.3    31.2    58.1    0           7.9
               Cowherd
Belleville     Union          436         0.5     27.5    43.1    0           0.5
Carpentersville Carpentersville 1136      37.8    10.7    34.2    26.1        4.6
               Middle School
Cahokia        Elizabeth      389       0.7     57.6  73.3    0.0        1.0
               Morris
Cahokia        Centerville    511       0.0     87.1  73.0    0.0        1.6
Crystal Lake   North Middle   728       3.8     0.1   9.3     0.0        0.0
Crystal Lake   Lundahl        914       2.6     0.9   3.3     0.0        0.0
               Middle
Crystal Lake   Beardsley      805       5.8     0.7   8.3     1.2        0.0
               Middle
Mt. Vernon     Dr. Andy Hall  179       2.2     26.8  48.0    0.0        1.7
Palatine       Virginia Lake  660       30.5    10.3  32.4    13.2       0.0
Wabash         North Middle   628       0.0     1.0   33.6    0.0        3.2

Thirty-eight teachers were directly involved in the project. These teachers involved 140
clock hours of training and professional development. Approximately 1000 students were
involved.

Engaged learning models

The project sought to provide teachers with instructional pedagogy that they could use
within their classrooms to help students access and achieve mathematics standards
identified by the Illinois State Board of Education. The use of engaged learning models
as an instructional pedagogy has strong research support in cognitive research regarding
the effectiveness of active engagement of students in the learning process. (Posner,
Strike, Hewson, and Gertzog, 1982; Shuell, 1990). In addition, empirical research has
demonstrated that the effectiveness of actively engaging students in the learning process
helps students achieve academic success. (Roth, 1994; Conrad, 1996). In Illinois the
second author has used his experience providing engaged learning curriculum and in-
service training, first as part of the Collaboratory Visualization Project (CoVis), (Pea,
1994) in the design of the AHAS project. Related work in the development of
infrastructure for schools () has been used by the AHAS project team. Future plans for
AHAS are informed by NCSA developments of new portals for education (Zaritsky,
1997; Zaritsky, 1998)

Teachers used an engaged learning model that was roughly based upon the work
described by Cheek (1992). Based upon the work of Soloway, (1997, 1998) Krajcik
(1998) and a common theoretical perspective (Collins, 1988) (Morrison, 1998), teachers
used reflective software () to develop a concept web for their unit. Teachers then
identified three to four standards that they would like to address in the unit and they
developed teaching events and assessments for these standards. Teachers identified a
method for engaging students in the electrical energy project. For example, some of the
teachers developed a Request for Proposal Model that was presented to students by
Business Department personnel. Teachers then identified a process whereby students
would be able to demonstrate their learning at the end of the unit. Some teachers
developed the culminating project of presenting their findings before a meeting of the
School Board.

Modeling software

An important element of this project was to help teachers infuse modeling software into
the ecology of their sixth grade classrooms. Work done by Soloway et al (1998)
demonstrate, through case studies, the effectiveness of Model-It software in helping high
school students achieve academic success.

Teachers in the AHAS Project participated in two days of workshops at the NCSA where
they learned how to use EXCEL software to collect and organize data as part of an
energy audit of their school. Additionally, teachers learned how to use Model-It software
and Stella software to create simple models of budgets and a modified model of the
electrical energy system of the average school building.

Teachers received the hardware and software necessary for their students to use and
create their own models. Teachers and students received just-in-time support from a
graduate student and researchers from NCSA. They also received videotaped programs
produced by the authors demonstrating how their students could use various modeling
software including: Excel software, Model-It software, and Stella software. Teachers also
received a videotape produced by the authors of how to use a commercial web
construction software package () and were provided the software for producing web sites
to describe their project. One of the project teams produced a web site () where various
engaged learning and modeling artifacts can be found.

Preliminary results of the project indicate that teachers and students are not only using the
technology within the context of the Electrical Energy Project but that they are also using
it in other projects. For example, one of the schools created a model called "Garbage" that
they use as part of their Recycling Unit. Other teachers are using the modeling software
as part of their mathematics units by having students model their budgets and allowances.

Action research and project communication

As part of the staff development component of the project, teachers participated in a full
day workshop to learn how to conduct action research around questions that they develop
related to their engaged learning project. Research by Schon (1983), Todnem and Warner
(1995) demonstrates the importance of self-reflection and action research in helping
teachers improve their practice and ultimately improve the academic success of their
students.

Guy Todnem from the Illinois Math and Science Academy conducted two full day
workshops with teachers. He actively engaged the teachers in a mini-action research
project where they used a four-step action research model: Develop a question, Plan a
Study, Collect the Data, and Interpret the data. Teachers used this model in a mini-action
research project that they conducted at the workshop.
During a full day workshop, researchers and graduate students from NCSA involved
teachers in initiating a web site for their projects using NetFusion. Teachers received the
software and just-in-time support from the graduate students in the development of local
web pages. This work is currently in progress.

Preliminary results and accountability

Preliminary results conducted with a sample of 30% of the schools who specifically
requested additional training demonstrate a 90% participation in workshops and on-line
communication. 80% of this sample reported professional development outcomes of the
production of visions for engaged learning and working in teams to experience and model
exemplary group processes. 90% of this sample reported regular technology usage
throughout the project, and finally 90% reported student use of technology.

The ISBE funded the AHAS Project for $0.25 million. Policy requires that the infusion of
engaged learning models and technology into the ecology of sixth grade classrooms can
demonstrate students outcomes of access and achievement of one or more of the state of
Illinois Standards for Learning. It is imperative for the authors as principal investigators
to develop initial systems for reporting results to policy makers in order that data be used
in further decisions with regard to support for promising instructional pedagogies and
instructional technologies.

Prior to the project many of the schools who signed on to the project did not have
computers within their classrooms. These schools demonstrated significant demographic
deficits of low SES, high mobility rates, high percentage of special education students,
and second language learners. The AHAS project provided these schools with the
hardware, software, and staff development necessary to carry out technology-rich
engaged learning units within their schools.

Significant to this study was the availability via distance education tools of a graduate
student instructor who could be called upon to solve simpler questions quickly via
technology, or would within usually a week make a trip to a school to provide more
directed on-site support. Using this model of a working help and support staff available to
make "home visits" was a significant addition to the project plan.

A sample of 30% of the classrooms participating in the project was used to provide the
preliminary results reported below. This sample represents schools that have requested
visits. It will be expected that subsequent visits to the remaining schools will demonstrate
lower percentages of implementation, probably in the range of 50-65%. It again should
be noted that the authors suspect that our initial sample is biased towards higher number
due to it representing schools who have requested additional training and were visited
first by researchers from NCSA.
Table 2: Preliminary Results

Category     Outcomes reflected at the 90%   Outcomes reflected
             level                           at the 80% level
Professional Teacher participation in        Creation of a vision
Development workshops and on-line            for engaged learning
             communication
                                             Working in
                                             collaborative teams
                                             to experience and
                                             model exemplary
                                             group processes for
                                             learning
Technology   Implemented Internet            Functioned as a
Use by       technologies as routine         learning community
Teachers     communication tool              through web site
                                             collaboration
             Used e-mail communication
                                             Trained in one or
             Authored web pages              more of the
                                             following software:
                                             Excel, Stella, Model-
                                             it, NetFusion4
Technology   Collected information from on- Used one or more of
Use by       line resources                  the following
Students                                     software: Excel,
             Used software to represent real Stella, Model-it,
             world data                      NetFusion4

             Analyzed data using
             appropriate software

Ongoing Results

The AHAS Project is ongoing. It is anticipated that aggregate state testing (forthcoming,
June 1999) will be used to assess success of the program. Additionally, the following
measures will be used to assess the success of the program: direct observations,
videotaped activities, focused interviews of students and teachers, teacher and student
surveys, student performance assessment measures, student standardized test scores, and
teacher and student artifacts.

Preliminary focus groups with teachers within the project have provided a ranked listing
of the utility of the various software used in the project in the following way.
   ·   Most comfort with Excel
   ·   Some comfort in using Stella within their classrooms for specific tasks
   ·   Least comfort in using the Model-It Program due to bugs in the program

In focus groups, students reported:

   ·   Most comfort with Model-It and noted potential for additional usage
   ·   Some comfort in using Excel
   ·   Least comfort in working with Stella for specific tasks

Results of Classroom Observation & Discussion

The goals for modeling by students and teachers were seen to differ. One of the
interesting results of early surveys was that when presented the two types of modeling
programs, Stella and Model-It, the teachers preferred Stella and the students preferred
Model-It. The reason for this is probably two-fold, one has to do with the "bugs" in the
Model-It commercial program and the other has to do with elementary conceptions of
science. The Model-It program supplied to the teachers for their PC's had many initial
glitches that made it uncomfortable for the beginner to use. Since the start of the project
the company took care of many of these glitches and the program became much easier to
use. The students saw only the corrected Model-It version ­ the one without the glitches;
whereas, the teachers remember the frustration associated with the original glitches.

However there may be another reason for the difference between student and teacher
preferences for modeling software. Stella is a program that works with exact numbers and
equations; whereas, Model-It works only with relationships and need not have any
numbers at all. For Model-It, an Y=X graph is represented as X increases Y increases
about the same. However, Y and X would be known as the variable they each represent.
So, an Y=X2 graph would be represented as X increases Y increases more and more. For
the sixth grade audience these textual representation are easier to understand and easier to
employ. For trained Mathematics and Science teachers this approach can come across
imprecise and unscientific. However, the Model-It process is a good tool to understand
relationships and if preciseness is needed later it is a good starting point for a Stella
model.

Results of On-Line Support for Teachers via distance education technologies:

A key component of the distance education was that of support by e-mail or on-site visits.
After the teachers were brought together for seminars on engaged learning and instruction
in the various software it was often months before they put this learning into effect. Also
whereas in the seminar sessions they were given a general education of the software,
support was needed later as teachers needed answers to problems with their specific
model or with program bugs. Some of the support necessary for a refresher on the
software and specific questions could be answered through e-mail. However, the most
effective support was that of an on-site visit. Six of the eight participating school districts
had an on-site visit, including one district that had two visits. Four of these visitations
were for teacher support, in preparation for teaching, so that they could then share with
their students models and resources. The other two were for co-teaching in the classroom
of their students. This co-teaching served two functions: a refresher for the teachers and
an introduction to the students. These meetings lasted at most four hours and would not
have been possible without the seminars.

VNC and Habanero technology were used to provide distance learning opportunities
between schools and the NCSA. Distance education without these technologies struggled
as the transmissions of what was being presented in class were fuzzy and almost
incomprehensible. To address this problem the presentation of the modeling program was
put forward with VNC using Habanero, a distance collaboration tool developed at NCSA.
With this the distance education students could read the screen and understand the
presentation. This solved the problem of the distance people comprehending what was
going on in the classroom, but it brought up another problem. This problem was the
difference in teaching styles between distance and local education. If the presentation was
made to the local people in the classroom then the distance people found it occurred too
quickly and they could not understand. If, however, the presentation was made for the
distance education people, the local people found it slow and boring. Distance learning
that uses VNC and Habanero technology is a good beginning in helping classroom
teachers and students understand the mechanics of modeling software in representing and
experimenting with complex systems.

A key aspect to this project was that students were presented with authentic tasks. Not
only were these tasks authentic, but they gave the students power to help in the situation.
To demonstrate this point and to expound on the use of modeling in this project a further
description of three of the projects and their models will be presented. The first model
shows modeling of the electrical supply in the students' school building (see model 1)

Model 1: In this project the students, at the middle school in Mt. Carmel Illinois,
collected information of the power usage in their building. They then used the
information to create a Stella model. As shown above this model assembled information
on each of the areas of the school, and then compiled all of the areas to give them an
approximation on the amount of electricity and money spent on electricity for a school
year. With this information entered into the model they then could manipulate the model
and ask what if questions. From this investigation they presented their findings to the
school board on how the school could save money on their electric bills by turning off the
lights. The model gave the students power to investigate change and then the school gave
them power by taking serious their investigation and implementing the results.

      The next model (Model 2) was that of water quality for a pond in Crystal Lake
Illinois. This pond had become so dirty and polluted that the pond could only support a
very specialized flora and fauna population and would not even freeze in winter due to its
high saline content. The former was a concern because the pond had been a fishing pond
and the later was a concern because the pond had been an outdoor hockey rink in winter.
The park system decided to clean up the lake and the school district came along side to
help. Before the water was drained the students collected water samples from the lake
and are continuing to take samples to see water quality improvement. These samples are
vital to the park district and it helps to have the extra work groups to carry out this task.
Figure 2 is a copy of this model. This Model-It model allows students to paste in images
appropriate to what is being modeled. This model helps the students to understand what
is appropriate water quality to support the natural floral and fauna patterns, and then to
insert their data and discover if the project is accomplishing its tasks.
In the last Model presented, students in Carpentersville, Illinois put together a model on
their recycling project. Figure 3 demonstrates this model in Stella. The students were
given the task of investigating recycling of paper and what that will do to save trees and
reduce waste in their landfill. Again the students were given an authentic task that they
could have some power over. They collected information on how much paper they
discarded and what would happen if they recycled this paper. Again the Stella model
gave the students power to ask what if question and simulate outcomes if current
practices were changed. In another plus for this project the middle school work was tied
into a more in-depth project being carried out by the high school science classes. This
gave the high school students the opportunity to teach what they had learned to the
middle school students, and it gave the middle school students an increase in motivation.
Conclusion

Largely these demonstration projects should be seen within the context of design research
that Stephen E. Toulmin reifies as a process of moving from malfunction to function.
Thus, if one can assume that competent in-service training was provided, that continued
on-line support was effective, and that modeling has been demonstrated to be a powerful
way to provide engaged learning experiences, motivating for both students and teachers,
we are left with attempting to answer some politically charged questions of project cost,
evaluation and scalability. While providing a simple number that reduces cost/pupil per
learning outcome is what policy makers would like to have, the research community, but
not the policy community understands that there are so many confounding questions and
ways to question the validity of any such measure.

A project analysis that suggest learning occurred is fraught with difficulty for a project of
this size. We have attempted to make these finding available to our state funders. Many
may see this effort as politically naive, however as we are attempting to effect policy we
must arrive at the table with some of the answers to costs, and maybe a few of the
answers to proven outcomes. Further to engage the national discussion of evaluation and
policy, we wanted to see what could be attempted with state level funding and limited
research versus service resources. Finally we might some day feel compelled to sit in
front of TV lights and across the table from critical policy makers. Thus we wanted a
beginning set of answers, a first draft answer to the "what did it cost, and what did we
buy" question. Also we hope we have added to a process that will ensure in Illinois
granting decisions might be made on assessment outcomes compelling to policy experts
as well as our research colleagues.

So finally, we did measure use, plus answer some essential questions of frequency of use
that can inform comparisons within the state. Namely that in our project the cost of
computer equipment and wiring as well as the cost of installing, training, and using
modeling software within this project was $225 per student for year one of the project.
However, the research generality of this finding may be quite limited to time with
technology and opinions about technology use. Standard student test scores will become
available in the late fall of 1999. Thick measures of student achievement remain both
hidden in our video records and beyond a quick analysis at this stage of the project.

One further insight into this project, is to note that we have videotape of many classrooms
that provide compelling exemplars, which can be used at both a policy level and at a
professional development level. We hope in the future that some state or national
repository of good practices-video will be structured as an attempt toward a comparative
database of engaged learning with technology studies.

When you have professional development staff with over five years of effective
experience, when you have a graduate student with over a year of supporting teachers
with modeling, when you add new computers into a class that cooperates, and when you
implement those factors at a cost of $225/ student, then you get the kind of changes we
observed.
Bibliography

Cheek, D. W., (1992). Thinking constructively about science, technology and society.
New York: State University of New York Press.

Collins, Allan. Cognitive Apprenticeship and Instructional Technology. Technical
Report. YR Jan 88.

Conrad, William, H., (1996). A constructivist-based instructional approach to help fifth-
grade students improve selected elements of scientific literacy. Michigan: UMI
Dissertation Services.

Krajcik, J., Blumenfield, P., Marx, R., Bass, K., Fredricks, J., & Soloway, E. (1998).
Inquiry in project-based science classrooms: Initial attempts by middle school students.
The Journal of the Learning Sciences. 7(3&4), 313-350.

Morrison, Donald. Collins, Allan. Epistemic Fluency and Constructivist Learning
Environments. Educational Technology. v35 n5 p39-45 Sep-Oct 1995.

Pea, R., Edelson, D., & Gomez, L. (1994, April). The CoVis Collaboratory: High school
science

learning supported by a broadband educational network with scientific visualization,
videoconferencing, and collaborative computing. Presented in the Symposium "Issues in
Computer Networking in K-12 Classrooms: A Progress Report of Four NSF Testbeds," at
the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans,
LA.

Posner, G.J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, p.W., & Gertzog, W. A. (1982). Accommodation of
scientific conception: Toward a theory of conceptual change. Science Education. 66(2),
211-227.

Roth, W. (1994). Experimenting in a constructivist high school physics laboratory.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31(2), 197-223.

Schon, D. (1983). The Reflective Practioner. New York: BasicBooks.

Shuell, T. J. (1990) . Phases of meaningful learning. Review of Educational Research, 60
(4), 531-547.

Soloway, E., Jackson, Shari, L., Klein, J., Quintana, C, Reed, J., Spitulnik, J., Stratford,
S.J., and Studer, S. (1998). Learning Theory in Practice: Case Studies of Learner-
Centered Design.
Soloway, Elliot. Pryor, Amanda Z. Krajcik, Joseph S. Jackson, Shari. Stratford, Steven J.
Wisnudel, Michele. Klein, John T. ScienceWare's Model-It: Technology to Support
Authentic Science Inquiry. T.H.E. Journal. v25 n3 p54-56 Oct 1997.

Todnem, G. & Warner, M. (1995) Demonstrating the Benefits of Staff Development.
Using Technology to Assess the School Improvement Process. Journal of Staff
Development. v16 n4 p62-63 Fall .

Zaritsky, R. & B.F Jones, (1997) Proceedings, SC'97. Defining the NCSA Superweb for
Education.

Zaritsky, Raul & Lambert, Bruce, (1998) Paper, AERA, 1998. The Video Annotation tool
and Theme Machine, components of a new SuperWeb for Education.

Author Information

William H. Conrad, III, Ed.D. (conradb@esc.ccsd15.k12.il.us)
Director of Curriculum, Community Consolidated School District 15; 580 N. First Bank
Drive; Palatine, Il. 60067. Office: 847-963-3103. Office Fax: 847-963-3119. Home: 630-
279-4579. Home Fax: 630-279-2841. Cell: 630-886-4579. http://www.ccsd15.k12.il.us
Raul Zaritsky (raulz@ncsa.uiuc.edu)
Senior Research Scientist, National Computational Science Alliance (NCSA); 605 East
Springfield; Champaign, Il 61820. Office: 217 244-0597. Home: 217 359-1917. Digital
cell: 217 778-9115. http://message.c1chicago.com/spg1/sms_send.cgi .
http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/People/raulz/ .
Michael Munroe (munroe@ncsa.uiuc.edu)
Graduate Student, College of Education, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign;
National Computational Science Alliance (NCSA); 605 East Springfield; Champaign, Il
61820. Office: 217 244-0597.
