Designs for collaborative learning environments:
Can specialization encourage knowledge integration?
Alex J. Cuthbert

Cognition & Development, University of California at Berkeley

     Abstract: In this paper, I develop strategies for designing and assessing
     collaborative learning environments from a knowledge integration perspective. I
     identify strengths and weaknesses associated with collaborative learning, linking
     them to the instructional approaches used in an eighth-grade science curriculum
     where students design a desert house. The house design activity provides a
     context for connecting instructional goals and technical innovations. Focusing on
     how students specializing in different areas can share ideas and provide feedback
     for each other, I show how social and technical supports can work to achieve
     common goals. I examine two assumptions about how an expanded repertoire of
     models contributes to knowledge integration. First, I provide evidence that
     considering more alternatives leads to improved designs only if students have a
     framework for organizing those alternatives and selecting between them. Then, I
     provide evidence that encouraging students to iteratively refine their ideas
     contributes to knowledge integration. Finally, I show how these cognitive goals
     can be pursued through social and technical innovations which seek to encourage
     knowledge integration by making thinking visible for students.

      Keywords: assessment of learning, cognitive analysis, design framework,
      discussion forum, learning through design, project based learning, scaffolding,
      shared knowledge, web

Introduction

The knowledge integration perspective conceives of learning not simply as the
memorization of facts or as an incidental effect of experience. The goal in knowledge
integration activities is to help students develop a repertoire of models (Linn, 1995).
Differentiating between these models involves not only recognizing their different
characteristics but the situations where they can be applied. Collaboration can facilitate
this process of identification and differentiation. Learning becomes a process of
reorganization and integration involving the restructuring of relations between ideas
instead of a simple process of replacement. Rather than focusing on isolated facts,
knowledge integration defines a flexible and dynamic type of understanding,
incorporating social and situational factors which help queue explanatory models for
different contexts.

What types of activities and supports can help students understand the relationships
between different perspectives? And how can we improve these activities and supports?
In this paper, I present the methods used to design and analyze the technical and social
supports for a Web-based, eighth-grade house design activity. I begin with an overview
of the advantages and disadvantages of collaborative learning. Then I relate the design of
the learning environment and the desert houses activity to the cognitive goals of the
curriculum.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the organizational strategies afforded by
specializing in different areas of a house design task (e.g., analyzing heating and cooling
concepts, comparing construction materials, or critiquing coherent designs). In addition,
six goals were articulated for the activity. These goals, derived from previous research on
collaborative learning, guided the design of the activity by using technology to structure
the co-generation and evaluation of ideas within and between the groups of specialists.

In analyzing the success of this curriculum, I examine two assumptions about how an
expanded repertoire of models contributes to knowledge integration. First, I provide
evidence that encouraging students to iteratively refine their ideas contributes to
knowledge integration. Second, I provide an explanation for why considering more
alternatives does not necessarily lead to improved designs. The overall approach, using
cognitive goals to guide technical innovations, recognizes the rich variety of ways in
which knowledge integration occurs and thus the need to support a diverse set of
approaches to collaborative learning.

Strengths and weaknesses of collaborative learning

Recent research indicates that collaborative learning has the potential to help students
generate ideas and identify alternatives (see Linn & Burbules, 1993). Technical
innovations in collaborative learning make it possible to represent these alternatives in a
more equitable manner than is afforded by verbal discourse. In addition, CSCL research
has investigated a range of potential benefits from intentional learning and the
construction of shared knowledge bases (Gomez, Pea, Edelson, et. al., 1995; Scardemalia
& Bereiter, 1991) to providing a conceptual and linguistic basis for metacognitive
reflection (Frederikson & White, 1997; Brown & Palincsar, 1989). Activities capitalizing
on the strengths of collaborative learning include developing shared criteria, negotiating
alternatives, and differentiating between perspectives (Linn & Burbules, 1993).
Collaborative learning can help break "design fixation" where students cling to original
and often unelaborated ideas (Cuthbert, 1996). From a knowledge integration
perspective, this breaking of fixation happens because collaboration encourages
reflection, promotes critique, and introduces new approaches to a problem.

Prominent among the disadvantages of collaborative learning is "group think". Group
think is the tendency to converge on a solution path without analysis of the alternatives.
In online and classroom discussions, students frequently make decisions based on social
status rather than on evaluation of the issues (Hoadley, 1998). The finding that students
lack effective discourse strategies works against unmoderated and unstructured
discussions, a dominant form of collaborative learning. Similarly, planning is difficult for
groups of students, though this drawback can be addressed through the use of checklists,
activity maps, and learning cycles (Bell, Davis, & Linn, 1995).
Recognizing the differences between related perspectives, let alone connecting them in a
systematic manner, has proved to be particularly challenging for students (Cuthbert &
Hoadley, 1998a). How can we help students distinguish between different perspectives?
Designers of cooperative learning environments often take the path of creating multiple
representations to help students see the connections between different perspectives (see
Conklin, 1988)(1). For example, an online discussion may be viewed in terms of the
number of new or total comments, links to specific contributors, or sequentially, based on
the dates and times when comments were entered.

A complementary, though less frequently seen, approach is to orchestrate social
arrangements which encourage the productive exchanges and patterns of interaction that
the software seeks to support (Scardemalia & Bereiter, 1991). One such arrangement,
investigated in this study, involves specialization. The claim is that specialization affords
students different organizational strategies and different paths for approaching design
problems. This arrangement, in turn, creates opportunities for students to share different
perspectives and develop an expanded repertoire of models.

Specialization and cooperation

Many problems today require cooperation and coordination between groups of
specialists. The research presented here is based on the hypothesis that specialization has
the potential to help students integrate multiple perspectives, make connections between
ideas, and differentiate between context specific and more general elements. Unlike
expertise, which forms over a period of many years, specialization is used here to refer to
focused learning or inquiry in a specific area. For example, students investigating
different dimensions of water quality (e.g., biological versus chemical) would be
considered specialists even though their individual research activity lasted only a few
days. Designers of CSCL environments seek to elicit these perspectives, making thinking
visible for students and helping them develop a broader problem definition. The
challenge for designers of CSCL environments is to create situations where specialization
leads to collaboration instead of isolation.

Research indicates that specialization can create opportunities for collaboration between
students if completion of the task requires integration of all the areas of specialization
(Brown & Palincsar, 1989). The house design problem meets this criteria by requiring
students to design a complete house, making decisions about all the component areas
(e.g., walls, windows, roofs). In addition, students need to explain heat flow in terms of
related scientific concepts (e.g., equilibrium and heat exchange).

The WISE Houses In The Desert Activity

To facilitate the sharing of perspectives and use of evidence to support decisions, we
created technology supports in our Web-based Integrated Science Environment (WISE)
to help students locate relevant Internet sites as well as annotate and search through them.
WISE is a structured learning environment that guides student inquiry, eliciting their
ideas, and helping them to make connections between scientific content and their
previous experiences.

         Figure 1. The Web-based Integrated Science Environment (WISE)

WISE views Internet sites as "evidence" which can be critiqued, used to support different
theories, or invoked to justify design decisions. In the house design activity, six related
goals helped guide the design of the social organization (i.e., having students specialize in
different areas) as well as the technical innovations (e.g., a collaborative search page and
online discussions).

Goal one: Elicit students' ideas

In some situations, such as brainstorming, the goal is to generate as many ideas as
possible before evaluating them. For example, students created their initial designs as
homework on the first day of the project to increase the probability that pairs of students
would have stable representations of different ideas. In the online discussions, having
contributors' pictures or names associated with ideas increases the likelihood that ideas
will be evaluated based on the social cues. To reduce this possibility, students entered the
alternatives they were considering for their house designs before they were given access
to other students initial ideas.

Goal two: Reduce planning problems

Planning is one of the perennial problems students have as evidenced by the number of
hands which are routinely raised to ask "What should we do next?" To address this
problem, WISE projects consist of activities and steps (figure 1).

Students join project teams, typically composed of pairs of students, and proceed through
the activities and steps by clicking on the navigational panel in the left hand frame. These
steps guide the students through the project.
                 Figure 2. Activity sequence for Houses In The Desert

Figure 2 illustrates the activity sequence and steps for the house design project. When
students first log in, they are provided with a link to the last activity on which they were
working. The activity sequence provides structure for students while giving them the
flexibility to move back and forth between different types of resources. This approach
reduces problems with planning, freeing teachers to circulate through the classroom and
interact with small groups of students.

Goal three: Represent ideas equitably

Online discussions, embedded seamlessly into WISE (figure 3), helped students negotiate
criteria for making design decisions about their specific houses. Students posted
questions for other student specialists and answered questions about their own areas of
research.:

Figure 3. Structured discussions in WISE use graphical icons to represent comment types,
            and optionally, student photos to provide social cues (not shown).

To counter the possibility that decisions about reliability are frequently based on the
social status of the contributor, students were allowed to enter comments anonymously.
Hsi & Hoadley (1997) found that anonymity lead to more equitable levels of contribution
across genders.

Goal four: Encourage sharing of resources

One advantage of collaborative learning is that students can share resources since they
are working on a common problem. The challenge is to provide ways for students to
locate and use resources effectively. Differences in how students approach the problem
complicate this goal. One solution is to have multiple ways of accessing the information
contributed to the shared pool of resources (e.g., through contributor, area of
specialization, or by searching the comments for specific phrases). Annotating Internet
sites can make the sites easier for students to interpret, and, perhaps more importantly,
encourages them to reflect upon the utility, understandability, and validity of the material
they are submitting.

For the house design activity, students searched the Internet for sites to use as evidence to
support their design decisions. Useful sites were added to a classroom-wide database
which other students could search. Earlier research indicated that students having
difficulty searching the Internet benefited from having access to a collection of relevant
sites (Cuthbert & Hoadley, 1998b). Still, students are inconsistent in the methods they use
for evaluating those sites.

Goal five: Develop shared criteria

Developing shared criteria can help students evaluate evidence. Shared criteria refers to a
set of requirements or guidelines for interpreting ideas and making decisions. Criteria
operate at different levels, from determining the adequacy of a piece of evidence to the
coherence of a design. From a knowledge integration perspective, criteria should help
students make informed decisions using scientific principles. Unfortunately, students
have little idea what the word "criteria" means and even less about how to use criteria to
make decisions. Modeling for students is necessary (we had some success getting
students to think about the criteria they would use to buy a pair of shoes: What criteria
could be used by both boys and girls?) In this particular study, students used the same
criteria: Is the site understandable? Does it have supporting evidence? Does it compare
alternatives? Our current research compares students who develop shared criteria with
those who employ their own implicit criteria (see Cuthbert, in press).

Goal six: Differentiate between perspectives

One of the most important dimensions of collaborative learning is the potential for
students to recognize views that are distinct from their own. From a knowledge
integration perspective, identifying and differentiating between different models is a
central part of learning. In the house design activity, this learning involved distinguishing
between different strategies for temperature regulation, specifically insulating the house
versus storing and releasing heat energy. Previously, we modeled the negotiation process
by having students contribute to an online discussion between two experts representing
these perspectives. Having students specialize in different areas of the house design
problem continues this line of research to determine effective strategies for making
thinking visible for students.

Methodology

The research took place in an eighth grade science classroom where students used WISE
to design passive solar houses for the desert. The project served as the capstone activity
for a semester on heat and temperature. Students worked in pairs to generate and refine
sketches of their house. They annotated and added relevant sites to a digital library while
collecting evidence to support their ideas. Online notes, class presentations, and
worksheets provided opportunities for students to refine explanations about the factors
affecting heat flow over the course of a day. For approximately two weeks, fifty minutes
per day, students used the Web-based Integrated Science Environment (WISE) to help
scaffold their work in the activity. Student grades were based on the coherence of the
explanations, the normative use of scientific principles, and how well the ideas were
supported with evidence.

Design

In this experiment, students were placed in one of three conditions:

            Table 1. Areas of specialization for different groups of students.

Concept Specialists           Component            Complete Design
                               Specialists           Specialists
analyzed heating and   compared                 critiqued coherent
cooling concepts like  construction             designs (e.g., a rammed
heat capacity and      materials for            earth house)
equilibrium            windows, walls, or
                       roofs

Two class periods were assigned to each condition. Students had several opportunities to
interact, first within their area of specialization (figure 2, step 3), and then across areas of
specialization (figure 2, step 6).

Individually, students developed initial design sketches as homework. Then they
compared their designs with their partner, entering what they thought were the most
important differences into a Web form. These comments were used to seed the initial
online discussions which took place within the areas of specialization, thus avoiding the
polling problem (see Koschman et. al., 1994, p. 243) where students reformulate other
students' initial statements.

The pairs of students worked to merge their two designs into a single final design. Near
the end of the project, students were able to consult other specialists, even those in other
conditions in a second online discussion. The final design report asked for explanations
of the factors affecting heat flow at different times of day. Annotations of Web sites and
notes were recorded online, while worksheets were used for analyzing heat flow and
generating design sketches.

The areas of specialization were selected because of the distinct organizational strategies
afforded by the different areas. The prediction was that component specialists would have
an easier time structuring the problem and would be more likely to focus on trade-offs
between alternatives. They would be able to decompose the problem, generate more
alternatives, and use evidence to support specific decisions about components of the
house. Students specializing in complete designs would be more likely to experience
design fixation since they were introduced to a possible solution early in the project. In
addition, complete design specialists were expected to consider the least number of
alternatives, focusing on a single solution path linked to the house design they
researched. Concept specialists would have a hard time comparing alternatives but would
be more likely to explain heat flow in terms of day-night cycles and equilibrium as
opposed to heat flow through an object such as a a wall or window at a specific time of
day. Concept specialists would consider the least number of alternatives since they would
be focused on refining their understanding of scientific principles as opposed to
comparing specific alternatives about which wall, window, or roof to use.

Measures

A wide range of outcome measures were used in this experiment drawn from previous
research on ill-structured design problems (see Goel & Pirolli, 1992; Guindon, 1990;
Simon, 1973) and peer learning processes (see O'Donnell, DuRussel, & Derry, 1997;
Saxe, Gearhart, Note, & Paduano, 1993). In addition to the number of alternatives
considered, the outcome measure focused on in this paper is the design method index.
The design method index was constructed by comparing the two initial designs (created
independently by each student in a dyad) with the pair's merged drawing and the
associated final report. Noting the possible confounding effect of the cross-specialization
discussions (the second online discussion), when categorizing students' design methods I
relied primarily on design revisions prior to the cross-specialization discussions. For
triangulation, I examined the Internet search worksheet (recording their goals, queries,
and overall results of searching for evidence) as well as the note students took about how
the designs were merged.

The categorical ratings used for the design method index were: (1) design fixation
(maintained the same initial design of one student), (2) copy-delete strategy (replacement
of entire design with little justification at various points throughout the project), (3)
refinement or aggregation, (4) refinement citing principles or trade-offs as justification
for refinement. While coded as a categorical, dependent variable, there was an
hypothesized increase in performance for the higher ranking categories.

Results & Discussion

All 79 groups of students completed the complex two-week project. Surprisingly, the
overall performance, as reflected by the final project grades, indicated that the concept
(N=28) and complete design specialists (N=28) significantly out-performed the
component specialists (N=23) (concept-component F(50)=4.578, p<.05; design-
component F(50)=4.006, p<.05).
                 Figure 4. Grade differences by specialization.

The final grades reflect knowledge integration (e.g., coordination of intuitive ideas,
scientific terms, laboratory work, and "everyday" experiences (2)) as well as the use of
principles and evidence to support design decisions. Why were concept and complete
design specialists able to make better use of the alternatives they considered? Closer
analysis of students' notes on why they considered and rejected different alternatives
suggests that specializing in concepts or complete designs provided an organizational
framework for students to approach the problem. Specifically, complete design specialists
tended to consider alternatives in relation to their existing complete design while concept
specialists tended to consider alternatives related to the concept in which they were
specializing. For example, concepts specialists researching reflection and scattering
tended to consider the trade-offs between white tile roofs and metal roofs. Students
specializing in a rammed earth house tended to consider the trade-offs between earth and
styrofoam as insulating materials.

Surprisingly, the concept specialists considered more alternatives than the component and
the complete design specialists (figure 5). While not a significant difference or a large
difference in mean value, it is interesting that the prediction that concept specialists
would consider significantly fewer alternatives was incorrect.

               Figure 5. Alternatives considered by specialization

The question remains of why specializing in components didn't provide a framework for
students to organize their ideas and consider alternatives more effectively?
Why component specialists were able to identify alternatives but not make connections

One possibility why component specialists were able to generate alternatives but not
make connections is that these students were unable to identify similarities between
components. The activity encouraged students to differentiate between alternatives (e.g.,
between using a metal roof and a wood roof) but was not as effective at helping students
identify similarities across the components of the house. For example, deciding that a
double-paned window would be effective because of the increased insulation did not
necessarily help students decide what type of wall to use. One explanation is that students
did not realize that the same principles could be used to make decisions about the
different components of the house. Identifying similarities phrased in terms of scientific
principles requires a more advanced structure of conceptualization and generalization
(see Vygotsky, p. 164), one that was provided by specializing in concepts but not in
components.

In many of the interviews I conducted, students began by identifying linkages between
structural components; only later did they reformulate or justify their decisions in terms
of scientific principles or systems. This pattern suggests that specialization provides a
starting point for knowledge integration but connections, which occur when students
revisit ideas, reformulate their explanations, and compare alternatives, happens through a
convergent process involving self-explanation, discussion, and negotiation (see
Roschelle, 1992). It seems likely that students specializing in components had the
potential to invoke scientific principles to explain the trade-offs between using different
components, but that analysis based on scientific principles did not come earlier enough
in the activity to benefit the selection process for these students.

Finally, a component-based view may make the house design project seem more like a
selection task (e.g., choose a window, a wall, a roof) as opposed to a task involving
understanding and regulating heat flow. Analyzing the between-specialist discussions, we
can gain insights into students' conceptualization of the problem and their emergent goals
supporting this hypothesis. Analysis of the online discussions indicates that students in
the component condition tended to ask for recommendations for specific components
while students in the concept condition asked for explanations about how those
components worked. These differences suggest that the areas of specialization influenced
students' conceptualization of the problem in distinct, though not always productive,
ways.

Did students' design process determine their success in the project?

There were no significant differences in design method between the three conditions.
However, students specializing in complete designs were the least likely to use principles
to select between design alternatives, with their design methods reflecting a copy-delete
approach more than the other groups. Earlier research (Cuthbert, 1997) showed that
design methods and search behavior were highly correlated suggesting that student
problem-solving strategies were tied closely to student dispositions. This research
provides additional evidence showing that students' methods for approaching open-ended
problems are dissociated from the imposed framework for structuring the problem, at
least for these areas of specialization.

Examining group performance based on design methodology, there were significant
differences in overall performance (figure 6), as measured by the final grade, between the
first two categories (fixity and copy-delete) and the second two categories (refinement
and refinement with trade-offs): fixity versus refinement F(50)=3.478, p<.005; fixity
versus refinement w/ principles F(29)=4.314, p<.005; copy-delete versus refinment
F(48)=3.629, p<.05; fixity versus refinement w/ principles F(27)=3.818, p<.01.

                     Figure 6. Final grade grouped by design method

This finding that refinement is better than design fixation or replacement is not
surprising. The first two categories are characteristics of one hypothetical "type" of
student, termed "consumers" (Linn, personal communication) while the second two
categories reflect more principled, reflective characteristics. Since the activity itself is
designed to encourage iterative refinement, evidence that this design methodology
contributes to knowledge integration validates our general instructional approach.

However, it is important to note that some groups that did not refine their designs
succeeded in the house design task. These students tended to reject information that they
did not understand or that was too complicated, focusing on developing explanations
using accessible scientific principles related to heat flow rather than more complex
principles relating to heat capacity and thermal mass. This finding, that developing
simple and constrained solutions can be a successful strategy for some students, goes
against the hypothesis that an expanded problem definition leads to improved designs.
The challenge for designers of CSCL environments is to create software supports that
enable students to follow a range of paths for completing projects. This research points to
two such paths: (a) iterative refinement and (b) developing a deeper understanding of
pragmatic solutions.
Conclusions

One of the primary goals of the activity design was to have students refine their ideas in a
variety of contexts including online discussions, worksheets, sketches, and in-class
discussions. These methods for supporting specialization were validated by the finding
that having students iteratively refine their ideas contributes to knowledge integration. In
addition, this research provides evidence that specialization affords students different
organizational strategies and different paths for approaching complex design tasks.

Interestingly, simply providing students with appropriate resources and encouraging them
to consider more alternatives did not lead to better designs. Students need a framework
for organizing their ideas and for selecting between alternatives. This framework was
provided by specializing in concepts or complete designs, but not by specializing in
components. Component specialists were not able to make better use of the alternatives
they considered for a variety of reasons including lack of an organizational framework, a
biased perception of the house design project as a selection task, and a need for principled
analysis at an earlier stage of the design process.

Investigating the interaction between students' organizational strategies, peer interactions,
design methods, and knowledge integration is a complex task. However, understanding
these processes can inform the design of collaborative learning environments by
providing a grounded perspective for connecting instructional goals and technical
innovations.

Acknowledgments

The design of this research has been a cooperative effort of the WISE research group. I
would like to acknowledge the contributions of the past and present members of this
group: Phillip Bell, Eric Baumgartner, Doug Clark, Betsy Davis, Brian Foley, Chris
Hoadley, Sherry Hsi, Doris Jorde, Doug Kirkpatrick, Brian Levey, Marcia Linn, Ernie
Loh, Jackie Madhok, Jeff Morrow, Nancy Muhlenberg, Sherry Seethaler, Jim Slotta,
Alex Strømme, Ricky Tang, Laura Tulep, and Michelle Williams. This material is based
upon research supported by the National Science Foundation under grant RED-9453861.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
publication are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation.

Footnotes

   1.  The distinction between "cooperative" and "collaborative" has been pointed out
       by Pea (1994) in much the same way that the difference between "common" and
       "shared" was highlighted by Bannon (1997). Collaborative learning refers to
       students working together on a group project with a shared product. Cooperative
       learning, on the other hand, involves sharing of resources but independent
       solutions. The learning environment and activity presented in this paper are
       examples of cooperative learning since each pair of students create unique
       solutions.
   2.  Everyday experiences are out-of-school experiences where instruction is not
       necessarily the focus of the activity. An example of an everyday experience
       would be noticing that the grass feels cooler than the sand on a hot day. See
       Vygotsky (1934/1986) for a more complete account of spontaneous ideas,
       scientific concepts, and everyday experiences.

Bibliography

Bannon, L.J. (1997). The role of common information spaces in CSCW. Proceedings of
the Seventh International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, (HCI
International '97), San Francisco, August 24-29.

Bell, P., Davis, E. A., & Linn, M. C. (1995). The knowledge integration environment:
Theory and design, Proceedings of CSCL95: The First International Conference on
Computer Support for Collaborative Learning . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in
creating complex interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.

Brown, A. L. & Palincsar, A. S. (1989). Guided, cooperative learning and individual
knowledge acquisition. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, Learning, and Instruction.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Conklin, J. (1988). gIBIS: A hypertext tool for exploratory policy discussion. Paper
presented at the Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW '88).
Portland, Oregon, Sept. 26-28: ACM Press.

Cuthbert, A. (1996) How Students Use Internet Evidence To Complete Projects: From
Exploration To Directed Search. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, New York, New York.

Cuthbert, A. & Hoadley, C. (1998a) Designing desert houses in the Knowledge
Integration Environment (KIE). Structured poster session, "Learning by Design:
Opportunities and Challenges", Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research
Association (AERA), San Diego, CA.

Cuthbert, A. & Hoadley, C. (1998b) Using KIE to help students develop shared criteria
for house designs. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Educational
Research Association (AERA), San Deigo, CA.
Cuthbert, A., Bell, P., & Hoadley, C. (1997). Tracking activity patterns in online
environments: Implications for instructional design. Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), San Francisco: CA.

Cuthbert, A. (1996). How do students use Internet evidence to complete projects? From
exploration to directed search. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, NY, NY.

diSessa, A. (1991). Local sciences: Viewing the design of human-computer systems as
cognitive science. In John M. Carroll (Ed.), Designing Interaction: Psychology at the
Human-Computer Interface. Cambridge University Press.

Edelson, D. C. & O'Neill, K. (1994). The CoVis Collaboratory Notebook: Computer
Support for Scientific Inquiry. The Annual Meeting of the American Educational
Research Association (AERA), New Orleans, LA, April.

Frederikson, J. R. & White, B. Y. (1997). Metacognitive facilitation: A method for
prompting reflective collaboration. Proceedings of the Second International Conference
on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL), Toronto. Mahwah NJ:
Erlbaum.

Goel, V. & Pirolli, P. (1992). The structure of design problem spaces. Cognitive Science.
July/Sept, 16(3), 395ff.

Gomez, L., Pea, R., Edelson, D., D'Amico, L., Fishman, B., Gordon, D., McGee, S.,
O'Neill, K., & Polman, J. (1995). The Learning through Collaborative Visualization
Project. Proceedings of the Annual meeting of the American Educational Research
Association, San Francisco, CA.

Guindon, Raymone (1990). Designing the design process: Exploiting opportunistic
thoughts. Human-Computer Interaction, Volume 5, No. 2-3 (combined issue), pp. 305ff.

Hoadley, C. (1998). Scaffolding scientific discussion using socially relevant
representations in networked multimedia. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University
of California, Berkeley, CA.

Hsi, S., & Hoadley, C. M. (1997). Productive discussion in science: Gender equity
through electronic discourse. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 6(1), 23-36.

Koschmann, T. D., Myers, A. C., & Feltovich, P. J. (1994). Using technology to assist in
realizing effective learning and instruction: A principled approach to the use of
computers in collaborative learning. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 227-264.

Linn, M. C. (1995). Designing computer learning environments for engineering and
computer science: The Scaffolded Knowledge Integration Framework. Journal of Science
Education and Technology.
Linn, M.C. & Burbules, N.C. (1993) Construction of knowledge and group learning. In
Kenneth Tobin (Ed.),The Practice of Constructivism in Science Education, 91-119.
Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

O'Donnell, A.M., DuRussel, L.A., Derry, S.J. (1997). Cognitive process in
interdisciplinary groups: Problems & possibilities. National Institute for Science
Education (NISE). Research monograph No. 5, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Pea, R., & Gomez, L. (1992). Distributed multimedia learning environments: Why and
how? Interactive Learning Environments, 2, 73-109.

Pea, R. (1994). Seeing what we build together: Distributed multimedia learning
environments for transformative communication. The Journal of the Learning Sciences
3(3): 285-299.

Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. Journal
of the Learning Sciences, 2(3), 235-276.

Saxe, G.B., Gearhart, M., Note, M., Paduano, P. (1993). Peer interaction and the
development of mathematical understandings: A new framework for research and
educational practice. In H. Daniels (Ed.), Charting the agenda: Educational activity after
Vygotsky , 107-144. London: Routledge Press.

Scardemalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in
knowledge building: A challenge for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences (pp. 37-68), Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Slotta, J. & Cuthbert, A. (in press) Improving our curriculum and technology through
cycles of trial and refinement in a KIE Design Study. International Journal of Science
Education (IJSE) special issue.

Simon, H.A. (1973). The structure of ill-structured problems. Artificial Intelligence, 4,
145-180.

Vygotsky, L. (1934/1986). In A. Kozulin (Ed.), Thought and Language, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Authors' addresses

Alex J. Cuthbert (alx@socrates.berkeley.edu)
Education in Mathematics, Science, & Technology, Graduate School of Education,
University of California at Berkeley, 4533 Tolman Hall #1670, Berkeley, CA 94720-
1670. Tel. (510) 643-6175.
