Does a shared screen make a shared solution?
Pierre Dillenbourg

University of Geneva, TECFA

David Traum

University of Maryland, UMIACS

      Abstract. What is the role of a shared whiteboard in building a shared
      understanding of the task and its solution? Our hypothesis was that a
      graphical communication tool would facilitate grounding processes, i.e.
      the mutual understanding of one or a few utterances and thereby the
      construction of a shared solution. We conducted an empirical study with
      20 pairs solving an enigma in a MUD environment enriched with a
      whiteboard. The results show that the whiteboard was used less used to
      disambiguate difficult concepts in conversation than as a tool for
      distributed regulation of the task. The graphical features of the whiteboard
      were less exploited thatn the fact that information displayed on the
      whiteboard was persistent. Subjects selected the communication medium
      by matching the persistency of display (how long information is
      displayed) with persistency of information (how long it remains valid).
      Their grounding behaviour also takes into account the probability that
      some piece of information probabilty that some piece of infornmation is
      misundersis misunderstood or disagreed upon.

      Keywords: grounding, shared knowledge, virtual environment,
      whiteboard.

Introduction

Cognitive science has for many years been treating social interactions as a simple
input/output mechanisms for core cognitive processes. This approach is inappropriate for
our research field, since a major challenge for explaining the effects of collaborative
learning is precisely to understand the deep intertwining between social interactions and
problem solving (Dillenbourg 1999). The notion of shared understanding is a good
candidate concept to use to articulate the connection between social interactions and
problem solving. Unfortunately, this concept is not used in the same way by researchers
studying on both sidesproblem solving and social interaction. At the linguistic level,
'shared understanding' is concerned with the understanding of a sentence, or even a word
in a sentence, while, at the cognitive level, it is concerned with the understanding of a
problem and its solution or even with the understanding of a domain. The goal of the
research reported here was to articulate the relationships between the cognitive and the
linguistic levels, namely to describe how grounding mechanisms contribute to build a
shared solution.

There is a large difference of scale between grounding an utterance and sharing a solution
through hundreds of interactions. This difference of scale is too large to expect that we
would find a direct relationship between patterns of utterances and the final shared
solution. Hence, we approach the relation between grounding an utterance and sharing a
solution by describing how utterance grounding mechanisms vary according to task
criteria.

We explore this issue in the context of a computer-supported collaborative work
environment. We expected that a whiteboard would increase both mutual understanding
at the utterance level, namely because a schema can disambiguate verbal expressions, and
at the task level, by sharing afacilitating a shared representation of the solution.

Theoretical framework

Levels of shared understanding

Social grounding is the mechanism by which two participants in a discussion try to
elaborate the mutual belief that their partner has understood what they meant to a
criterion sufficient for the current purpose (Clark & Brennan, 1991). Of course, wpeople
never understand each other completely. We treat the degree of shared understanding as a
discrete variable (Dillenbourg, Traum & Schneider, 1996). We transposed Clark's levels
(1994), established for spoken conversation, toadapted the four communicative functions
of Allwood et al. (1991), to the task of representing degrees of sharing of information,
taking into account the peculiarities of virtual workspaces, namely typed communication
and use of a spatial metaphor. If agent A wants to communicate information X to agent
B, A may receive different feedback about Bhave different kinds of information about
B's potential sharing of that information, depending in part on the kind of feedback A
receives. Each of these aspects can have a negative or positive component:

      A can infer that B can (not) access X: For instance, in a virtual space, if A knows
      that B is in room 7, where information X can be found, then A knows that B can
      access X.
      A can infer that B has (not) perceived X: For instance, if A writes a note on the
      whiteboard and B moves that note, A can infer that B has read it.
      A can infer that B has (mis-) understood X: For instance, in a virtual space, if A
      says "let's ask him a few questions" and B moves to the room where "him" is
      located, then A can infer that B knows who is referred to as 'him', i.e. that"him" is
      grounded.
      A can infer that B (dis-)agrees. This includes verbal agreement, but also (dis-)
      agreement by action, as we will illustrate in this paper.

This classification enables us to view grounding and agreement as different levels in a
continuum going from complete mutual ignorance to completely shared understanding.
We have two reasons to bypass the distinction between misunderstanding and
disagreement. First, to be able to disagree requires a certain level of mutual
understanding. Second, empirical studies of collaborative learning have shown that 'pure'
conflict (p versus ~p) was not a necessary condition for learning, that -- often a slight
misunderstanding may be sufficient (Blaye, 1988).

Grounding mechanisms vary according to the task

Two pilots need a higher degree of mutual understanding when they fly a plane than
when they talk about politics in a bar. The relation between grounding and the task is
encompassed in the so-called 'grounding criterion': ´"The contributor and the partners
mutually believe that the partners have understood what the contributor meant to a
criterion sufficient for the current purpose.ª" (Clark & Brennan, 1991). This 'grounding
criterion' is a synthetic account of various parameters whichthat are investigated in this
study, such as the probability of non-grounding (higher for ambiguous or polemical
messages), the cost of non-grounding (how detrimental it is to misunderstand) and
persistency of information. This study is indeedIndeed, this study is an investigation of
how the grounding criterion varies inside the task.

Grounding mechanisms vary according to the medium

CSCL tools have an impact on the way mutual understanding is achieved. For a review of
how medium features impart on grounding, see Clark & Brennan (1991). We here point
out three factors which were important in our study.

The degree of sharedness of information.
      Environments contribute to grounding by providing peers with the same access to
      information, i.e. they both see or hear the same things. Copresence decreases the
      cost of grounding (Clark & Brennan ,, 1991), This notion is an funding important
      principle of CSCW, known as "What you see is what I see" (wysiwis) (Stefik et
      al, 1987). It has been mainly applied to shared workspaces (Terveen et al. . al.,
      1991), i.e. places where several users manipulate the same set of objects and see
      each other's actions.
The degree of mutuality of knowledge.
      Sharedness differs from mutuality since we can be mutually aware that we
      disagree on X. One component of mutuality is visibility, i.e. whether the medium
      enables peers to see each other. The cost of grounding is lower if visibility is high
      (Clark & Brennan, 1991). In whiteboards, visibility is reduced to viewing each
      other's cursors and object moves. In virtual reality environments, visibility is
      achieved by displaying avatars. When visibility cannot be guaranteed, some
      CSCW environments provide peers with information about what he partner is
      looking at through awareness, i.e. the "up-to-the-moment understanding of
     another person's interaction with the shared space" (Gutwin & Greenberg , 1998,
     p. 2).
Persistence of Information.
      The third factor is one of a set of features concerning the timing of interactions:
      synchronous versus asynchronous, turn taking rules, etc. In this contribution, we
      focus on one of them, persistence: objects are persistent (Smith, 1994) if, once
      created, they stay accessible as long as they are not deliberately erased.

Research setting

The task

Two subjects play a mystery solving gamedetectives solving a mystery: a woman has
been killed in a mountain Auberge and they have to find the killer among the (virtual)
people present in the Auberge. Subjects walk in a MOO environmentnavigate a virtual
environment, built in a MOO (described in the next section), find various objects, meet
suspects and ask them questions. The subjects can ask 3 kinds of question toof any
suspect: what hethe suspect knows about the victim, what hethe suspect did the night
before and what hethe suspect knows about any object. Suspects are programmed robots
implemented using the MOO language, theyand provide pre-defined answers. Subjects
are told that they have to find the single suspect who (1) has a motive to kill, (2) had
means to kill (i.e., access to the murder weapon) and (3) had the opportunity to kill the
victim. The complexity of this task is more the information load (large number of facts to
organize) than the intrinsic complexity of the relations to be inferred. This will
impactimpacts on the way subject use the whiteboard. i.e. as a tool for storing and
organizing information (group memory) more than as a tool for disambiguating
information. The correct solution was found by 14 out of the 20 pairs. The time for
completing the task averaged two hours (123 minutes). It varied between 82 and 182
minutes. The average time of failing pairs was almost the same (113 minutes).

The collaborative environment

These experiments have been run within a standard MOO (tecfamoo.unige.ch), using the
TKMOO-lite client on UNIX workstations. The MOO window is split into panes: a pane
of 14 X 19 cm, which display about 60 lines of text (any interaction uses several lines)
and, just below, a text entry pane which allows the user to enter and edit just which enter
to type 3 lines. Themessages up to 3 lines in length. The experimental environment also
includes a MOO-based whiteboard. It supports elementary drawing of boxes, lines, and
text objects. Users can move, remove, resize or change the color toof the objects created
by their partner. Smselves or their partners (several subjects complained that the Both
users see the same area of the whiteboard, there is no scrolling inside the fixed window
size. whiteboard was too rudimentary, especially for editing objects). They cannot see
each other's cursor. The whiteboard and MOO windows split the each users' screen
vertically in two equal area. Both users see the same area, there is no scrolling inside the
fixed window sizeto two equal areas.
The subjects

Twenty pairs of subjects participated in the experiments. We recruited subjects who had
no experience of working together. The level of MOO experience was heterogeneous. We
compared subjects with a medium or goointermediate or advanced experience of the
MOO with the novices (respectively 16 and 20 subjects). Taken individually, experience
has an impact: experienced MOO users sent more messages per minute (mean (novices)
= 0.45, mean (experts) = 0.68; F=11.98,novices = 0.45, mean experts = 0.68; F=11.98;
df=1; p=.001) and were more sensitive to virtual space (mean (novices)= 75% , mean
(experts)= 87% ,novices = 75%, mean experts = 87%; F=4.39; df=1; p=0.05). However,
there was no difference between novices and experts with respect to the success on task.
There was a non-significant difference with respect to task completion time, probably due
to interaction frequencyshorter latency between messages rather than to problem solving
behavior. Most statistics are based on 18 pairs (excluding pairs 1 and 2 who used voice
interactions), the statistics involving actions on the whiteboard do not include pair 4 for
which the movie of whiteboard interactions was lost. Most quantitative values are
presented by pair, since, even if they are sometimes counted individually, most
interaction variables make more sense when aggregated by pair.

Variables

We computed many variables in order to describinvestigate grounding processes. We
describe here only a few of them here, some other variables are also described in the next
section.

The mode of communication
      This is the tool used to communicate: Moo dialogues, the whiteboard or MOO
      actions such as moving, asking questionwere three modes of communication:
      Moo dialogues, information put on the whiteboard or virtual actions in the MOO
      environment, such as moving, asking questions of suspects, etc. An instance of
      agreement by a MOO action is when A says "Let's go to the kitchen" and B
      moves to the kitchen. An instance of disagreement in a whiteboard is when A
      writes a note and B erases it. We observed cross-modal acknowledgment, such
      whiteboard/talk acknowledgment (A puts a note on the whiteboard and B make
      comments about it through a Moo dialogue), talk/action acknowledgment (e.g. A
      says ´ask it to Oscarª and B moves to Oscar's room), and so forth. However, 86%
      of acknowledgment occurred inside MOO dialogues.
The rate of acknowledgment
      This is the ratio between the number of interactions that were acknowledged by
      the partner and the total number of interactions. We parsed the 20 protocols and
      associated utteranceactions by pairs [U1 - U2] when U2 can be interpreted as
      acknowledging U1. Acknowledgment can be in different forms, ranging from a
      simple 'hmm' to a clarification question. The average rate of acknowledgment was
      41% (For comparison, it was 90% for the pairs with voice communication).
      Interestingly, the acknowledgment rate does not seem related to surface
      interaction features. For instance, when split the sample among the pairs who
       interact more frequently (number of messagesinto two groups based on the
       interaction rate (number of messages per minute), per minute) and those who
       interact less frequently, bothboth the high and low groups have the same
       acknowledgment rate (respectively 41% and 42%). Similarly, the
       acknowledgment rate was not correlated with the delay of acknowledgment,
       neither with theacknowledgment symmetry (does A acknowledge B more often
       than B acknowledges A), nor with the regularity of turn taking.
The mode of communication
       This is the tool used to communicate: Moo dialogues, the whiteboard or MOO
       actions such as moving, asking questions, etc. An instance of agreement by a
       MOO action is when A says "Let's go to the kitchen" and B moves to the kitchen.
       An instance of disagreement in a whiteboard is when A writes a note and B erases
       it. We observed cross-modal acknowledgment, such whiteboard/talk
       acknowledgment (A puts a note on the whiteboard and B make comments about it
       through a Moo dialogue), talk/action acknowledgment (e.g. A says ´ask it to
       Oscarª and B moves to Oscar's room), and so forth. However, 86% of
       acknowledgment occurred inside MOO dialogues.
The content of interaction
       It is described with the categories and sub-categories, listedThe subjects
       communicated several different types of information. Content types are
       categorized as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Categories of content of interactions.
Category     Sub-       Content and examples
             category
Task         Facts      Utterances which contain information as it was collected in
knowledge               the Moo by the subjects (e.g. ´Rolf was a colleague of the
                        victim ª). It often reproduces word by word the answer
                        given by a suspect
             Inferences An inference utterance involves some interpretation by the
                        subject. (e.g. ´Helmut had no motive to kill ª).
Management   Strategy   Utterances about how to proceed: how to collect information
                        (which suspects, which rooms, which questions,
                        ...), how to organize data, how to prune the set of possible
                        suspects, who does what in the pair... Utterances regarding
                        spatial positions were generally related to strategy issues
                        and were hence included inthis category. . (e.g. ´Let's see
                        who cold get the gun ª).
Meta-com-               Utterances about the interaction itself, such as tuning delay
munication              in acknowledgment (e.g. ´ Sorry I was busy with the
                        whiteboard ª) or establishing conversational rules (e.g. ´ We
                        should use a color coding ª).
Technique               Utterances where one subject asks his partner how to
                        perform a particular action in the MOO. . (e.g. ´I can't read
                        my notebook ª).
Results

Does the whiteboard contribute to grounding utterances?

Our main hypothesis was that whiteboard role in mutual understanding was to support
drawing schemata, which are useful for clarifying an idea that is difficult to turn into
words. Actually, this was rarely the case. The experiment task did not involve the type of
misunderstanding which can be easily disambiguated by a schemata. A second hypothesis
was that the whiteboard would support grounding by helping partners to solve
references. An utterance such as "he lies" can be disambiguated if it is accompanied by a
gesture pointing to "he". In a previous study, we observed that 87% of the numerous
gestures performed by two subjects in front of the MEMOLAB environment (Roiron,
1996) were simple deictic gestures. In the present study, deictic gestures were not
observed for two reasons. First, the users could not see each other's cursor. Second, even
if some gestures were possible (e.g. putting a mark on or moving the object being
referred to), it was impossible for the speaker to simultaneously type "he" in the MOO
window and move the cursor wherever "he" was located on the whiteboard.

While our hypothesis viewed the whiteboard as a tool for disambiguating dialogues, we
observed opposite acknowledgement sequences, we often observed the opposite, i.e.
utterances aimed to disambiguate the information displayed on the whiteboard. In short,
the dialogues were instrumental for grounding whiteboard information rather than
the reverse. The preponderance of the whiteboard over dialogues seems related to the
persistency of information, as we will see next.

Does the whiteboard contribute to build a shared solution?

Most whiteboards were made of a large collection of text notes. We did not encounter
many elaborated graphics. On the 20 pairs, four drew a timeline (e.g. fig, 1), four drew a
map and three drew a graph, mainly indicating social relations among suspects. Timelines
can be helpful since its is difficult to reason about intervals without visualizing them.
However only one complete time line has been produced. The maps did not really help to
solve the task since the solution of the enigma did not require any spatial reasoning such
as "Hans could not go from room 1 to the bar without being seen by Rolf.", and the basic
layout was provided in the experimental instructions. The pairs who drew a map where
probably influenced by the spatial metaphor which was very salient in thate task. Overall,
the graphs were generally abandoned before being completed. In other words, the
expressivity of graphics has been under-exploited by the subjects. Our interpretation
is simply that the task did not require such explanatory schemata, e.g. to articulate
complex causal structures. We did, however, see at east one pair use the schematic power
to indicate a chain of logical inference. When one subject asked about the reasons for the
latest in a series of inferences displayed on the whiteboard, the other used boxes and
arrows to indicate the supporting premises. Thus, even when purely verbal information is
expressed, the whiteboard allows a kind of deictic reference as a useful shorthand.
                            Figure 1:       Using the whiteboard to build a shared solution:
                            Uncompleted timeline in Pair 22.

Some graphical features of the whiteboard were used to structure the collection of notes.
Three pairs use color codes for indicating the author of the note. Many pairs used the 2-D
space to structure the information, either systematically in a two-entry table (2 pairs),
more often, by grouping geographically the notes concerning the same suspect.

Delhom (1998) observed five additional pairs solving the same task but with a
whiteboard which was not shared (A could not see what B drew). She observed that
subjects without a shared whiteboard had a higher acknowledgment rate than those with a
shared whiteboard. Conversely, Schwartz (personal communication) observed that
subjects with a whiteboard perform more grounding acts than those without a whiteboard.
This apparent contradiction differentiates whiteboard functions and confirms the results
above. In Schwartz' study, the subjects faced complex routing problems and hence
needed the whiteboard to express or repair their contributions, while our task, used by
Delhom, required managing a large set of simple factual information, the whiteboard
being used for data management, as we explain now.

Does the whiteboard support the regulation of the task?

The task has two logical phases, data acquisition, in which the subjects search for and
gather necessary clues, and data synthesis, in which they try to infer the answer from the
gathered information. Generally, these phases are temporally distinct, although there can
be some overlap. During the first part of the task (data acquisition), most pairs split
spatially, one detective visiting the rooms of the upper corridor of the auberge while the
other explored the lower corridor. Very often this division of labor did not hold, because
one detective was faster than the other and because this division does not specify who
will explore the rooms in between corridors (e.g., the bar, and the (the bar, the restaurant,
...restaurant). This insufficient specification of the strategy should lead to complementary
negotiation of who does what. This was not the case. It could be explained by the fact,
however, this was not the case. A possible explanation could be that the subjects used
MOO commands such as "who" to trace their partner itinerary's travels in the MOO. This
was not the case either. Indeed, each agent was able to 'trace' his partner by looking at the
information (s)he was adding onto the whiteboard: If A sees that B puts on the
whiteboard the information collected from Suspect5 on the whiteboard, A may infer that
B is in Suspect5's room. Another explanation of this implicit coordination is related to the
specific affordances of the spatial design of the environment. We indeed observed that
virtual space influences collaboration (Dillenbourg, Traum & Montandon, submitted), but
we do develop this point here.
During the second part of the task (data synthesis), many pairs started with all the
suspects and then discarded one by onesequentially eliminated any suspect who had
either no motive to kill, no opportunity to get the weapon, or no opportunity to kill (Fig
2). This process generally takes a concrete form on the whiteboard: the detectives one by
oneincrementally cross out the notes regarding any suspect whicho is discarded. The
whiteboard provides them with a persistent representation of the set of remaining
suspects.

Figure 2:       Using the whiteboard for task management, crossing notes = discarding suspects.

In other words, the whiteboard mainly served as shared memory, i.e. accumulating the set
of problem data and inferences on which peers agreed or have to agree. The whiteboard
reifies the problem state or, in Whittaker, Geelhoed & Robinson (1993) terms, the
whiteboard helps to 'retain the context'. Shared memory relies on the persistency of
displayed information. The next section confirms this finding by showing that the
whiteboard is used as a group memory.

Does grounding predict performance ?

The rate of acknowledgment is a rudimentary appraisal of grounding intensity. I, but is it
related to problem solving ? At a first glance, the answer is negative. The
acknowledgment rate is not related to global performance measures. When the sample
was split withinto groups consisting of the highest acknowledgment rates versus the
lowest rates, we found no difference with respect to task completioncorrect solution
(respectively, 6 correct solutions versus 7) or with respect to time (respectively 120 and
125 minutes, in average). However, low acknowledgers perform significantly more
actions in the MOO (ask, move, read, look, etc.) than high acknowledgers (respectively,
237 versus 178 ; F=5.13, df=1, p=.05). This difference seems related to an higher number
of redundant actions (respectively 18 versus 6; F=11; df=1; p= 0.01). We discriminate
self-redundancy (a subject asked a question that (s)he asked before) from cross-
redundancy (a subject repeats a question that her partner asked before). The average self
redundancy is almost equal for low and high acknowledgers, respectively 3.4 and 3.2.
Hence, the difference between high and low acknowledgers is rather related to cross-
redundancy. This result illustrates that redundancy is not just a matter of memory, since
memory defectlimitations would also affect self-redundancy. In cross redundancy, we
differentiated immediate redundancy (the delay between two redundant questions is less
than 5 minutes) withfrom delayed redundancy (over 5 minutes -- this threshold has been
selected by inspecting data). Immediate redundancy is not always an indicator of mis-
coordination. It may indicate explicit coordination: A, instead of summarizing the
information for B, simply invites B to ask the same question again. On average, high
acknowledgers ask almost the same number of immediate redundant questions as the low
acknowledgers, the mean being respectively 1.20 and 1.40. The difference between the
two groups comes from the number of long term redundancies (11.40 for low
acknowledgers, 3.40 for high acknowledgers).

                            Figure 3:       Relationship between the rate of acknowledgment for
                            utterances regarding task management and different indicators of
                            redundancy in problem solving actions.

This comparison reveals somea quantitative relationship between specific grounding
mechanisms (acknowledging utterances about the strategy) and the efficiency of a
distributed problem solving process (measured by the delayed cross-redundancy). This
relationship is however not very strong: redundancy may decrease efficiency but increase
effectiveness and the cost of acknowledgment might be higher than the cost of
redundancy. An interesting conclusion is however that the acknowledgment rate is a
sensitive variable (we reuse it in the next sections). The more important conclusion is that
the notion of group memory, which explains differences in delayed cross-redundancy, is
a key to relate grounding utterances and sharing a solution. Actually, the fact that
information remains displayed on the whiteboard is only one factor in the selection of a
grounding medium, as explained in the next section.

The complex management of shared spaces

In our experiment, the whiteboard was not the only shared space. The MOO was also a
shared space. For instance, subjects could disambiguate sentences such as "he lies" not by
referring to the whiteboard but also by observing that both subjects are in the same MOO
room and that 'he' was the suspect present in the room. Virtual space creates a micro-
context which complements the conversational context. The previous section revealed
that the difference between the MOO dialogues and the whiteboard interaction was less a
question of verbal versus graphical interactions than a matter of timing: (1) interactions
follow sequentially in the MOO, while there is no temporal order to be respected on the
whiteboard, (2) information is persistent on the whiteboard (it remains displayed until it
is explicitly erased) while it is semi-persistent in the MOO (past interactions scroll up as
new interactions are added to the MOO window). The subjects appear to take these
differences into account. As illustrated by figure 4, utterances concerning the strategy,
matterseta-communication and technical issues are rarely conducted via the whiteboard.
To understand these data, we need to discriminate the persistency of display (how long
information is displayed) from the persistency of validity (how long information
remains valid). The display persistence on a whiteboard is high, while the validity
persistence of strategic knowledge is low. For instance, an utterance such as "I am going
to ask questions to Heidi" remains true for a few minutes. If such a piece of information
is put on the whiteboard, it might still be displayed while it is not true anymore. If the
display persistency is longer than the validity persistency, obsolete information may be
displayed (this is becoming a common problem on the world wide web, where sites are
moved and removed more often than links updated).

Figure 4:       Categories of content in MOO (left) and whiteboard (right) interactions

In summary, subjects seem very effective in matching the display persistence with the
validity persistence in such a way that group memory is not 'polluted' with obsolete
information. To have a complete picture of how grounding is achieved through different
media, we must introduce another dimension, which is the probability of non-grounding.

      The average rate of acknowledgment for inferences (46 %) is higher than for facts
      (26 %). There is not much to disagree or to misunderstand about fact%) is higher
      than for facts (26%). There is little room for disagreementabout facts, and they are
      also easier to understand, because of having been pre-constructed and tested by
      the task designers, hence acknowledgment is less necessary. Conversely,
      inferences are open to and disagreement and, since they are spontaneously
      constructed, more subject to misunderstanding and disagreement and hencethus
      are more likely to require acknowledgment to be shared.
     Acknowledgment is lower in the whiteboard than in Moo dialogues. We set up the
     size of whiteboard in a way that no scrolling was possible. Hence, partners knew
     they see the same information as their partners. In Moo dialogues, visibility only
     occurs when the partners are in the same room and are mutually aware of it.
Figure 5: Interaction on the acknowledgment rate between the mode of interaction and the content of
interaccommunciation and the content of communication.

More interestingly, figure 5 shows a significant interaction effect on the acknowledgment
rate between the content and the mode of grounding (F=6.09; df=2; p=.001). These data
can be interpreted with the four levels of shared knowledge defined in the beginning of
this paper. The talk/whiteboard difference occurs on level 2: acknowledgment is more
necessary if one cannot be sure that the partner has perceived the message. The
facts/inferences differences relate to level 3-4: acknowledgment is more necessary if one
cannot be sure that the partner has understood or agreed. By combining these two factors,
table 2 shows why the acknowledgment rate is the lowest for facts in hethe whiteboard
and highest for inferences in MOO dialogues.

Table 2.         Explaining variations of acknowledgment rate according to the medium
feature (sharedness) and the information features (probability of non-grounding): the
number of 'yes' entries in a column is related to the data shown in figure 5.

Is it necessary       MOO dialogue (talk)               Whiteboard interactions
that B
acknowledges
information X
provided by
A?
Level of              Facts        Inferences           Facts        Inferences
sharedness of
information X
4. Agreement     NO: X is        YES: B can        NO: X is        YES: B can
                 presented as    question both     presented as    question both
                 true by the     X and the         true by the     X and the
                 environment     motivations for   environment     motivations for
                                 X                                 X
3.               NO: X was       YES: B may        NO: X was       YES: B may
Understanding    pre-            misunderstand     pre-            misunderstand
                 constructed.    X                 constructed.    X
2. Perception    YES: B can be in a different      NO: A and B see the same
                 room than A and hence fail to     information on the whiteboard
                 perceive X
1. Access        NOYES: B can be in a different    NO: A and B have access to the
                 room and hence fail to access to  same information on the
                 information X                     whiteboard
Conclusions

In this study, the whiteboard is not used to ground utterances, nor to represent the final
solution. Instead, it is used to maintain a shared representation of the state of the problem
along the problem solving process. Our whiteboard fulfills its role for this task because of
two features: persistency of display and shared visibility. Our observations should be
generalized not just to any system labeled 'whiteboard' or 'virtual space' by its designer,
but instead to systems including a space of shared and persistent information.,

This group memory is not a static depository of information, but the result of a complex
organization of the whole distributed cognitive system in which subjects allocate
different functions (grounding information of type X) to different tools (media) according
to criteria such as the persistency of display, the persistency of validity of information,
the probability of non-grounding due to the medium (level 1 or 2) or due to the
information itself (level 3 or 4)

We consider it worthwhile to describe these agents and these tools as a distributed
cognitive system because we observed a large variety of ways of distributing the various
functions to favorite tools. For instance, if a pair communicates all facts through
dialogues, the whiteboard will be more available for inferences; if they exchange all
information in the whiteboard, they fill it very soon and hence start to exchange
inferences through MOO dialogues, and so forth. It may also vary within a pair as the
collaboration progresses, one function being for instance progressively abandoned
because the detectives become familiar with another one. This plasticity, or system
ability to self-organize along different configurations, justifies the descriptions of a pair
and the environment as a single cognitive system.

Acknowledgments

This project was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant #11-40711.94).

References

Allwood, J., Nivre, J. & Ahlsén, E. (1991). On the Semantics and Pragmatics of
Linguistic Feedback. Gothenburg Papers in Theoretical Linguistics No. 64. University of
Gothenburg, Department of Linguistics, Sweden.

Blaye, A. (1988) Confrontation socio-cognitive et résolution de problèmes. Doctoral
dissertation, Centre de Recherche en Psychologie Cognitive, Université de Provence,
13261 Aix-en-Provence, France.

Clark, H.H. (1994) Managing problems in speaking. Speech Communication, 15:243 --
250.
Clark, H.H., & Brennan S.E. (1991) Grounding in Communication. In L. Resnick, J.
Levine & S. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition (127-149).
Hyattsville, MD: American Psychological Association.

Delhom, K. J. (1998) Etude des techniques de collaboration dans la résolution de
problème à l'intérieur d'un environnement virtuel. Mémoire de licence non publié, Faculté
de Psychologie et des Sciences de l'Education, Université de Genève.

Dillenbourg, P. , Traum, D. & Schneider, D. (1996) Grounding in multi-modal task-
oriented collaboration. In P. Brna, A. Paiva & J. Self (Eds), Proceedings of the European
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education. Lisbon, Portugal, Sept. 20 - Oc. 2, pp.
401-407.

Dillenbourg, P. (1999) What do you mean by collaborative learning? In P. Dillenbourg
(Ed) Collaborative learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches. Oxford:
Pergamon.

Gutwin, C. & Greenberg, S. (1998) The effects of workspace awareness on the usability
of real-time distributed groupware. Research report 98-632-23, Department of Computer
Science, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada

Roiron, C. (1996) Expérimentation d'un logiciel éducatif utilisant des techniques
d'intelligence artificielle. Rapport de recherche non-publié. TECFA, Faculté de
Psychologie et des Sciences de l'Education, Université de Genève.

Stefik, M., Bobrow, D,G., Foster, G., Lanning, S. & Tatart, D. (1987) WYSIWIS
Revised: Early Experiences with Multiuser Interfaces. ACM Transactions on Office
Information Systems, 5(2), 147-167, April.

Terveen L.G., Wroblewski, D.A. & Tighe S.N. (1991) Intelligence Assistance through
Collaborative Manipulation, Proceedings of IJCAI 91.

Whittaker, S., Geelhoed, E. & Robinson, E. (1993) Shared workspaces: How do they
work and when are they useful? International Journal of Man-Machines Studies, 39, 813-
842.

Addresses

Pierre Dillenbourg, TECFA, University of Geneva, Bd Pont d'Arve, CH 1205 Geneva
Switzerland, Pierre.mailto:Dillenbourg@tecfa.unige.ch
David Traum., AV Williams Building, UMIACS, University of Maryland, USA,
mailto:traum@cs.umd.edu
