Computerized Molecular Modeling as a Collaborative
Learning Environment
Yehudit J. Dori, Miri Barak

Israel Institute of Technology

      Abstract: Interpretation of symbols, as well as understanding the
      particulate nature of matter and spatial structures are essential skills
      students need for solving problems in organic chemistry. However, model
      perception and understanding the spatial structure of organic molecules
      has been a source of difficulty for many chemistry students. A
      computerized molecular modeling (CMM)-based collaborative learning
      environment has been shown to be an effective means to overcome certain
      learning difficulties in chemistry.

     This research investigated the effect of using different types of models
     while teaching organic chemistry on student understanding of new
     concepts and the spatial structure of new molecules, as well as preference
     of a particular model type. We employed a teaching method that combines
     physical (plastic) and virtual (computerized) three-dimensional molecular
     models in both collaborative and individual learning setting on 276
     students from nine high schools in Israel.

      Research tools included a designated learning unit, software and database
      for computerized molecular modeling, and pre-and post-course
      questionnaires on organic compounds and models.

      Experimental group students understood the model concept better and
      were more capable of applying transformation from one-dimensional to
      two- or three-dimensional molecular representations and vice versa. Based
      on these results, we recommend incorporating both virtual and physical
      models in chemistry teaching/learning as a means to foster spatial
      understanding of molecular structure.

Introduction

Science can be thought of as an attempt to model nature in order to understand and
explain phenomena. A model can be viewed as an intermediary between the abstractions
of theory and the concrete actions of experiment. Models have a target -- the actual thing
they are trying to represent, and a source -- the idea or object from which the
representation is derived (Hardwicke, 1995). They therefore help making predictions,
guide inquiry, summarize data, justify outcomes and facilitate communication (Gilbert &
Boulter, 1998).
Brief History of the Development of Molecular Models

The history of models (Walton, 1968; Petersen, 1970; Ramsay, 1981; Hardwicke, 1995;
Clark, 1997) can be traced back to Plato (482-347 BC), who conceived of the four
"elements" -- soil, water, air and fire. Nothing much happened in terms of model
development until in 1808 Dalton published the New System of Chemical Philosophy --
the first substantial discourse on atomic theory. At the same year Malus discovered
polarized light. Wollaston related it to tetrahedron, but noted that "It is perhaps too much
to hope that the geometrical arrangement of primary particles will ever be perfectly
known".

In 1811 Dalton had a set of models of atoms and simple diatomic molecules constructed
to help illustrate his ideas. In 1815 Biot observed several organic compounds that enable
light polarization and realized that the rotation of light was due to a property of the
individual molecule. In 1848 Pasteur found that crystals can be separated into two types,
and in solution they rotated the plane of polarized light equally, but in opposite
directions. This discovery could not be explained at that time due to lack of a proper
model. The next indication of actual model construction was by Kekule in 1867, who
proposed the tetrahedral structure of carbon bonds. In 1874 Van't Hoff used models --
tetrahedra joined at the apex, sides or faces to describe the optical isomers of tartaric acid,
which raised widespread objection.

Sachse was one of the few chemists who around 1890 used molecules to make
predictions, and predicted the `boat' and `chair' forms of cyclohexane. During 1900-1920
the use of ball-and-stick models became more widespread. In 1934 Stuart developed
space-filling models that gave precise indications of the van der Waals radii of the atoms
in a molecule. These were preferred over the earlier type, and opened the `golden age' of
molecular models. In 1947 Pitzer computed the energy barrier to carbon-carbon bond in
butane. Later, Pitzer and Hazel, who won Nobel Prize in chemistry, demonstrated the
axial and equatorial chair form of cyclohexane ring. Space filling models were
considered an indispensable tool for organic chemists during the next 30 years and
enabled the prediction of structural conformations, strereochemistry, reactivity and
physical properties. Most notable was the double helix structure of DNA proposed by
Watson and Creek in 1953, who later won Nobel Prize in chemistry.

Models in Science and Science Education

Modeling and simulation are used in research and education to describe, explain and
explore phenomena, processes and abstract ideas. Scientists, engineers and science
educators use models to concretize, simplify and clarify abstract concepts, as well as to
develop and explain theories, phenomena and rules. A model is considered useful if it is
simpler than the natural object that it represents. An important value of models in science
and science education is their contribution to visualization of complex ideas, processes
and systems. A virtue of a good model is that it stimulates its creators and viewers to pose
questions that take us beyond the original phenomenon to formulate hypotheses that can
be examined experimentally (Toulmin, 1953; Bagdonis & Salisbury, 1994).
Experimentation, however, is rarely presented as a way of developing, interpreting or
evaluating explanatory models for the investigated phenomenon (Tamir, 1989). Ben-Zvi
and Genut (1998) recommended to teach high school students about interconnections of
history and philosophy of science on one hand and the usefulness and limitations of
scientific models, such as the Periodic Table, on the other hand.

Gilbert and Boulter (1998) distinguish between target systems, mental models, expressed
models, consensus models and teaching models. Other researchers underscored the need
for models as enablers of students' mental transformation from two-dimensional to three-
dimensional representations (Baker & Talley, 1974; Elliot & Hauptman, 1981; Barak &
Dori, 1999).

One of the problems that arises while using concrete models is that insufficient emphasis
is placed on the fact that models are theory-based simulations of reality. The theory of
molecular structure is a kind of intellectual model (Hammond, Osteryoung, Crawford &
Gray, 1972). Harrison and Treagust (1996) claimed that the use of term "model" is a
source of considerable semantic variation for science students and teachers. Models are
often oversimplified and therefore cannot tell humans all they may wish to know about
the real physical system that is being modeled.

Teachers and students should, therefore, be made aware of the fact that models, employed
in a variety of research, study and design contexts, are not complete representations of the
realities they are supposed to represent (Osborne & Gilbert, 1980).

Applied to chemistry, physical ball and stick models derived from polystyrene spheres
and plastic straws are not merely enlargements of the molecules they are intended to
represent. These are analogue models that are used to explain new and abstract concepts.
Some of the properties are similar to aspects of the target they are representing. For
example, the relative diameter of the spheres represents the size of the different atoms.
Other aspects, however, are not reflected in the model. For example, in a ball-and-stick
model type, all sticks (straws) are of equal length, while "real" molecular bond lengths
are not. Other analog models focus on different properties of the molecule, thereby
creating multiple ways of representing the same molecule. Teachers frequently use just
one type of model, limiting students' experience with models and causing their model
perceptions to be partially or completely inadequate.

Computerized Molecular Modeling

The use of concrete molecular models (made of plastic, wood and/or metal) to illustrate
phenomena in chemistry teaching has been widespread for a relatively long time
(Peterson, 1970). The choice of model type has an impact on the image students create
concerning the ways in which particles are shaped and how they function in the "real"
world from a scientific viewpoint.

Simulating different model types quickly and efficiently is achieved in a computerized
environment, of which theoretical chemists, experimentalists and educators are taking
advantage (Wilson 1997). Information technology helps relieving present-day researchers
and students from the laborious task of data collection and enables them to engage in
creative thinking and problem solving. Nakhleh and Krajcik (1994) investigated how
different levels of information presented by various technologies affect secondary
students' understanding of acid, base and pH concepts. They found that students using
microcomputer-based laboratories exhibited a positive shift in their concept map scores,
indicating greater differentiation and integration of their knowledge.

The development of computerized molecular modeling (CMM) made traditional models
less favorable in the late 1960's. Not only are computers capable of drawing and
manipulating molecules in three dimensions. They are also powerful tools for predicting
molecular spatial structure through energy minimization calculations based on quantum
mechanics. These capabilities have opened the way for advanced research in chemistry,
resulting, among other things, winning Nobel Prize in chemistry (1998).

Among the advantages of using information technology in science education are the
options of providing for individual learning, simulation, graphics, and the demonstration
of models of the micro and macro world (Dori, 1995; Dori & Barnea, 1997; Dori &
Hameiri, 1998; Krajcik, Simmons & Lunetta, 1988; Krieger, 1996; Lazarowitz &
Huppert, 1993). Computer aided instruction enables students to solve a variety of
problems while carrying out their own research at their own pace (Dori & Barnea, 1993;
Dori 1995). The use of computerized models places more emphasis on the creation of
mental models by students and their use to make prediction (Gilbert & Boulter, 1998).

Students need more experience with models as intellectual tools that provide contrasting
conceptual views of phenomena, and more discussion of the roles of models in the
service of scientific inquiry (Gabel & Sherwood, 1980; Grosslight, Unger, Jay & Smith,
1991). Raghavan & Glaser (1995) recommend that science educators become less
concerned with the presentation of facts and concentrate on showing the centrality of
models in research and education. However, most educators use a limited number of
static models, and do not emphasize the way in which models are created, their essential
role in science learning, or their advantages and limitations (Gilbert, 1997; Bagdonis &
Salisbury, 1994). Williamson and Abraham (1995) studied the effect of computer
animations on college student mental models of chemical phenomena. Animations were
used in two treatment situations: as a supplement in large group lectures and as both the
lecture supplement and an assigned individual activity. Both treatments increased the
students' understanding. They attributed the improvement to the superior formation of
dynamic mental models of chemical processes that were made possible by the computer
animation.

Research Objective and Setting

Our research objective was to investigate the effect of using various types of models in a
collaborative learning environment while teaching/learning organic chemistry. We
studied the effects of these variables on student understanding of new concepts and the
spatial structure of new molecules, as well as their preference of a particular model type.
We employed a teaching method that combines physical (plastic) and virtual
(computerized) three-dimensional molecular models. The combination of physical and
virtual model types was designed to benefit from advantages of each type while its
disadvantages are compensated for by the complementary type.

Physical models of atoms and molecules are tangible and "real" -- they can be touched
and manipulated in actual three dimensions. They are, however, limited in quantity,
variety of colors and sizes, and are not amenable to any computational operations.
Virtual, computer-based models, on the other hand, are only visible as two- or three-
dimensional, but they are mere projections of images on the computer screen. Yet, since
they are virtual, they are available in unlimited quantities, colors, radii, and model types
e.g., stereo line, ball-and-stick, and space filling (Barnea & Dori, 1996). Perhaps more
importantly, they can be operated on by complex mathematical functions to calculate
their expected 3-D shape by means of energy minimization. Considering the advantages
and disadvantages of real vs. virtual models, it was our conjecture that students can
benefit from using one alongside the other.

The research population consisted of 276 students from nine high schools in Israel. The
experimental group consisted of 154 students who studied according to the innovative
method. The control group consisted of 122 students who studied in a traditional method.
Control group teachers used models only rarely, and only for demonstration. The research
tools included a designated learning unit, software and database for computerized
molecular modeling, and pre-and post-course questionnaires on organic compounds and
models.

  Figure 1. An example of a problem from the post-organic compound questionnaire
The learning materials were aimed at encouraging students to use different types of
models for building spatial structures of organic molecules.

Figure 1 is an example of a problem from the post-organic compound questionnaire that
tested the ability to perform bi-directional transformations between one- and two- or
three-dimensional representations.

Research Plan

A survey among science and chemistry teachers was first conducted to find what teaching
methods teachers use, their opinions regarding the value of using models and actual use
of models in the classroom. We considered findings of this survey while developing
learning materials for the main research. A pilot study was then conducted to validate the
research questionnaires and the learning materials. During the main research, students
investigated the molecules' three-dimensional structure, conducted learning tasks and
engaged in building and drawing physical and virtual models. The Object Process
Diagram (Dori, D., 1995; Dori & Dori, 1996) in Figure 2 describes the structure of the
learning materials for both collaborative and individualized learning modes.

                Figure 2. The learning materials and their attributes

The pilot and the main research are described in Figure 3. The expert group, which
consisted of science teaching researchers, graduate students, and expert teachers, was the
agent for the learning materials developing process. The science teaching researchers
team developed and improved the evaluation tool-set, which consisted of questionnaires,
observations and interviews. The pre-and post questionnaires related to the model
concept and organic compounds understanding. The resulting learning materials
comprised a model repository and an organic chemistry learning unit set. The pilot study,
carried out by the graduate students and expert teachers, used the model repository and
evaluation tool set to improve the learning unit. In the main research we investigated the
effect of the computerized molecular modeling and physical models environment on the
experimental high school students' learning.

         Figure 3. Object-Process Diagram (OPD) describing the research

Research Results

The results of the survey done among 20 science teachers and 31 chemistry teachers
regarding the use of models are presented in Table 1. We investigated the types of models
and the topics in which the various models were incorporated.

As Table 1 shows, the most prevalent model is ball-and-stick, and the two most popular
topics in which models are used are simple molecules and organic compounds. Most
teachers indicated that they use models in cooperative learning (32%) and demonstrations
(51%). Only a minority (17%) indicated the use of models in individualized learning and
attributed it to budgetary constraints. Consequently we decided to supply additional
model kits and the CMM software for the purpose of the experiment.
              Table 1. The use of models in various chemistry topics

Pilot Study Findings

The feedback from the pilot study included teachers' and students' open responses to the
learning unit and to the learning environment. Overall, the responses were positive and
included four categories: interest and understanding, autonomous learners, 2- and 3-D
models, and learning skills.

Student negative responses included the need for more explanations, increased
competition among students, and the requirement to draw models. Points for
improvement teachers indicated related to "waste of precious learning time" and the
excessive length of the post-organic compounds questionnaire. We took these remarks
into account while improving the learning unit and the post-test for the main research.

Main Research Results

Students' answers to the pre-model and pre-organic compounds questionnaires were
analyzed and scores were summarized. The average score of the experimental group was
compared to the average score of the control group and analyzed for randomness of the
class effect in this research. The results showed that in the pre-model questionnaire there
was no significant class effect while in the pre-organic compounds questionnaire a
significant class effect was found (Z=2.01, p=0.0450). Significant differences between
experimental and control students were found neither in the pre-model questionnaire nor
in the pre-organic compounds questionnaire. Nonetheless, the pre-questionnaires served
as covariant in the Mixed Model Procedure (Littell, Milliken, Stroup & Wolfinger, 1996)
for analyzing the post-questionnaires results. The new teaching method was determined
as the fixed effect and the class was determined as the random effect.

            Figure 4. Regression lines for organic compounds questionnaire

Figure 4, which presents the regression lines for the organic compounds questionnaire,
shows a steady gap between the experimental and control group scores. The gap is in
favor of the experimental group and is statistically significant (t = --17.12, p < 0.00001).
A similar effect was found for the model questionnaire. To examine the effect of the
learning method on students' ability to perform bi-directional transformations between
one- and two- or three-dimensional representations, we analyzed the results of the
problem from the post-organic compound questionnaire, shown in Figure 1. The two
significant factors, which were found to explain the students' scores of this problem,
were the pre-questionnaire score (F = 171.3, p = 0.001) and the research group (F = 6.8, p
= 0.01).

Experimental group students understood the model concept better and were more capable
of defining and implementing isomerism and functional group concepts than their control
group counterparts. They were also more capable of applying transformation from one-
dimensional to two- or three-dimensional molecular representations and vice versa. When
required to explain their choices, most of the experimental group students used mainly
sketches of ball-and-stick models and some space-filling models. Most students of the
control group did not provide any explanation (although required to do so) and those who
did, used mainly 2-D wireframe model that resembles their teacher's chalk and board
structural formulae.
Summary

Interpretation of symbols, as well as understanding the particulate nature of matter and
spatial structures are essential skills students need for solving problems in organic
chemistry. However, model perception and understanding the spatial structure of organic
molecules has been a source of difficulty for many chemistry students. A computerized
molecular modeling (CMM)-based collaborative learning environment has been shown to
be an effective means to overcome certain learning difficulties in chemistry.

This research investigated the effect of using different types of models while teaching
organic chemistry on student understanding of new concepts and the spatial structure of
new molecules, as well as preference of a particular model type. We employed a teaching
method that combines physical (plastic) and virtual (computerized) three-dimensional
molecular models in both collaborative and individual learning setting on 276 students
from nine high schools in Israel.

Research tools included a designated learning unit, software and database for
computerized molecular modeling, and pre-and post-course questionnaires on organic
compounds and models.

Experimental group students understood the model concept better and were more capable
of applying transformation from one-dimensional to two- or three-dimensional molecular
representations and vice versa. Based on these results, we recommend incorporating both
virtual and physical models in chemistry teaching/learning as a means to foster spatial
understanding of molecular structure.

References

Bagdonis, A.S., & Salisbury, D.F. (1994). Development and validation of models in
instructional design. Educational Technology, 34, 26-32.

Baker, R.S. & Talley, H.L. (1974). Visualization skills as a component of aptitude for
chemistry - A construct validation study. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 11,
95-97.

Barak M. & Dori, Y.J. (1999). Model Perception and Understanding the Spatial Structure
of Organic Molecules by High School Chemistry Students. Science Teachers Education
Toward the New Millenium, Technion, Haifa, Israel.

Barnea, N., & Dori, Y.J. (1996). Computerized Molecular Modeling as a Tool to Improve
Chemistry Teaching. Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences, 36, 629-
636.

Ben-Zvi, N., & Genut, S. (1998). Uses and Limitations of Scienctific Modls: The
Perioduc Table as an inductive Tool. International Journal of Science Education, 20, 3,
351-360.
Clarke, F.H. (1997). New Skeletal Space-filling Models: a Model of an Enzyme Active
Site. Journal of Chemical Education 54 230-235.

Dori, D. (1995). Object-Process Analysis: Maintaining the Balance between System
Structure and Behavior. Journal of Logic and Computation, 5, 227-249

Dori, D., & Dori, Y.J. (1996). Object -- Process Analysis of a Hypertext Organic
Chemistry Studyware. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 15,
65 - 84.

Dori, Y.J. (1995). Cooperative Development of Organic Chemistry Computer Assisted
Instruction by Experts, Teachers and Students. Journal of Science Education and
Technology, 4, 163-170.

Dori, Y.J., & Barak, M(1997). The Use of Models in Chemistry and Science Teaching.
Proceedings of the 62nd Meeting of the Israel Chemical Society, Technion, IIT, Haifa,
Israel.

Dori, Y. J., & Barnea, N. (1993). A Computer Aided Instruction Module on Polymers.
Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Science, 33, 325 -- 331.

Dori, Y.J., & Barnea, N. (1997). In-service Chemistry Teachers Training: the Impact of
Introducing Computer Technology on Teachers Attitudes and Classroom
Implementation. International Journal of Science Education, 19, 577-592.

Dori, Y.J., & Hameiri, M. (1998). The "Mole Environment" Studyware: Applying
Multidimensional Analysis to Quantitative Chemistry Problems. International Journal of
Science Education, 20, 317-333.

Eliot, J.K., & Hauptmam, A. (1981). Different Dimensions of Spatial Ability. Studies in
Science Education, 8, 45-- 66.

Gabel, D., & Sherwood, R. (1980). The effect of student manipulation of molecular
models on chemistry achievement according to Piagetian level. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 17, 75-81.

(Gilbert, J.K. (1997). Exploring Models and Modeling in Science and Technology
Education. The University of Reading, The New Bulmershe Papers, UK.)

Gilbert, J.K., & Boulter, C.J. (1998). Learning Science Through Models and Modeling.
In Fraser, B.J. and Tobin, K.G. (Eds). International Handbook of Science Education.
Kluwer Academic Publisher, Dordrecht/Boston/London, 53-66.

Gilbert, S.W. (1991) .Model building and a definition of science. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 28, 73-79.
Grosslight, L., Unger, C., Jay, E., & Smith, C.L. (1991). Understanding models and their
use in science: conceptions of middle and high school students and experts. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 28(9), 799-822.

Hammond, G.S., Osteryoung, J., Crawford, T.H., & Gray, H.B. (1972). Models in
Chemical Science, Benjamin Inc., 2nd Edition, Menlo Park, CA.

Hardwicke, A.J. (1995). Using Molecular Models to Teach Chemistry. Part 1: Modeling
Molecules. School and Science Review, 77, 59-64.

Harrison, A.G., & Treagust, D.F. (1996). Mental Models. Science Education, 80, 508-
534.

(Holman, J. (1975). The Use of Abstract Models in Science Teaching. School and
Science Review 57, 391-392.)                     

Krieger, J.H. (1996). New Software Kicks In. Chemistry and Engineering News,
September, 30-40.*

Krajcik, S. J., Simons, E. R. & Lunetta, N. (1986). Improving Research on Computers in
Science Learning. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 23, 465-470.

Krajcik, S.J., Simons, E. R. & Lunetta, N. (1988). A Research Strategy for the Dynamic
Study of Students' Conception and Problem Solving Strategies Using Science Software.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 25, 147-155.

Lazarowitz, R., & Huppert, J. (1993). Science process skills of 10th grade biology
students in a computer-assisted learning setting. Journal of Research on Computing in
Education, 25, 366-382.

Nakhleh, M.B., & Krajcik, S.J (1994). Influence of Levels of Information as Presented by
Different Technologies on Students' Understanding of Acid, Base and pH Concepts.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31, 1077-1096.

Nobel Web Site (1998). http://www.nobel.se/announcement-98/chemistry98.html

Osborne, R.J., & Gilbert, J.K. (1980) The Use of Models in Science Teaching. The
School and Science Review, 62, 57-67.

Peterson, Q.R. (1970). Some reflections on the use and abuse of molecular models.
Journal of Chemical Education, 47(1), 24-29.

Raghavan, K., & Glaser, R. (1995). Model based analysis and reasoning in science: the
MARS curriculum. Science Education, 79, 37-61.
Ramsay, O.B.(1981). Nobel Prize Topics in Chemistry -- Stereochemistry. Cambridge
University Press, Great Britain.

Tamir, P. (1989). Traning Teachers to Teach Effectively in the Laboratory. Science
Education, 73, 59-69.

Tamir, P., & Lunetta, V.N. (1981). Inquiry Related Tasks in High School Science
Laboratory Handbooks. Science Education, 65, 477-484.

Toulmin, S. (1953). The Philosophy of Science: An Introduction. New York: Harper and
Row.

Walton, A. (1968). A Review of the Use of Both Skeletal and Space-filling Models.
Progress in Stereochemistry, 4, 335-336.

Williamson, V.M., & Abraham, M.R. (1995). The Effects of Computer Animation on the
Particulate Mental Models of College Chemistry Students. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 32, 521-534.

Wilson, E.K. (1997). Thinking instead of `Cookbooking'. Chemistry and Engineering
News, May, 33-34.

Authors' Addresses

Yehudit J. Dori
Department of Education in Technology and Science; Technion; Israel Institute of
Technology; Haifa 32000; Israel.
Miri Barak
Department of Education in Technology and Science; Technion; Israel Institute of
Technology; Haifa 32000; Israel.
