The situated effects of awareness in distributed
collaborative learning: Interactive 3D an example
Annita Fjuk & Ingeborg Krange

Telenor Research & Development, Norway

       Abstract: Recent research in CSCL (Computer Supported Collaborative
       Learning) and CSCW (Computer Supported Co-operative Work) has
       provided insights into how various forms of awareness information should
       be computer supported to enable collaboration in distributed
       environments. Based on an understanding of learning as mediated by
       social interaction and artefacts (such as various forms of information and
       communication technologies), we argue that the effects of task and
       workspace awareness are highly situated with respect to collaborative
       knowledge construction. Some issues from this line of consideration are
       illustrated by examples gathered from designs of a distributed interactive
       3D application.

Introduction

The awareness usually afforded in physical collaborative learning environments allows
learners to implicitly maintain information about the others' interactions with common
problem areas and corresponding tasks. If two learners are co-located they cannot help
see, hear and perhaps even feel the presence and actions of the other. In distributed
collaborative learning environments, where collaboratively oriented activities are
mediated by various forms of information and communication technologies (ICT), these
abilities are greatly reduced. The actions of the others can take place in deafening silence
and their actions can almost be invisible. As a result, collaboratively oriented activities
such as negotiation of meaning, creation of joint understanding, and division of labour
and responsibility require meta-communicative actions for maintaining certain cognitive
and collective effects of the distributed collaboration (Fjuk & Dirckinck-Holmfeld,
1997).

Awareness has become a focus in computer systems designs to reduce the meta-
communicative efforts needed to collaborate across physical distances and in computer-
mediated environments (e.g., Gaver, 1991; Dourish & Bellotti, 1992; Palfreyman &
Rodden, 1996; Gutwin et al, 1995; Gutwin et al, 1996). Gaver (1991) underlines the
importance of supporting awareness information to help actors to shift from working
alone to working together. For example, Dourish & Bellotti (1992) connects this issue to
shared workspaces and defines awareness as "an understanding of the activities of others,
which provides a context for own activity" (ibid. p. 107). They argue that awareness
information should be passively collected and distributed rather than explicitly provided
by the actors through meta-communicative activities. Moreover, Gutwin et al. understand
workspace awareness as "the up-to-the-minute knowledge about other students'
interactions" and proclaim that such information plays an "integral part in how well an
environment creates opportunities for collaborative learning" (Gutwin et al, 1995, p.
147). With references to the pedagogical aspects of problem solving and critical thinking
Newman (1996) argues that up-to-minute information about co-learners' interactions has
little to do with learning and knowledge construction. Computer systems that support
workspace oriented awareness, he continues, are tools designed for routine work and for
making efficient workflow possible, and "problem-solving becomes more important than
routine work and effective critical thinking counts for more than efficient workflow"
(Ibid.).

In this paper, we support Newman's line of thinking and argue that the effects of
awareness information are situated according to what kind of social interactions we are
talking about and the context specific conditions of ICT-based artefacts. The core
arguments of the discussion are illustrated by examples gathered from designs of an
interactive 3D application. The paper is first and foremost a theoretical contribution to a
discussion concerning the effects of awareness information with respect to collaborative
learning. Second, it is a contribution to the educational debate on 3D and collaborative
learning. Distributed interactive 3D applications have been used to a limited extent as
mediators in collaborative learning probably because the character of this kind of ICT has
yet to be defined (Youngblut, 1998). There exist few in-depth studies that discuss the
potential learning effects of collaboration through interactive 3D (ibid.).

The structure of the paper is as follows: In section 2, we specify our theoretical position
of collaborative learning. In section 3, we discuss issues of awareness information with
respect to certain conditions of collaborative learning. In section 4, we operationalise the
theory with respect to distributed interactive 3D, and how the operationalisation was
maintained in designs. Section 5, concludes the paper and addresses activities for further
work.

Learning through genuine interdependence

Based on Vygotskian theory (e.g., Vygotsky, 1978) concerning the way collaboration
contributes to cognitive changes and knowledge construction, learning is situated in
social interaction and context specific conditions (Cole & Engeström, 1993). The learners
are interdependent in the sense that there are positive cognitive effects in drawing on
each other's knowledge through an intellectual partnership as well as through sharing of
resources and artefacts (such as for example various forms of ICT-based solutions).
Based on this theoretical heritage it becomes unreasonable to separate knowledge
construction from the socially and artefact mediated context. Moreover, artefacts
themselves are socially and contextually situated, carrying hidden assumptions developed
into their design, and determine what can be carried out when, in what form and for what
purpose (Leontjev, 1983). Thus, the role of artefacts is not limited to transmission of
operational aspects of human interaction. The artefacts also shape the goals of the actors
using them (Kaptelinin, 1996).
Salomon's (1992) work raises strong issues regarding the role of ICT-based artefacts in
collaboration and knowledge construction. This becomes especially evident when he
proclaims a difference between two kinds of desired effects, that is, effects with ICT
and/or collaborating peers, and effects of these. Concerning the former, the effects with,
are the changes or results afforded during the use of ICT or in social interaction with
peers. We argue that an ICT-based artefact attains this role when it becomes an
integrated part of the interactional forms that are required for constructing knowledge
collaboratively (Fjuk & Smørdal, 1998). When an ICT-based artefact attains this role,
first it implies that the use of it is conducted automatically due to the actor's
internalisation of the properties and conditions of the particular artefact. Second, the use
of the artefact must not hamper the focus and object of collaborative knowledge
construction.

According to the latter effect, effect of, Salomon proclaims that ICT-mediated
collaborative learning covers more than design and use of ICT-based artefacts. He
emphasises the role of mindful engagement, that is, the processes of active construction
controlled by the learners. This effect advocates lasting changes were the students solo-
capabilities are improved through intellectual partnership and genuine collaboration.
Salomon proclaims that genuine collaboration requires opportunities for maintaining
genuine interdependence. He characterises genuine interdependence by the following
activities:

   ·  The necessity to share information, meanings, conceptions and conclusions.
   ·  A division of labour where roles of actors complement one another in a joint
      endeavour and the end product requires this pooling of different roles.
   ·  The need for joint thinking in explicit terms that can be examined, changed, and
      elaborated upon by peers.

Concluding, this implies according to Salomon (1992) that "effects with CSCL are
necessary (but not sufficient) condition for the attainment of effects of it".

Discussion: The situated effects of awareness

To provide desired learning effects of ICT-mediated collaborative learning, genuine
collaboration and ICT-based artefacts must be considered in terms of an well-
orchestrated wholeness (Salomon, 1992). From this position, we suggest that issues on
awareness must be consciously sought due to the situated conditions anchored in the
socially and artefact mediated aspects of learning. In what follows we discuss the effects
of task and workspace awareness with respect to various conditions that are manifested
in artefact-mediated collaborative learning.

Task awareness and interaction about the tasks

A collaborative environment is made up of many tasks carried out over time, and divided
according to various situated criteria amongst the learners. This particular features of
genuine collaboration concerns issues that Gutwin et al. (1995) call task awareness. Task
awareness is concerned with how to complete the common task (e.g., What do we know
about the task, how much time do we have, what steps must we take to complete the task,
etc.). In what follows we discuss the situated effects of task awareness with respect to
ICT-mediated collaborative knowledge construction.

We might argue that task awareness is a necessary condition to perform a specific task
effectively and to complete an end product in joint endeavour and without breakdowns.
However, it is not sufficient for providing learning effects of collaboration and social
interaction. This is due to the fact that task performance, also, is situated in social
interactions and artefact specific conditions:

First, social interaction about tasks is necessary to maintain genuine interdependence.
However, the necessary interactional forms constitute possible forces of contingencies
and situated actions on both an individual (intra-personal and cognitive) and a collective
level (inter-personal). Contingencies on an individual level are for example connected to
personal construction of understanding and knowledge, changes of existing knowledge as
a result of negotiations, improvement of individual knowledge and interpretations, etc.
Contingencies on a collective level are related to for example collaborative negotiation of
meaning, inter-personal conflicts and disagreements, division of responsibility, co-
ordination of contributions, etc. In the face of contingencies the challenge for the learners
is to use the contingencies constructively in developing knowledge and meaning
collaboratively and in achieving collective progress, and thus try to reduce the cognitive
distances amongst themselves (Fjuk & Dirckinck-Holmfeld, 1997).

Second, and in addition to the situated features of collaborative knowledge construction
as such, come contingencies associated with the use of ICT-based artefacts (Fjuk &
Smørdal, 1998). These types of contingencies may be due to the artefacts' lack of
functionality, due to the user's unfamiliarity with them or due to breakdowns in using
them. In such situations the artefacts may themselves involve thought and are no longer
integrated tools in the learners' interactions.

These situated features of ICT-mediated collaborative knowledge construction make
collaborative learning broader than effective performance of specific tasks and smooth
workflow as such. Veen et al (1998) arrive at the conclusion that such efficiency issues
are often missions critical in business processes rather than in intentional learning
processes. In business, they argue, performance assessment is often based on end
products with no explicit reference to process performance. The question of whether the
primary production process is efficient or not is critical, since it can mean survival or
failure of the enterprise. In collaborative learning, however, the primary goal is to achieve
cognitive effects of interactional processes. Efficiency issues are secondary and arise in
learning processes only in broad terms (ibid.). Given this situated nature of collaborative
learning, the design ideals behind computer systems thus becomes broader than those
often focused, that is, to provide mechanisms that increase efficiency of carrying out the
tasks and reducing the overhead of working together in distributed contexts (e.g.,
Schmidt & Bannon, 1992; Divitini & Tuikka, 1996; Gutwin et al, 1996). Rather, we
argue that the aim should be to make artefacts that are integrated in social interactions
and so that they do not hamper the necessary interdependence between interactions on a
collective level (discussions, division of labour, joint thinking, information sharing etc.)
and interactions on an individual level (knowledge construction, cognitive re-
structuration, performance on tasks, etc.) (Fjuk, 1998). Seen from a computer systems
designer's standpoint, however, the relation between individually and collaboratively
oriented interactions often conflict, forcing designers to make computer-based
mechanisms for one at the expense of the other (Fjuk & Smørdal, 1998; Gutwin &
Greenberg, 1998). Design that supports individual activities often hinders collaboration,
and vice-versa. For example, this trade-off becomes apparent when trying to support both
the individual's needs of integrated and transparent tools and control over the artefacts,
and the collaborative arrangement's needs regarding workspace awareness, division of
labour, creation of joint understanding, etc. It is incorrect, however, to assume that any
ICT solution should mediate all actions found crucial for maintaining these issues.
Rather, we argue that a particular ICT-based artefact should constitute one of many
operators of activities found critical for maintaining genuine interdependence.

Workspace awareness and individual reflection

Workspace awareness information concerns who is in the shared environment, where
they are interacting, what they are doing and sometimes how they carry out the tasks.
Gutwin et al (1995) emphasises the learning effects of workspace awareness in the
following way:

      "a student requires up-to-minute knowledge about other students'
      interactions with the shared workspace if they are to learn and work
      together effectively. This awareness is important in collaborative learning
      for two reasons. First, it reduces the overhead of working together,
      allowing learners to interact more naturally and more effectively. Second,
      it enables learners to engage in the practices that allow collaborative
      learning to occur." (Ibid. p. 148)

According to the authors, it is especially the awareness of others and their activities that
allows learners to initiate meaningful interaction. This understanding of collaboration is,
arguably, anchored in face-to-face situations where workspace awareness is considered
optimal because of the closeness between the actors. The aim of systems design is thus to
make mechanisms that provide corresponding opportunities, in spite of the physical
distances amongst the actors. In what follows we discuss the effects of this type of
awareness with respect to collaborative learning.

Although division of labour and joint thinking are collaboratively oriented activities, the
activities are often conducted through interactions of individual actors, directed towards
thought and reflection (on an intra-personal level) or co-learners (on an inter-personal
level). Collaborative actors frequently move back and forth between individual tasks
performed in relative isolation and shared work undertaken with co-actors. According to
the theoretical heritage, these interactional forms provide effects first when they are
genuine interdependent, that is, when they are mutually constructive. For example, joint
thinking in explicit terms - so that they can be examined, changed, and elaborated upon
by peers - requires individual reflection and thought. Moreover, thought, reflection and
individual understanding must be co-ordinated with, and have meaning for joint
understanding and division of labour. This line of consideration does not necessarily
require an up-to-minute information of who has done what and where. The effects of this
awareness information become optimal only when the learners are working on the same
physical object. We argue that opposite conditions than what workspace awareness
entails, namely some distance to peers, are also required for individual reflection and
thus, for maintaining genuine interdependence. When something becomes conscious to,
or acknowledged by the individual learner, it happens because she/he is able to reflect on
the matter (Sorensen, 1999). Reflection, Sorensen (1999) argues, requires distance to
peers. The virtual and distributed environment distinguishes from physical environments
exactly because it adds a new reflective dimension to interactions in collaborative
learning (Ibid.), since they allow the actors to "get off-stage" for some time.

Thus, the desired effects of workspace awareness are situated with respect to what
aspects that are considered critical at what time of the collaborative processes. We argue
that mindful engagement and genuine interdependence require opportunities to move
between a closeness to peers through some extents of workspace awareness, and a
distance to peers in order to articulate thoughts through reflection. This means that
designs aimed at providing solutions for this situatedness must, as suggested in the
previous sub-section, try to find a balance between individually and collectively oriented
interactions and so that the ICT-based artefacts do not hamper the necessary
interdependence of the whole collaborative activity.

An example: Corpus Callosum

In what follows we illustrate how some of the issues discussed have been implemented
into designs of one particular interactive 3D application -- Corpus Callosum.

Loeffler & Andersen (1994) defines interactive 3D as:

      "a three dimensional, computer-based, simulated room, that is
      synchronous according to the users movements and perspectives" (Ibid. p.
      12).

This implies that interactive 3D imposes dynamic and situated environments that are
created by the actors through their actions. In the case presented in this paper, the 3D
application includes an additional dimension: Physical distribution of actors.

Corpus Callosum: Pedagogical and technological designs

The target group of the 3D application is 14-years old learners. To stimulate their
engagement and social interaction we invited a couple of them to participate in the first
stages of concept-development. The problem area was manifested in `an ecological
catastrophe at a synthetic planet' according to the young learners' desire. This planet was
later called `Corpus Callosum'. Parts of the story go like this:
       There have been a lot of tremors at the planet and it has resulted in a
       number of ecological problems. One of them is the heat that threats some
       areas of the planet. The iron three, Nucleus, is the central point at the
       planet and it is particularly exposed. Nucleus can whenever crack and fall
       apart. This might bring catastrophic consequences for Corpus Callosum
       because Nucleus takes care of two central functions. The first one, is
       internal oriented when Nucleus is the major source of oxygen at the
       planet. The second one, is external oriented when Nucleus might be the
       only possibility to avoid that the planet should be forgotten by inhabitants
       of other planets because this three is able to send signals out to space. To
       avoid a complete catastrophe, Nucleus must be supplied with spinalfluid.
       This is operationalised by re-building the Aqueduct. During the planet
       tremor was the Aqueduct that supplied Nucleus with spinalfluid from the
       Hippomania-sea to Nucleus' roots destroyed into small pieces. Each of the
       parts was spread far away and landed in different areas of the
       Hippomania-sea.

Various metaphors are used in the graphical design of Corpus Callosum: Latin
vocabulary associated with the brain as well as aspects from Nordic mythology are used.
This implicates that in Corpus Callosum the names of the territories are selected from
regions of the brain like Thalamus, Homunculus etc. According to the creation of earth in
Nordic mythology, these territories are placed in various circles and were each surrounds
the previous one. Figure 2 gives an overview of the planet.

The relationship between artefacts and actions is operationalised with help of two terms:
Avatar and object. An avatar represents an actor in the learning environment. Some
avatars are designed as humanoids;

others are without any resemblance to humans. In Corpus Callossum avatars represent the
learners and the tutor.

According to the theoretical basis, an artefact represents certain conditions that determine
what can be carried out, in what form and for what purpose. As such, it shapes the way
people act and influences the nature of human interactions. The objects constitute the
major artefacts of the collaborative 3D environment. Each part of the destroyed Aqueduct
or the whole

Aqueduct when it is re-built are examples of such objects. Moreover, there are
particularly three relationships that operationalise Salomon's (1992) two kinds of effects.
These are actor-object, object-object and, actor-actor. In line with the theoretical heritage,
the relationships cannot be considered separately but mutually.

4.1.1  Actor-object

The effects with the artefacts (that is, the changes or results afforded during the use of
available objects) are particular present in the actor-object and the object-object
relationship. The actor-object relationship represents first and foremost a learner's actions
mediated by an object. This operationalisation is conducted by manipulating the object
directly by clicking, lifting, moving, etc. For example, in Corpus Callosum different parts
of the Aqueduct are spread around in the different areas of the planet (Thalamus,
Homunculus etc). According to the manipulation of objects this implies that the learners
can pick up a part of the Aqueduct from one area, bring it with them and place it together
with other similar elements until the whole Aqueduct is built. Figure 1 illustrates a built
aqueduct and its connection to the iron three Nucleus and the Hippomania sea.

The actor-object relationship clearly supports awareness information of how a task is
complete. This is because the learners internalise the same images and this ability reduces
the need to meta-communicate all interactions. But, in line with our arguments
concerning the situatedness of ICT-mediated genuine collaboration, the aim is not
necessarily to achieve knowledge regarding who is doing what, how, where and when in
all parts of the collaboration. Rather, the aim is also to create opportunities for individual
reflection. As suggested, the designs' ideals thus become to create opportunities for the
learner to move between a closeness to peers through some extents of workspace
awareness, and a distance to peers in order to articulate thoughts through reflection.
These design ideals are manifested in Corpus Callosum in the following way: A learner is
aware of certain actor-object relationships that are operationalised within her/his field of
cognisance. Workspace awareness is optimal when two or more learners are located in
the same area (such as Thalamus) for example when jointly building the Aqueduct. In
contrast, the effects of workspace awareness are limited when the learners are situated in
separate areas. In Corpus Callosum this is manifested in situations where the individual
learners, on basis of their common decisions and division of labour, are located in various
areas aimed at finding new objects and performing actions on them, or at individually
reflecting upon the problem areas and tasks.

3.1.2  Object-object

The object-object relationship concerns how manipulation on one object, influences the
situated conditions of another object. Nucleus is an example of an object that is socially
and contextually situated. Nucleus shifts colour according to the learners' actions on it
and on other objects linked to it (such as the Aqueduct). Nucleus signals whether the
actions are appropriately operationalised vis-à-vis the problem area (ecological disaster)
and corresponding tasks. This object-object relationship has a twofold effect on
collaborative learning and awareness information. On the one hand, it explicitly
visualises the consequences of the individual's actions on an object and constitutes an
essential means for further actions related to divisions of tasks and discussions about the
tasks. On the other hand, it mediates the learner's information awareness on how her/his
action constitutes a part of a greater wholeness. This is an essential factor in how well an
environment creates opportunities for collaborative learning, rather than workspace
awareness and task performance per se.
3.1.3  Actor-actor

According to our arguments, efficient task performance is not sufficient for providing
effects of socially and artefact-mediated learning. Rather, the effects of ICT-mediated
genuine collaboration become optimal when the distributed environment creates
opportunities for discussions about the tasks (C.f. Dillenbourg (1996)). The actor-actor
relationship focuses particularly on this argument. Oral dialogues between the actors
mediate this interaction, but also by the two other relationships (actor-object, object-
object). One way to provide effects of this relationship is to organise for good
interactional conditions so as they stimulate the learner's mindful engagement, personal
responsibility and discussions. This is first and foremost connected to the problem area
(the ecological disaster) and corresponding tasks. Then, it is associated with the tutor's
secondary role and is more moderator-oriented in their relation to the collaborating peers.

Good conditions for mindful engagement are connected to the learners' opportunity to
take part in the problem definition and how this in turn motivates and engages the
learners in inter-personal interaction. In doing so, the learners have a conscious
ownership of their own learning processes and are implicitly invited to involvement and
motivation (Fjuk & Dirckinck-Holmfeld, 1997). In the pedagogical designs connected to
Corpus Callosum, the learners defined the particular problem (in accordance with the
given problem area of ecological disaster) they were going to collaboratively reflect
upon, discuss and make shared representation of.

Concerning the tutor's role in distributed environments, some aspects of scaffolding must
be maintained. In many cases scaffolding refers to processes of developing forms of
instruction, which maximise internalisation within collaborative environment (McMahon
& O'Neill, 1992). The learner internalises the scaffolding and advises given by more
capable peer (often the tutor). Scaffolding can thus be considered as the opposite of the
learners' control and ownership of problems, through its focus on pre-defined problems
and tasks. Task awareness may provide explicit scaffolds to help stay on the task.
Moreover, the tutor's role must also be related to the social interactions as such, that is, to
reduce stagnation on the one hand and, to stimulate discussion and engagement on the
other. In Corpus Callosum, this was maintained and visualised through an own avatar.
The tutor's avatar, Lobos, is a kind of old fashion robot that is stuck in Nucleus. This
avatar is not able to move and it cannot interact with the objects in the planet. The tutor
has thus a passive but central position since her/his avatar has been lifted up from the
ground in such a way that she/he gets an overview of the learners' activities. In this way
she/he can more easily counsel the learners, but only when they ask her/him to do so.

5.     Conclusion and further work

In this paper, we have discussed the problem area of addressing the effects of task and
workspace awareness with respect to learning. Based on theories (Vygotsky (1978);
Salomon (1992)) on how social interactions and artefacts (such as for example various
forms of ICT) pull cognitive changes and human development, we have argued that the
effects of task awareness and workspace awareness are situated with respect to the
various interactional forms manifested in collaborative learning situations. That is, these
types of awareness are not sufficient enough for providing certain cognitive and
collective effects of artefact-mediated collaboration. Thus, the aim behind systems design
becomes broader than making artefacts that support efficient work flow and task
performance. Rather, we argue, that systems design should be aimed at making and
organising artefacts that become integrated parts of the whole collaborative activity and
in such a way that they do not hamper the necessary interdependence between
interactional forms on an individual and collective level. We have illustrated some issues
of this argument with examples gathered from designs of a specific interactive 3D
application. This becomes particularly evident through three relationships that are
situated in the properties and conditions of interactive 3D applications. These are actor-
object, object-object and actor-actor relations. The objects represents artefacts that,
through their predefined conditions and relations, shape the way the learners act and
collaborate: The actor-object and object-object relationships concern the changes or
results afforded during the use of the artefacts. The relationships represent a learner's
interactions mediated by an object (in the 3D environment) and how this mediation
affects the collaboration and individual knowledge construction. The actor-actor
relationship concerns pedagogical and interactional conditions for maintaining mindful
engagement and discussions, and is based on the learners' opportunity to take part in the
problem definition and how this in turn motivates and engages them. This interaction is
mediated by oral dialogues between the actors as well as by the two other relationships
(actor-object, object-object).

The theoretical foundation has provided rich insights into a design process of taking the
effects of ICT-mediated collaborative learning seriously into consideration. The theory
has served as adequate means related to our intentions as technological and pedagogical
designers; to support the learners' activities of creating a common learning environment
in such a way that interactive 3D becomes an integrated part of the learners' collaborative
knowledge construction. However, the real effects of collaboration and interactive 3D
can first be identified through the learners' talk on use-experiences. Thus, our further
research in this area will move into two directions: First, we will conduct qualitative
evaluations of the learners' and the tutor's experiences of using the application. This will
explore aspects that must be included in pedagogical and technological re-designs.
Second, we want to look more closely at the links between various types of awareness
with respect to collaborative learning processes where negotiation of meaning and critical
reflection constitute two major pedagogical principles. We believe that this is necessary
to create new learning situations that provide effects with respect to learning and
knowledge construction.

6.     Acknowledgement

We would like to thank Rich Ling for giving useful comments on earlier drafts of this
paper.
References

Cole, M.; Engeström, Y. (1993) A cultural historical approach to distributed cognition. In
Salomon, G. (ed.) Distributed cognition: Psychological and educational considerations,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1-46.

Dillenbourg, P. (1996) Some technical implications of distributed cognition on the design
of interactive learning environments. Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 7
(2), 161-179.

Divitini, M.; Tuikka, T. (1996) Steps for Developing Coordination Support. In Dahlbom,
B.; Ljungberg, F.; Nulden, U.; Simon, K.; Stage, J.; Sørensen, C. (eds.) Proccedings of
IRIS 19, Gothenburg Studies of Informatics, 823-841.

Dorish, P, Bellotti, V. (1992) "Awareness and Co-ordination in Shared Workspaces" in
Turner, J., Kraut, R. (eds.) CSCW (1992) Sharing Perspectives. Proceedings of the
conference of the Computer Supported Co-operative Work. ACM Press. 107-114.

Fjuk, A. (1998) Computer Support for Distributed Collaborative Learning. Exploring a
Complex Problem Area, Dr. Scient Thesis, Department of Informatics, University of
Oslo.

Fjuk, A.; Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L. (1997) Articulation of Actions in Distributed
Collaborative Learning. In Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2,
3-24.

Fjuk, A., Smørdal, O. (1998) The Computer`s Incorporated Role in Work. In Buch, N. J.,
Damsgaard, J., Eriksen, L. B., Iversen, J. H., Nielsen, P. A. (eds.) Information Systems
Research in Collaboration with Industry. Proceedings of the 21st Information Systems
Research Seminar in Scandinavia, Aalborg University: Department of Computer Science,
207-221.

Gaver, W. (1991) Sound Support for Collaboration. Proceedings ESCW'91, 293-308.

Gutwin, C.; Greenberg, S. (1998) Design for Individuals, Design for Groups: Tradeoffs
between power and workspace awareness. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work., ACM Press, 207-216.

Gutwin, C.; Roseman, M.; Greenberg, S. (1996) A Usability Study of Awareness
Widgets in a Shared Workspace Groupware System. In Proceedings of ACM CSCW'96.
Conference on Supported Cooperative Work. Boston, Mass, ACM Press.

Gutwin, C., Stark, G., Greenberg, S. (1995) Support for Workspace Awareness in
Educational Groupware. Schnase, J. L., Cunnius, E. L. (eds.) Computer Support for
Collaborative Learning. Proceedings of CSCL'95. The First International Conference on
Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, New York: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 147-156.

Kaptelinin, V. (1996) Computer-Mediated Activity: Functional Organs in Social and
Development Contexts. In Nardi, B. (ed.)Context and consciousness. Activity Theory and
Human-Computer Interaction. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 45-68.

McMahon, H. O'Neill, W. (1992) Computer-Mediated Zones of Engagement in Learning.
In Duffy, T. M.; Lowyck, J.; Jonassen, D. H.; Welsh, T. M. (eds.) Designing
Environments for Constructive Learning, Berlin :Springer-Verlag, 37-57.

Newman, D. R (1996): How can WWW-based groupware better support critical thinking
in CSCL? Proceedings of the ERCIM workshop on CSCW and the Web, Sankt Augustin,
Germany.

Reber, A. S. (1985) Dictionare of Psychology. London: Penguin Books.

Salomon, Gavriel (1992) What Does the Design of Effective CSCL Require and How Do
We Study Its Effects? Sigcue Outlook, 21(3), Spring 1992, ACM, 62-68 (http://www-
cscl95.indiana.edu/cscl95/outlook/62_Salomon.html).

Sorensen, E. (1999) Collaborative Learning in Virtual Contexts: Representation,
Reflection, and Didactic Change, Paper presented at ICTE99, Edinburgh, Scotland.

Schmidt, K.; Bannon, L. (1992) Taking CSCW Seriously. Supporting Articulation Work.
Computer- Supported Cooperative Work, 1 (2), 7-40.

Veen, J. van der; Jones, V.; Collis, B. (1998) Workflow Applied to Projects in Higher
Education. Submitted to COOPIS'98.
http://wwwhome.ctit.utwente.nl/~vdveen/ny/anaxny.html.

Vygotsky, L. (1978) Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological
Processes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Wertch, J. V. (1991) A socio cultural approach to socially shared cognition. In Resnick,
L. B.; Levine, J. M.; Teasley, S. D. (eds.) Perspectives on socially shared cognition,
Washington DC: American Psychological Association, 85-100.

Youngblut, C. (1998): Educational Uses of Virtual Reality Technology. Washington:
Institute of Defence Analysis.
