Teamwork: Assessing Cross-Disciplinary Learning
Renate Fruchter
Stanford University, Project Based Learning Laboratory
Katherine Emery
Stanford University, School of Education, "Learning, Design and Technology" Program
  Abstract: Multidisciplinary teamwork in an information age learning environment poses
  new assessment challenges. This paper presents a study that focuses on the assessment of
  a learning environment in which students collaborate in multidisciplinary, geographically
  distributed teams. The study presents a new metric, cross-disciplinary learning, as a
  journey from the state of island of knowledge (discipline-centric) to a state of
  understanding of the goals, language, and representations of the other disciplines. The
  metric proposes a four-tiered classification, designed to measure the students' evolution
  of cross-disciplinary learning, that is based on the perspectives of cognitive and situative
  learning theories. The four tiers are islands of knowledge, awareness, appreciation, and
   understanding. An additional metric is based on a longitudinal assessment that tracks the
   programmatic changes such a cross-disciplinary education program can lead to. The
   paper describes the multidisciplinary, collaborative, geographically distributed teamwork
   learning environment, the assessment methodology, data collection and analysis, and
   discusses the preliminary results.

   Keywords: teamwork, cross-disciplinary learning, assessment

Introduction

Fragmentation among Architecture/Engineering/Construction (A/E/C) professionals, which is
emphasized by divergent education, is today's status quo. One of the reasons for the current poor
coordination and communication among professionals in the fragmented A/E/C industry and
among project phases is rooted in the way education is structured today, by discipline.

PBL, the People-, Problem-, Process-, Product-, Project-Based Learning Lab, was created to
provide a learning environment where A/E/C students would collaborate in multi-disciplinary,
geographically-distributed teams on project-centered activities that produce a product for an
industry client (Fruchter, 1999). The design of the PBL lab is grounded in cognitive and situative
learning theory. The cognitive perspective characterizes learning in terms of growth of
conceptual understanding and general strategies of thinking and understanding (Dewey, 1958).
The design of the A/E/C PBL--to provide team interaction with professor, industry mentors and
team owners--provides a structure for modeling and coaching which scaffolds the learning
process, both in the design and construction phases, as well as for techniques such as articulating
and reflecting on cognitive processes

The situative perspective shifts the focus of analysis from individual behavior and cognition to
larger systems that include individual agents interacting with each other and with other
subsystems in the environment (Greeno, 1998). Situative principles characterize learning in
terms of more effective participation in practices of inquiry and discourse that include
constructing meanings of concepts and uses of skills. Greeno argues that the situative perspective
can subsume the cognitive and behaviorist perspectives by including both conceptual
understanding and skill acquisition as valuable aspects of students' participation and their
identities as learners and knowers. Teamwork, specifically cross-disciplinary learning, is key to
the design of the A/E/C PBL. Students are expected to engage with other team members to
determine the role of discipline-specific knowledge in a multi-disciplinary project-centered
environment, as well as to exercise newly acquired theoretical knowledge. It is through cross-
disciplinary interaction that the team becomes a community of practitioners--the mastery of
knowledge and skill requires individuals to move towards full participation in the sociocultural
practices of a larger community. The negotiation of language and culture is equally important to
the learning process--through participating in a community of practitioners (A/E/C), the students
learn how to create discourse that requires to construct meanings of concepts and use of skills.

Motivation

The study comes in response to three distinct problems. First, there is a pedagogically perceived
need to enhance traditional assessment methods in order to monitor and evaluate the evolution of
the cross-disciplinary learning experience students have in multidisciplinary project-based
courses, such as A/E/C PBL. Traditional assessment dimensions included in course evaluation
questionnaires, such as Tau Beta Pi developed at Stanford, offer basic performance measures--
however, they focus on the teaching aspect rather than on the learner and learning perspective.
This assessment approach can be effective in the case of conventional classes where there is one
discipline-centric focus, one instructor, a reader or text book(s), homework assignments, a
midterm, and a final exam.

In addition, current studies of university courses in which technology is a key component tend to
focus on the technology--specifically, on media selection and media effects. Neither of these
issues address the individual learner (Walther, 1997). Technology is central to the design of
PBL--without it, the students would not be able to collaborate across geographic distances.
However, the technology is constantly changing. Even within a two-quarter period, certain
technologies are updated or even replaced by newer technologies. This study, rather, focuses on
the importance of the learner's experience in A/E/C PBL, which includes the interaction with
and through various technologies.
And finally, we are interested in determining how to design and conduct an assessment within
the perspective of cognitive and situative learning theory. If traditional assessment methods have
limited value in evaluating a collaborative, multidisciplinary, geographically distributed team of
students, they are equally ineffective in measuring:
·   Effective participation in practices of inquiry and discourse
·   Increase in skill acquisition and conceptual understanding through multidisciplinary collaboration.
With the emerging interest in multidisciplinary, project-based learning and teamwork, new
assessment dimensions need to be considered to evaluate cross-disciplinary learning. The study
formalized two key questions:
1.  What is the impact of cross-disciplinary learning on the student population in the class
    overall, as well as on the students within each discipline?
2.  What is a key metric for recording the student's longitudinal curricular/programmatic
    changes as a consequence of a multidisciplinary, project-based teamwork experience?
A/E/C PBL Teamwork Learning Environment

The "Computer Integrated Architecture/Engineering/Construction" (A/E/C) is the main
education program housed by the PBL Lab, in the Civil and Environmental Engineering
Department, at Stanford. It is aimed at developing a new A/E/C learning culture, an exciting
education paradigm, and an engaging computational infrastructure for collaborative multi-
disciplinary work that takes the distance out of distance learning. The A/E/C education program,
launched in 1993, is based on the PBL methodology of teaching and learning that focuses on
problem based, project organized activities that produce a product for a client. PBL is based on
re-engineered processes that bring people from multiple disciplines together. The A/E/C course
brings together faculty, practitioners, and students from different disciplines, who are
geographically distributed. One of the innovative features of this course is represented by the
role each of the participants plays, i.e.:
·  undergraduate and graduate students play the roles of apprentice and journeyman,
   respectively,
·  faculty members and researchers play the role of "master builders,"
·  industry representatives play the role of mentors.
The core atom in this learning environment is the A/E/C student team, which consists of an
architect, a structural engineer, a construction manager from the M.Sc. level, and one or two
undergraduate apprentices.
In 1998-1999, PBL organized the 6th generation A/E/C program in an international pilot,
engaging students from Stanford, UC Berkeley, Georgia Tech, UK, Slovenia, and Japan. A/E/C
teams are typically situated in three time zones, e.g., architect at Georgia Tech, structural
engineer at Stanford, construction manager in Glasgow, UK, and apprentice at Stanford.

In this teaching environment emphasis is placed upon teamwork in a hands-on building project.
The international structure of A/E/C student teams adds the "real-world" collaboration
complexity to the learning environment, which includes space and time coordination and
cooperation issues. A key focus is the effective use of information technology (IT) resources as
tools to support instruction and learning outcomes.

The Building Project. Teams of A/E/C students are involved in a multi-disciplinary building
project in which they model, refine and document the design product, the process, and its
implementation. The project is based on a real-world building project that has been scoped down
to address the academic time frame of two academic Quarters. The students learn to (1) regroup
as the different discipline issues become central problems and impact other disciplines, (2) use
computer tools that support discipline tasks and collaborative work, and (3) use video-
conferencing and desktop sharing technology to have face-to-face meetings, interact with the
teaching team and industry mentors. The project progresses from conceptual design to a
computer model of the building and a final report. As in the real world, the teams have tight
deadlines, engage in design reviews, and negotiate modifications. A team's cross-disciplinary
understanding evolves over the life of the project. (Project examples http://pbl.stanford.edu)

Team formation in the A/E/C education program has been a function of team size, member roles,
and participant location. The size of the teams is determined by two factors, (1) the three
disciplines, and (2) the roles, i.e., journeyman and apprentice. Consequently, each team will
have one architect, one structural engineer, one construction management student as journeymen
from the MS programs, and one or two apprentice students from the BS program. The
pedagogical reason behind the decision not to have more students from any of the A/E/C
disciplines in a team is to ensure that all students maintain a constant, high engagement in the
project and have a well defined responsibility to represent their profession within their team.
The geographical location of the team members provides the students with an opportunity to be
exposed to a virtual teamwork in a cross-cultural environment, as well as justify the use of
information technologies to accomplish the goals of the project. Interaction between the
disciplines is key to the functioning of the team, and to the development of the cross-disciplinary
learning experience for each individual.

Mentoring and coaching. The role of the instructor is changing in a PBL learning environment,
from the traditional teacher who delivers the course material in class to the coach. Industry
practitioners play the role of mentors. They become active participants in the teaching process.
This change in role from teacher to coach, industry practitioner to mentor, provides a structure
for modeling and coaching which scaffolds the learning process, both in the design and
construction phases, as well as for modeling techniques such as articulating and reflecting on
cognitive processes.

The roles of information technology (IT) as facilitator for improved communication and
cooperation within multidisciplinary teams are determined to support the diverse:

¨ Modes of interaction over time and space.
Time. Throughout the teaching, learning, and building project process, participants transition
between synchronous and asynchronous types of interaction.
Space. Faculty, practitioners and students meet for lectures, round table discussions, or project
team meetings to review design proposals. Such face-to-face meetings can take place in a co-
located setting, or in a distributed setting, and use network applications (e.g., groupware) to share
and exchange information and discuss their design decisions.
¨Needs of content capture, sharing, exchange, and reuse, i.e., knowledge management.
¨Types of interaction. A wide spectrum of Internet-mediated, Web-based, and videoconference
tools are provided to support the different modes of interaction among learners, instructors and
mentors, such as:
·  The World Wide Web is used for team building and as a medium to disseminate and share
   conceptual design solutions of the design teams asynchronously among students, instructor,
   mentors.
·  Shared WWW Project Workspace was created for each A/E/C project team to archive, share,
   access, and retrieve project information that ranged from sketches, Word documents, Excel
   spreadsheets, AutoCAD drawings, email notes, and CAD related change notifications
   (Fruchter et al, 1998).
·  Team Discussion Forums are set up for each team to facilitate asynchronous capture, sharing,
   tracking, and re-use of ideas, issues raised by students, instructors, or practitioners.
·  Recall, a Web based application that supports capture, access and retrieval of knowledge,
   information, and sketches in informal media (Yen et al, 1999).
·  Digital Lecture Archive enables interactive learning, as well as supports the diverse learning
   styles and preferences goals of the students anywhere, anytime. Windows Media facilitates
   live broadcast, capture, and on-demand access to digital lectures, A/E/C panels, and team
   meetings.
·  Videoconferencing and application sharing are available to the students for Face-to-Face
   Meetings in Cyberspace, Distant Learning Lectures, Office hours in Cyberspace, and Final
   Project Presentations.
Assessment Methodology

Cross-disciplinary learning is a journey from the state of island of knowledge (discipline-
centric) to a state of understanding of the goals, language, and representations of the other
disciplines. The proposed cross-disciplinary learning metric consists of four key dimensions to
measure the students' learning evolution. These dimensions are defined as follows (Figure 1):
·  Islands of knowledge: the student masters his/her discipline, but does not have experience in
   other disciplines.
·  Awareness: the student is aware of the other discipline's goals and constraints.
·  Appreciation: the student begins to build a conceptual framework of the other disciplines, is
   interested to understand and support the other disciplines' goals and concepts, and knows
   what questions to ask.
·  Understanding: the student develops a conceptual understanding of the other disciplines, can
   negotiate, is proactive in discussions with participants from the other disciplines, provides
   input before the input is requested, and begins to use the language of other disciplines.
This classification is grounded in the situative perspective--that effective participation in
practices of inquiry and discourse leads to conceptual understanding and skill acquisition. At
each level of classification the students are demonstrating changes in participation through
practices of inquiry as well as changes in conceptual understanding of other disciplines. This
paper proposes an assessment method based on a four tiered classification to monitor the
evolution of the learner and presents preliminary results in exercising this methodology in a
multidisciplinary A/E/C course.

This process is not linear--it is expected that students, as they become more engaged and
involved in the design negotiation, will move through several of the classifications within a
single meeting. The objective of any multidisciplinary education program is for all or the
majority of the students to reach the state of understanding by the end of the course.
           Island of Knowledge
                Awareness
              Appreciation
  A                                E
              Understanding

                                              Legend

                                                 Level of cross-disciplinary learning

                                                 Journey of cross-disciplinary learning

                                                 Initial state (I.e., Island of knowledge)

                                                 Final state (I.e., Understanding)
              C

Figure 1: Four Tiered Classification for Cross-Disciplinary Learning Assessment
Data Collection
This assessment study was performed in the context of the 6th A/E/C generation. During this
A/E/C PBL program there were five A/E/C student teams. The student population was
composed of 16 students, i.e., five architecture students, five structural engineering students, five
construction management students, and one undergraduate apprentice. The time and space
distribution of the teams was as follows:
-   One team was located in the Bay Area, i.e., Stanford and UC Berkeley students, two
    locations and one time zone.
-   One team was located in the US, i.e., Stanford and Georgia Tech, two locations and time
    zones.
-   Three teams were distributed over three universities, i.e., Stanford, Georgia Tech,
    Strathclyde, and Slovenia ­ three locations and time zones.
Methodology. The data collection methods covered a spectrum of subjective and objective
observation of team interactions, such as, (1) surveys and rationale provided by learners, (2) exit
interviews, (3) video analysis of team meetings and final project presentations, and (4) Web team
discussion forums and (5) team shared project Web workspaces. The surveys were created in
HTML and distributed online in an interactive format for self-administration by the students.
Students responded to a questionnaire in which they were asked to reflect on the interaction
between team members. The students were asked to situate themselves within the four
classifications of cross-disciplinary learning (Islands of Knowledge, Awareness, Appreciation
and Understanding). This request was posed at three distinct moments during the two Quarters -
- at the start of the program, at the end of the first Quarter of the program, and at the end of the
second Quarter of the program. Students were also required to provide rationales for their
assessment. The results of the survey were collected online to better facilitate the manipulation
of the data.

Ethnographic observation included videotaping, transcribing, and analysis of synchronous team
meetings to determine key moments where individuals or teams demonstrated awareness,
appreciation, or understanding of another discipline. In addition, observations were conducted of
asynchronous team interaction, via email and online communication programs such as discussion
forums, shared workspace (Fruchter et al, 1998), and Recall (Yen et al, 1999).
             Islands
                       Awareness
                                   Appreciation
                                                  Understanding
                                                                            Islands
                                                                                      Awareness
                                                                                                  Appreciation
                                                                                                                 App./Under
                                                                                                                              Understanding
Data Analysis

The paper presents preliminary analysis results of the survey at the start of the program and at
the end of the first Quarter. Final results that include the statistics and assessment at the end of
the class, i.e., at the end of the second Quarter will be presented at the conference.

                       Before A/E/C Class                                       End of 1st Quarter of A/E/C Class
       50%                                                            50%
       40%                                                            40%
       30%                                                            30%
       20%                                                            20%
       10%                                                            10%
        0%                                                             0%

Figure 2: Assessment of Cross-Disciplinary Learning Evolution per Class
The data collected was organized and analyzed from three perspectives: the class as a whole
(Figure 2), the disciplines (Architects, Structural Engineers, Construction Managers ­ Figure 3),
and the individual (Apprentice - Figure 3). This decision was made to allow for multiple
interpretations of the data and demonstrate the use of the cross-disciplinary learning metric at the
macro and micro level. For example, Figure 2 presents the Evolution of cross-disciplinary
learning per class, recorded before the class began and at the end of the first Quarter. At the
beginning of the quarter, 27% of the students identified their interaction with other disciplines as
Islands of knowledge. These students recognized that they were masters of a particular discipline,
but did not have experience in other disciplines. 41% of the students claimed Awareness of other
disciplines' goals and constraints. 18% of the students responded that they demonstrated
Appreciation, an active interest to understand and support the other disciplines' goals and
concepts. Students who had 1-3 years of working experience claimed full Understanding of the
other disciplines (14%). The data shows that 68% of the students had yet to achieve appreciation
or understanding of the other disciplines--this confirms that A/E/C students, at the entry
graduate level, have little experience with the disciplines they will collaborate with in the
industry.

At the end of the first Quarter, the class as a whole showed progression towards understanding.
In Figure 2, no students remained in Islands of knowledge. 11% of students claimed Awareness
of other disciplines, 22% claimed an Appreciation. 22% of the students defined a new
classification, Appreciation/Understanding, to represent movement beyond Appreciation, but not
full Understanding (44%). At the end of the first quarter, 88% of students classified themselves
as having achieved an Appreciation or Understanding of other disciplines. Our observations
were corroborated by data captured in other media, such as email, discussion forums, video.
               Islands
                        IslandsAw are
                                  Aw are

                                   Appreciate
                                               Appreciate

                                                          Understand
                                                                     Understand

                                                                                                  Islands
                                                                                                    Islands
                                                                                                              AwareAware
                                                                                                                      AppreciateAppreciate
                                                                                                                                   App./Under.App./Under.
                                                                                                                                                 UnderstandUnderstand
                                                                                                                                                                              IslandsIslands
                                                                                                                                                                                         Aw areAw are
                                                                                                                                                                                                   AppreciateAppreciate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UnderstandUnderstand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IslandsIslands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AwareAware
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AppreciateAppreciate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 App./Under.App./Under.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UnderstandUnderstand
                                                                                            100%

                                                                                              80%

                                                                                             60%

                                                                                             40%

                                                                                             20%

                                                                                              0%

                                                                                                                                                                                       Before A/E/C Class                                       End of 1st Quarter of A/E/C Class
                                                                                                                                                                    100 %

                                                                                                                                                                     80 %

                                                                                                                                                                     60 %

                                                                                                                                                                     40 %

                                                                                                                                                                      0%

Figure 3: Assessment of Cross-Disciplinary Learning Evolution per Discipline

Figure 3 represents the evolution of cross-disciplinary learning per individual discipline. As
presented, the architects began the quarter with 40% Islands of knowledge and 60% Awareness.
At the end of the first quarter, 40% had moved to Awareness and 60% to Understanding.
Individual rationales provided in the survey confirmed the students' awareness of learning
progress. Specific examples include rationales, such as:

-   Before the course: "Awareness. I have worked in the architectural profession for a couple of years so I have a
    bit of real world knowledge as to how collaboration/coordination works. I never really had much sympathy for
    the other disciplines and, as most professionals do, I tended to blame consultants rather than attempt to
    understand the reasoning or rationale behind their motives. I always saw the other professions as distinctly
    different and as opposition."                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Architect

-   After the first quarter: "Understanding. The A/E/C has taught me a lot about the problems the other design
    professionals face--by working very closely with them I can now forsee issues that may become problems as
    well as understand why some things work better than others. It has also helped me become friends with my
    teammates. It's much easier to be understanding and sympathetic to your friends than it is to your opposition."
    Architect

The structural engineers began the quarter with 22% demonstrating Islands of knowledge, 33%
Awareness, 22% Appreciation and 22% Understanding. At the end of the quarter, they also
demonstrated progression towards Understanding--14% Awareness, 14% Appreciation, 29%
Appreciation/Understanding, 43% Understanding. Rationales for the engineers showed that the
higher levels of Appreciation/Understanding were a result of previous experience with other
disciplines, through classes and personal contacts.

-   Before the course: "Before Jan. 99 I had an APPRECIATION of architecture. I was always interested in
    architecture, and took some classes in "architectural engineering." I had an AWARENESS of the construction
    discipline, because it was not something I had been exposed to very much (it wasn't taught at my undergraduate
    school)."                                 Engineer

-   After the first quarter: "I would say I have an APPRECIATION/UNDERSTANDING of both the architect
    and the construction manager. I've learned a lot more about construction because the CM on our team is very
    outspoken."        Engineer

Construction managers demonstrated the highest progression during the first quarter. Beginning
data showed 14% Islands of knowledge, 29% Awareness, 29% Appreciation and 29%
Understanding. The end of the first quarter, however, showed 60% Appreciation/Understanding
and 40% Understanding. Rationales explained previous relationship with the structural engineer,
but not with the architect:

-   Before the course: "Understanding (Engineer).I am also an engineer and have a strong background in structural
    design, so I understand very well the requirements and constraints of the structural engineer and could pro-
    actively provide input and guidance. Appreciation (Architect). I appreciated the profession of the architect and
    had worked with some in the past, but not in the same conceptual capacity. I did not speak the same language
    although I was able to support the goals and concepts."              Construction Manager

-   After the first quarter: "No change in my relationship with the structural engineer. Beginning to "understand"
    the role of the architect. This is, in part, because our architect is just beginning to understand her own role with
    regard to construction and engineering, so it is a process of mutual discovery. We may have come further in our
    mutual understanding if she had a stronger concept of her own role, but that will come with time. So, I expect to
    get a much greater level of understanding with regard to the role of the architect as the quarter progresses."
                                               Construction Manager

The undergraduate apprentice classified herself in Islands of knowledge at the beginning of the
quarter, with movement towards Appreciation by the end of the first quarter. Her rationale
explains that while she was not an expert in a specific discipline, this experience has allowed her
to learn about all of the disciplines:

-   Before the course: "Islands of knowledge--I cannot say that I have mastered by discipline, but I had awareness
    and interest in architecture as an academic discipline before January 1999. I had very little knowledge of
    engineering but I viewed it as something that would be necessary for an architect. I had no idea what
    construction management was all about."

-   After the first quarter: "Appreciation--after the first quarter, I gained a big picture of A/E/C collaboration:
    goals, focus and work habits. I have decided to work more closely with the architect this quarter, and I have
    looked at the design process that the architect had gone through last quarter. I modified her floorplans in order
    to accommodate the architectural requirements for the purpose of my own practice. During the practice, I
    realized that my concern was not only architectural, but also structural (feasibility of position of columns and
    shear walls) and cost and building efficiency (location of computer lab, elevator/restroom core, etc.). Although I
    still know very little about structural systems and construction methods, I can ask E/C whether an architectural
    modification with affect them, and how."
       Apprentice

In examining the data from the perspective of individual disciplines, we were able to see patterns
in the movement from Islands of knowledge to Understanding. For example, at the beginning of
the course, the architects did not have much experience in other disciplines, whereas the
structural engineers and construction managers showed more experience with other disciplines.
The rationales explained that levels of Appreciation and Understanding were a result of courses
taken in other disciplines, or personal contact with another disciplines. It is also interesting to
note that both engineers and construction managers created a new category of
Appreciation/Understanding. They made clear distinction when identifying their state towards
the other two disciplines. However, the architects grouped the structural engineer and
construction manager into one discipline and assessed their state with respect to the one
discipline.
Results from observations of synchronous/asynchronous team interaction further supported the
findings. Interactions were compared with student response to evolution of cross-disciplinary
learning. The following excerpts exemplify the four dimensions of cross-disciplinary learning.

Islands:              Islands of knowledge: "There is little I can think of to do while the
fragmentation of      architect is designing. " ­Engineer
the design process,
sequential. No
experience in other
discipline.

Engineer is aware     Awareness: "The architect's interaction with the engineer in the beginning
of the constraints,   of the project is crucial. He/she must be in constant communication with
progressiong          the engineer.   If not, frustrating things   may   happen. In our    case, the
towards               architect's initial proposal had severe structural problems. However, by
appreciation.         getting  it  to the  engineer  in   the very  initial stage  of  the  project
                      development, a preliminary structural solution was adapted (with some
                      architectural changes)...also, the C's initial participation is crucial as well.
                      Primarily   because   of  'constructability' issues.  The    C's preliminary
                      feedback is essential for having a sound and cost effective project." --
                      Engineer

Appreciation: this    Appreciation:
interaction shows
an active             C:  "I'm curious   about  your (A)   statement   "too much    of its form    to
engagement and        functional purposes." Isn't the function of the building foremost here? It is
inquiry between       to be an instructional facility and the form needs to accommodate the
disciplines, leading  learning environment. I tend to think that a predictable layout is good when
to understanding.     dealing with students who are trying to find classes for the first time. My
                      quest is, what is the alternative for the layout?"

                      A:  "...this is  a  wonderful  question!   I  think  that is precisely  what
                      (Apprentice) and I have commented. The primary focus for this design IS
                      indeed function. However, is this enough? Does this create a pleasurable
                      space? Is it interesting? Has the architect created a "sense of place" or has
                      he/she just oriented a series of boxes in order to accommodate usage?"

                      C: "I see what you mean. The "basic" function of the building will fall
                      out of the square footage requirements and the room affinity chart.
                      Maybe one way we can increase the ease of use is to open the place up.
                      The architects at SFO airport did this by not putting walls behind the
                      check in agents."

CM understands        Understanding: "I think I understand (A's) view about creating a sense
issues, uses          of space. The original architect states that the "highlight of the design is
language "sense of    the central atrium around which all the spaces were organized," but it
space."               seems to me that this effect is only achieved with the third floor..."--C
An additional key metric is based on a longitudinal assessment that can track the programmatic
changes that such a cross-disciplinary education program can lead to. More specifically, a
survey posed the following questions: After this experience, do you plan to take any courses in
any of the other disciplines? Which topics?(Figure 4). Preliminary studies of the past five A/E/C
generations indicate that a large percentage of the students exercise the option to take classes in
the complementary programs after going through the A/E/C program. For instance, architects
take construction classes, structural engineers take costing and scheduling classes, and
construction management students take structural design classes).
Before the A/E/C Class    After the 1st Quarter of the A/E/C Class

             Yes               NO

      NO                           Yes

Figure 4: "Take class(es) in another A/E/C program/discipline as a consequence of the
multidisciplinary project-based learning experience"

Figure 4 shows results of this study, i.e., at the beginning of the course, only 25% of students
were interested in taking courses outside of their discipline. At the end of the first quarter, 75%
of the students planned to pursue courses in another discipline.

Summary

The study presents a new metric to measure and monitor the students' cross-disciplinary
learning. The four-tiered classification, islands of knowledge, awareness, appreciation, and
understanding, offers an assessment tool to measure and monitor the students' knowledge state
and learning evolution. An additional key metric is based on a longitudinal assessment that
facilitates tracking programmatic changes such a cross-disciplinary education program can lead
to. The preliminary results demonstrate the use and effectiveness of the assessment
methodology, data collection and analysis. It is important to note the generality of the four-
tiered classification in cross-disciplinary learning assessment, i.e., the three disciplines,
architecture, structural engineering, and construction management, characteristic to the building
industry, can be easily replaced with mechanical engineering, software engineering, and
electrical engineering, characteristic to the manufacturing industry. We plan to continue to
exercise this assessment metrics and method in the A/E/C PBL program for further validation.

Acknowledgement

This study was partially funded by the "International Joint Research and Development for
Modeling Virtual University" project sponsored by MITI, Japan.

Bibliography

Fruchter, R. (1999) "Architecture/Engineering/Construction Teamwork: A Collaborative Design
and Learning Space," Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, Vol. October 1999.

Fruchter, R., Reiner, K., Leifer, L., and Toye, G., (1998) "VisionManager: A Computer
Environment for Design Evolution Capture," CERA: Concurrent Engineering: Research and
Application Journal, Vol 6, Nr. 1.

Greeno, J.G. (1998) The situativity of knowing, learning and research. American Psychologist,
53, 5-26.

Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1991). Sharing cognition through collective comprehension activity.
In L.B. Resnick, J.M. Levine, & S. D. Teasley (Eds.) Perspectives on socially shared cognition
(pp331-348). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991) Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Levin, David S et al. Collaborative learning: a critical success factor in distance education.
Microfiche:ED422843.

Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1994) Computer support for knowledge building communities.
Journal of Learning Sciences. Vol 3(3), (pp265-283).

Walther, J. B., (1997) Group and interpersonal effects in International Computer-Mediated
Collaboration. Human Communication Research, Vol. 23, No. 3, March 1997(pp342-369).

Yen, S., Fruchter, R., Leifer, L., "Facilitating Tacit Knowledge Capture and Reuse in Conceptual
Design Activities," ASME Conference, September 1999.

Addresses
Renate Fruchter (fruchter@ce.stanford.edu)
Stanford University, Project Based Learning Laboratory, Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Stanford CA 94305, Tel. (650)725-1549

Katherine Emery (kemery@leland.stanford.edu)
Stanford University, School of Education, Stanford CA 94305
