Mentoring in a School Environment
Shanan Gibson

Department of Psychology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061

Dennis C. Neale, John M. Carroll, Christina A. Van Metre

Center for Human-Computer Interaction and the Department of Computer Science,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061

       Abstract: We describe how the integration of multiple computer-mediated
       communication and collaboration technologies can support educational
       activity through mentoring in a local community context. We discuss the
       student and mentor expectations, their ongoing relationships, and the role
       that technology has played throughout their interactions.

       Keywords: mentoring, telementoring, computer-mediated communication

Introduction

In recent years, mentoring has received much recognition as a means of fostering student
development. Mentoring has been shown to be reciprocally beneficial to both students
and mentors. It is claimed that these mentoring relationships benefit students through
performance support and conveyed knowledge, through increased self esteem evoked by
involvement in developmental relationships, and through clarity in communicated project
and work goals (Gaskill, 1993). Young people who are mentored by community members
are more likely to stay in school, attend classes, achieve and aspire to better grades, and
go to college (Proctor and Gamble, 1988). Mentors report deriving satisfaction from
having a positive impact on studentsí learning and interests in academics, self-
confidence, and through "getting to know" the students involved. Furthermore, it is likely
that individuals serving as mentors will develop a better understanding and appreciation
of the educational needs of todayís students and teachers (HP Telementor Program,
1999).

Much of the current research on mentoring has focused on informal, spontaneous
relationships that evolve between individuals (Gaskill, 1993). However, this is not always
a viable approach in a school environment; indeed it has been argued that the best
mentoring programs are designed, not left to chance, and that a well-designed mentoring
program offers the greatest opportunity for student development and benefit (Mann and
Staudenmier, 1991 and Lawrie, 1987). Many factors can impede the development of
effective mentoring relationships: time constraints, geographic location, convenience of
interactions, visibility of results, and effective evaluation of project focus and structure.

The Learning in Networked Communities (LiNC) project integrates multiple computer-
mediated communication and collaboration applications in order to address some of these
issues that might encumber the mentoring process. The following paper provides an
overview of the project, student and mentor expectations, and the relationships developed
during the mentoring activity. It discusses the role computer-mediated communication
plays in this educational setting and proposes some future work and issues to be
addressed.

Overview and Goals of the LiNC Project

The LiNC project is investigating ways in which technology-based collaborative tools
can support educational activities. A major component of the project has been fostering
mentoring relationships in a local community context (Carroll & Neale, 1998). By
seeking to utilize and develop the networking infrastructure of the Blacksburg Electronic
Village, an advanced community network in southwestern Virginia (Carroll & Rosson,
1996), it is hoped that school-based learning will be made more meaningful as it is joined
with the proximal community in which students reside.

The LiNC project involves four schools and teachers, consisting of two middle-school
physical science teachers, and two high-school physics teachers. One school at each level
is "rural," and the other is located in a town. The chief objective is to understand how to
use computer-based communication and collaboration technology to promote effective
collaborative relationships among students within a classroom, across students in
different classrooms, and between students and community mentors. The project is
strongly committed to a participatory investigation among public school educators and
university researchers. We believe it is both appropriate and realistic for the educators to
exert prerogative in the area of pedagogical practice (Tyack & Cuban, 1995), and as a
consequence of this, the implementation of the mentoring initiatives has varied somewhat
among the classrooms.

During the 1998-99 school year, and consistent with the prior year, an emphasis was
placed on sustained collaborative projects as a teaching mechanism. Student groups work
over a period of four months to complete physics-based science projects, with many of
these targeted at springtime academic fairs and other events that involve presenting
schoolwork to parents and other community members; these projects are currently
ongoing. Teachers had incorporated community mentors into similar projects during the
1997-98 school year and were predisposed to do so this year as well. It was anticipated
that the incorporation of mentors would add validity, relevance, and context to the
classroom science projects, augmenting the traditional science learning (Glasgow, 1996).

Technological Tools

The educational technology focus of the LiNC project includes an ensemble of
technological communication and collaboration tools called the "Virtual School," a Java-
based environment supporting coordinated synchronous and asynchronous planning, note
taking, experimentation, and report writing (Koenemann, Carroll, Shaffer, Rosson, &
Abrams, 1998). The central tools include e-mail, desktop videoconferencing, chat, a
shared whiteboard, as well as a specially created collaborative notebook. The notebook
allows students, teachers, and mentors to organize projects into shared and personal
workspaces (sections), annotate the work of other group members, and track changes to
project notebooks. Both remote and proximal participants can access the notebook
collaboratively or individually.

Community Mentors

Teachers established mentoring relations by contacting community members (e.g.
spouses of other teachers, parents of former students, or friends from church) and
searching Virginia Tech departmental web pages to identify faculty with relevant
expertise. Community members with the relevant backgrounds who agreed to participate
were invited to an informational meeting where the goals of the project, initial
expectations, and the software to be used were reviewed.

The recruited mentors had expertise in a variety of fields, including the mechanics of
amusement parks, the engineering principles of bridge building, aerodynamics, robotics
building, the principles of acoustics, and physics used for creative engineering. The
mentors were each assigned to collaborative student groups and provided with e-mail
addresses for contacting the students through the Virtual School. Students were asked to
contact their mentors via the Virtual School and e-mail. Table 1 provides an overview of
the topics being mentored and the corresponding schools.

                  Table 1. Overview of Mentoring Topics by School

Student and Mentor Expectations

A survey taken at the beginning of the 1998-99 school year measured studentsí attitudes
toward mentoring and other collaborative learning relationships transcending the
classrooms. Students responded on a seven-point Likert-type scale to the following
statements:
          ·  I would enjoy having a mentor for my group project who is from
             the community, not my school.
          ·  I would enjoy interacting with students from other schools on my
             group science project through the Virtual School.

Results indicated that across all schools the students were positively disposed toward
working with a mentor. In excess of 50% of the students responded above the
hypothesized mean of four (the midpoint of the scale) to the first question, and only 26%
responded below this. Comparisons among schools, grade levels (middle vs. high),
setting (rural vs. urban), gender, and a level by setting interaction were conducted. No
significant differences were found between the four schools, settings, genders, or grade
levels. There was a significant interaction effect, however, of setting by grade level with
the urban high school students responding most positively to the statement (p < .05).
Similar, but more highly positive, responses indicated that students were enthusiastic at
the prospect of working with students from other schools. Over 63% of the students
responded above the mean of four to this item, and only 18% responded at the low end of
the scale. No significant differences were found for any comparisons conducted.

Prior to the full-fledged kick-off of the studentsí science projects, both students and
mentors were contacted by e-mail to gather feedback regarding their expectations and
plans for the ensuing relationships. Across all of the student groups, several themes were
repeated. Namely, students perceived the mentors as "experts" who could help them with
understanding and applying the appropriate physics concepts to their science projects.
The students also expected assistance in designing the actual physical models required for
their projects. Students also stated that they had a responsibility to uphold
communications, keep mentors informed, and be polite and reasonable with all requests.
These statements were consistent with instructions given to the students by teachers at the
beginning of the projects. The studentsí expectations for mentoring outcomes were
universally positive.

Mentors were also positive in their expectations. Several mentors had prior experience
working with students and looked forward to the interaction, anticipating it as
"enjoyable". A desire to have "fun" while "showing the value of experiential learning"
was also expressed. Mentors who had worked with students from the LiNC project last
year had more specific expectations, including receiving feedback on mini-assignments
that they were giving the students, and monitoring of the mentoring relationships by
teachers. In all instances, mentors felt that they could positively impact the studentsí
collaborative science projects.

The Mentoring Relationship

Both students and mentors were diligent in initiating contact via e-mail. The mentors all
began with brief introductions as well as a synopses of their affiliations and expertise.
Two of the mentors also expressed their enthusiasm for the projects and their desire to
work with the students, but they did not broach the subject of actual work. Two other
mentors, however, immediately began providing structure for the students by attempting
to narrow the focus of the groupís work and by assigning mini-experiments in the subject
matter. The fifth mentor was a bit slower in contacting his groups, but once he did so, he
incorporated both strategies in his initial e-mail. Students generally introduced group
members, expressed their pleasure at having a mentor, and proceeded directly to
questions of project relevance. Examples included: "How is the angle of the first hill
determined so that the train (roller coaster) has enough energy to make it through the
ride?" and "We were wondering if you had any information on Web sites on (stereo)
speakers."

Despite this initial enthusiasm in the mentoring endeavor, several of the relationships
later became plagued by lack of communication. Mentors also had difficulty
videoconferencing from remote locations due to a newly installed firewall in the public
school system. As a result, videoconferencing occurred primarily among the students, and
mentoring interactions were relegated to e-mail and chat within the Virtual School. The
exception to this was one mentor who traveled each week to one of the local schools in
order to participate in the videoconferencing and assist the younger student in the project
group.

The lack of videoconferencing capabilities, however, was not the only barrier to the
mentoring relationships. An interesting example involves the interaction between the
mentor and the students engaged in a bridge-building project. The mentor involved in the
bridge-building project worked as a LiNC mentor during the previous school year, and
his mentoring relationship has been characterized as the most successful observed.
According to Carroll and Neale (1998) "this relationship was initiated via e-mail but
became rich and successful through direct face-to-face interaction. The student working
on a bridge project contacted his mentor at Virginia Tech, and through discussions about
the project, they discovered they lived in the same neighborhood. They developed a
friendship, and the student visited the mentor many times through the course of the
project. They actually built model bridges together at the mentorís home. The studentís
teacher commented that rarely did she see the enthusiasm and knowledge developed by
this student for his science project, and it resulted from the mentoring process. Although
one could imagine being able to do similar activities with videoconferencing, the
experience would not have been as rewarding for the student or mentor, nor would the
relationship have likely progressed to this level. Notably, e-mail enabled this relationship
and subsequently helped facilitate face-to-face communication as the project proceeded."

During the current school year, the bridge-building mentor began working with his two
new groups in an extremely proactive manner, not only explaining the physics concepts
to the students but also suggesting ways in which they could replicate them in the
classroom. However, the students this year did not actively engage in the interaction and
did not respond to the mentorís suggestions. This prompted the mentor to infer that the
students did not need nor want his assistance. He stated that he was "without feedback
from either bridge group" and that "an e-mail on their progress would be nice." However,
he did have access to their work through the Virtual School. Despite attempts to re-
engage students in the interaction and make teachers aware of the current situation, the
mentoring relationship did not regain momentum. This example suggests that something
more than access to student work and encouragement may be necessary to sustain
successful mentoring relations.

Unlike the two bridge building groups, two other project groups developed very strong
mentoring relationships. Although these groups also relied upon the Virtual School
technology in their endeavors, they also had a face-to-face component in their
relationships. The acoustics project group initially communicated only through e-mail
with their mentor. However, a few weeks into the project, the mentor made a trip to the
studentsí classroom and gave a lecture on the physics of acoustics. Although the students
expressed concern that the content of the lecture may have been too difficult, this meeting
provided much fodder for future electronic meetings and the nature of the relationship
continued to grow. Following up with the students, the mentor made a second trip to the
school in which project plans and goals were clarified, and students gained a better
understanding of the physics concepts in question. The students in this group have also
had the opportunity to work with their mentor in an acoustics laboratory at VA Tech.
This mentoring relationship continues to be characterized by frequent e-mails in addition
to the face-to-face interactions even as the science project comes to a close. This mentor
continues to play a central role in helping develop a classroom demonstration of the
principles studied.

The mentoring relationship in the robotics group is characterized by a mix of electronic
and face-to-face interactions that is fully enabled by the technology used by the students
during group collaboration. This mentor regularly visits the classroom of the middle
school group member and sits with her as she videoconferences and chats with her group
members at a remote high school. The remote group members can see and speak with the
mentor through videoconferencing and chat with him through text. This relationship
further developed because students from the remote group were able to meet face-to-face
with the mentor at the Virginia Tech Robotics lab. The relationship between the mentor
and students appears strong in this instance, as evidenced by the impact the mentor has
had in developing the project and the continued number and content of interactions. The
use of e-mail is infrequent in this relationship, possibly because it is unneeded. Non-
verbal communication is occurring synchronously via chat, and face-to-face interactions
have allowed for verbal interaction. An educational, and perhaps social, consequence of
this relationship concerns the extent to which the middle-school student has become
reliant on the mentorís feedback and project suggestions. When the mentor is present, the
student tends to take less solo initiative with her group teammates. However, following
the studentís visit to the Robotics Lab, there has been some abatement in this. This
mentor continues to help the students in designing the actual robot, and further engages
their interests by bringing working robots to the classrooms for demonstration. Clearly,
this mentorís physical presence has transformed the group interactions.

Visibility, a major theme in telementoring research, has been hypothesized to be the key
ingredient in sustaining successful telementoring relationships. It has been posited that
providing mentors with the ability to view their protégéís work promotes sustainable
telementoring relationships (OíNeill & Gomez, 1998). Visibility did not appear to be
sufficient for sustaining relationships in this project. Table 2 shows mentor activity in the
Virtual School applications. Each mentor engaged in a similar number of the activities
associated with viewing student work; however, actual mentoring communication
(measured as the number of chat messages sent) is highly skewed toward the Acoustics
mentor. This mentor also engaged in face-to-face communication with his students.
Furthermore, an examination of the content of the chat messages sent by the Acoustics
mentor, shows significantly richer interactions such as sharing project information,
providing project feedback and giving support and reassurance.

                     Table 2. Virtual School Activity by Mentor

1 Designates those groups that incorporated a face-to-face aspect to the mentoring
relationship

2 This mentor did not log-in or utilize the software externally because he was present in
the classroom during Virtual School activities

Table 3 summarizes the number of e-mail interactions as well as the theme of the
messages across all of the groups. The two groups that had face-to-face interaction with
their mentors not only had a larger number of communications, but the kinds of
communication engaged in appear to be quite different. It makes sense that these groups
would need to devote a considerable amount of time to coordination and scheduling of
meetings; 53% and 44% of the e-mail for the acoustics and robotics groups contained this
theme. What is surprising; however, is that these are the only groups whose e-mails
contained themes related to providing moral support, requests for feedback on work, and
actual feedback on the project work. These are areas that one would assume to be major
emphases in all mentor-protégé relationships, providing the foundation on which the
relationships build. It appears that in the absence of personal contact, a rich give-and-take
mentoring relationship did not develop.
              Table 3. Comparison of E-Mail within Group, by Theme

1 Designates those groups with a face-to-face aspect to the mentoring relationship

Discussion

The nature of the relationships propagated by technology emphasizes the role of face-to-
face interactions in establishing successful computer mediated mentoring relationships.
The contrast between the mentoring relationships developed in the bridge-building
project and those in the acoustics and robotics projects, clearly speaks to the visibility of
the members in the mentoring relationship, not simply the work. The aerodynamics
mentor from the 1997-98 school year felt that his initial face-to-face meeting helped
make subsequent interactions effective by allowing him and the students to more vividly
imagine the other people with which they were communicating (Carroll and Neale,
1998). Likewise, the acoustics and bridge-building mentors this year have fundamentally
transformed the nature of their mentoring interactions by meeting and working face-to-
face with the students.

In general, the relationships characterized solely by electronic interaction had fewer
interactions of any type occurring, and those that did occur appeared to be less rich in
nature. Face-to-face interactions appear to have facilitated mentoring by computer-
mediated channels. Those students who were not able to meet face-to-face with their
mentors were not successful in maintaining their telementoring relationship. One possible
explanation for this is that the computer-based communication was novel in the
mentoring relationships, and lacked a history of social cues and shared experiences that
could have made it more fruitful (Sproull and Kiesler, 1991). Although all students were
provided with valuable information for their projects, the mentors who were completely
reliant upon computer-mediated communication had significantly less impact in focusing
the groups' work and the final outcomes of the science projects.

The ability to exploit videoconferencing more fully may help to alleviate some of the
difficulties of sustaining a successful telementoring program. In follow-up interviews, the
Acoustics and Robotics mentors stated that they believed the ability to videoconference
from their offices would have lessened the need for face-to-face interactions; however,
they do not believe it would have removed it entirely. For those mentors who had no
face-to-face contact with their protégés, videoconferencing may have provided the
impetus to more fully develop their relationships.

Future Work

As the science projects begin to culminate, so do the mentoring relationships. Students
are finishing their work, and teachers are advising them to send e-mail to their mentors
thanking them for their assistance during the past several months. As most interactions
are still ongoing, summative conclusions about the outcomes of the project are tentative.
Future analyses will include quantification of the various mentoring interactions (e.g., e-
mail, chat discussions, annotation of course work, and face-to-face meetings) as well as
conducting interviews and surveys to ascertain the perceptions of the mentors, students,
and teachers involved in the project. It is anticipated that this information will guide the
implementation of the mentoring program next year, serving as a "needs-analysis" that
may point toward better training of mentors and students in use of the technology,
expectations for the relationship, and role-clarification for all involved.

Although computer technology has played a major role in the relationships examined
during the 1998-99 school year, the face-to-face contact remains critical. Face-to-face
meetings provide an array of physical and social resources to aid in the coordination of
group work. Visual and verbal presentations, taken together, allow dimensions of clarity
that written presentation does not afford (Olson et al., 1993). One of the challenges faced
by computer-mediated communication is how to make distributed interactions as
effective as face-to-face interactions (Ellis et al., 1991). Since most mentors were unable
to use videoconferencing throughout this project, it will be interesting to observe the
effect videoconferencing has on the student-mentor relationship in future projects. We
believe that videoconferencing can provide some of the resources of face-to-face
communication. Further exploration of how to integrate and supplement face-to-face
communication will be a central theme during the coming school year.

All participants involved in the mentoring relationships recognized the potential value of
working together. The technological tools used in this project, while reducing the
constraints of physical proximity, also created second-level interpersonal implications
that will need to be considered more fully in the future (Sproull and Kiesler, 1991). Thus,
a major challenge in coming years will be determining how to best utilize a mixture of
computer-supported technology and traditional mentoring methods to achieve the greatest
return for all participants.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge the cooperation and participation of the students,
teachers, and mentors involved in the LiNC project. Special thanks are also extended to
Philip Isenhour and others who have masterminded the technology used in the project,
and to Dan Dunlap and Jim Helms who assisted in generating and coding the descriptive
statistics reported here. The LiNC project is supported by Virginia Tech and the National
Science Foundationís Networked Infrastructure for Education (NIE) program, under
award REC-9554206.

Bibliography

Carroll, J. M., & Neale, D. C. (1998). Community mentoring relationships in middle
school science. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Third International conference
on the Learning Sciences (ICLS-98), Atlanta, GA.

Carroll, J. M. & Rosson, M. B. (1996). Developing the Blacksburg electronic village.
Communications of the ACM, 39(12), 69-74.

Ellis, C.A., Gibbs, S.J., & Rein, G.L. (1991). Groupware: Some issues and experiences.
Communicaitons of the ACM, 34(1), 38-58.

Gaskill, L. R. (1993). A conceptual framework for the development, implementation, and
evaluation of formal mentoring programs. Journal of Career Development, 20(2), 147-
160.

Glasgow, N. A. (1996). Taking the classroom into the community: A guidebook.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

HP Telementor Program. (1999). The international telementor center.
http://www.telementor.org/

Koenemann, J., Carroll, J. M., Shaffer, C. A., Rosson, M. B., & Abrams, M. (1998).
Designing collaborative applications for classroom use: The LiNC project. In A. Druin,
(Ed.), The designing of childrenís technology. San Francisco: Morgan-Kaufmann, pages
99-123.

Lawrie, J. (1987). How to develop a formal mentoring program. Training and
Development, 41, 25-27.

Mann, R.W. & Staudenmier, J.M. (1991). Strategic shifts in executive development.
Training and Development, 45, 37-40.
Olson, J.S., Olson, G.M., Storrosten, M., & Carter, M. (1993). Groupwork close up: A
comparison of the group design process with and without a simple group editor. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, 11(4), 321-348. New York: ACM.

OíNeill, D. K., & Gomez, L. M. (1998). Sustaining mentoring relationships online.
Proceedings of the CSCWí98, pg. 325-334. Seattle, Washington.

Sproull, L. & Kiesler, S. (1991). Connections: New ways of working in the networked
organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Tyack, D. & Cuban, L. (1995). Tinkering toward utopia: A century of public school
reform. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.

Authors' addresses

Shanan Gibson (shanan@vt.edu)
Department of Psychology, Virginia Tech; 5088 Derring Hall, Blacksburg, VA 24061-
0106. Tel. (540) 231-6581. Fax (540) 231-3652.
Dennis C. Neale (dneale@vt.edu), John M. Carroll (carroll@vtopus.cs.vt.edu), &
Christina A. Van Metre (cvanmetre@vt.edu)
Center for Human-Computer Interaction and the Department of Computer Science,
Virginia Tech; 660 McBryde Hall; Blacksburg, VA 24061-0106. Tel. (540) 231-6931.
Fax (540) 231-6075.
