Activity Centered Design: Towards a Theoretical
Framework for CSCL
Bernard R. Gifford and Noel D. Enyedy

University of California at Berkeley

      Abstract: Computers have not yet had the profound impact on classroom practice that
       has been predicted. Given the proven potential of computer-mediated instruction, what
       can account for the lack of progress? This paper explores the theoretical underpinnings of
       many of the existing computer-mediated learning environments and suggests that the
       learning theories that lie behind them lead to designs that do not fit with nor change the
       basic participation structures of the classroom. We argue instead for Activity Centered
       Design (ACD), a model of design for Computer Supported Collaborative Learning
       environments, based on the following assumptions: that activity is mediated by cultural
       tools, that activity must be conceptualized on a number of interdependent levels, and that
       conceptual understanding is first established socially. We then critique our own existing
       learning environment, the Probability Inquiry Environment, from the ACD perspective.

      Keywords: activity theory, design framework, discourse analysis

Introduction

In the last decade, the field of education has invested an enormous amount of energy and
resources to the design of computer-mediated learning environments. The findings from
this body of work are both consistent and encouraging. According to both individual
researchers' articles and the many meta-analyses regarding the pedagogical effectiveness
of computer-based instructional materials, computer-mediated learning environments
have increased both student learning and interest (e.g. Berson, 1996; Kulik, 1994; Weller,
1996). However, despite the optimistic rhetoric that computers would change the nature
of the teaching and learning enterprise, the daily activities of the average classroom have
not changed much. The whole-class, lock step, lecture presentation still dominates the
pedagogical landscape of most schools.

Given the proven potential of computer-mediated learning and the well documented
faults of the lecture, what can account for the lack of progress? This paper examines the
two dominant genres of computer-mediated instruction and suggests that the learning
theories behind much of this software leads to designs that do not fit with nor change the
basic participation structures of the classroom. We argue that the goals of Computer
Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) fundamentally conflict with the underlying
cognitive theories of both these styles of design. We then suggest an alternative, Activity
Centered Design (ACD). ACD, building upon the insights of distributed cognition
(Hutchins, 1995; Pea, 1993) and Activity Theory (Leont'ev; 1979; Wertsch 1979), views
learning as a complex process in which an individual's cognition is defined by its relation
to the material setting and the forms of social participation encouraged by these settings.
Accordingly, ACD emphasizes the design of computer-mediated environments to support
and structure the interactions and interdependencies of an activity system, including the
interrelations between students, their instructors, the tasks they undertake, and the
inscriptions they use. Finally, we critique The Probability Inquiry Environment (PIE),
(Vahey, Enyedy & Gifford; 1999) from the perspective of Activity Centered Design.

Domain Centered Design

The most common design for educational technology, especially in the latter half of the
1980's, has been to "bolt-on" technology to the conventional classroom practices
(Giffrod, 1996). The fundamental theoretical assumption of this approach is the
transmission model of knowledge transfer. The transmission model suggests that
knowledge is an identifiable object that is possessed by a person, detached from any
social context, that can be conveyed from the mind of the instructor to the mind of the
students. The focus of pedagogy from this perspective is to make the transmission of
knowledge more efficient.

The conventional classroom­with its lock-step lectures and textbooks that present the
student with facts, theories and explanations­is a natural extension of this theoretical
assumption. Educational technology designed from this perspective is best exemplified
by Computer Aided Instruction (CAI). CAI aims to make knowledge transfer more
efficient primarily by ordering the sequence of information and by elaborating on its
presentation. Because of this focus on the structure of the disciplinary domain we call this
approach to instruction, Domain Centered Design (DCD). It could have also been called
Teacher Centered Design, because in most cases it is assumed that the teacher (whether
human or a computer surrogate) is the sole possessor of the disciplinary knowledge that
must be transferred to the students. Consistent with this perspective, almost all the
classroom activities revolve around the teacher or computer as the provider and evaluator
of information.

Figure 1 shows the flow of information in a Domain Centered classroom. The teacher is
placed at the center of Figure 1 to demonstrate her central role in this type of classroom.
The teacher often holds the floor for up to 80% of the class time, leaving little time for a
student to initiate and complete a two-way instructional exchange. Technology can be
bolted on to each of aspect of the teaching and learning system of Figure 1 (e.g.
enhancing teacher lectures with multimedia presentation tools). However, doing so does
not alter the basic character of this instructional system.

Domain Centered Design and the transmission model of instruction have been routinely
criticized over the years for rewarding imitation and memorization while limiting sense-
making and meaningful dialogue. Even the most generous interpretation of DCD that
DCD entails thinking critically about conventional understandings of a domain, and
designing tools and representations that help to make the domain accessible in a
completely different way than it was before is still open to the criticism that it ignores
the social context of learning and assumes learning is primarily an individual activity
(Lave, 1996). This epistemological assumption is the antithesis to collaborative learning.
Bolting-on technology to a flawed pedagogical system obviously fails to address these
serious criticisms. As a result, the DCD approach to instructional technology has
provided only modest learning gains. More importantly, based on the results of the last
decade Domain Centered environments seem destined to have only marginal impact on
the daily activities of the classroom.

Learner Centered Design

As cognitive science and the learning sciences have matured, however, so has the
approach to the design of computer-mediated educational environments. Learner
Centered Design (LCD), emerging from the context of User Centered Design of the
Human-Computer Interaction community, proposes to design learning technology by
focusing in on the cognitive capabilities and needs of the learner. Using this model, LCD
has produced a number of innovative computer-mediated tools, visualizations and micro-
worlds aimed at helping students learn a specific domain (e.g. Anderson, 1993; White,
1993).

Most of these learning environments are founded on the information processing model of
cognition which assumes human intelligence is the result of our ability to operate on and
transform the mental representations of a physical symbol system. Instruction is
portrayed largely in terms of the processing of large chunks of coded, unambiguous
information in the minds of learners. In the field of education, the information processing
model has led to many studies that focus on the cognitive capabilities, misconceptions,
mental models and learning needs of individual students. This is generally accepted as an
improvement over Domain Centered Design because it includes the student as an active
participant in his or her own learning. Because of this focus on isolated individuals and
the decontextualized minds of learners we call this approach to instructional design
Learner Centered Design.
The Learner Centered Design model is depicted in Figure 2. The learner­her goals,
misconceptions and cognitive capacities­is placed at the center of the model. Notice that
the majority of the elements of the model are the same as in DCD. What has changed is
their arrangement. The student is at the center because Learner Centered environments
are deliberately organized to increase student control over the sequencing and pace of the
materials. As the student progresses through the materials she is presented with feedback
based on her actions with the software. Finally, while the teacher is part of the system,
the role of the teacher is often minimal. The new role of the teacher in LCD is often
described as the, "guide on the side." However, in most cases the types of support
provided for this new role are; non-existent, unrealistic (e.g. giving the teacher the
technical ability to monitor 30 students' investigations simultaneously), or in direct
contradiction to the spirit of LCD (e.g. giving the teacher the ability to control the
learner's screen). In most cases, however, the teacher's most effective and direct role is
as the facilitator of a classroom discussion after the students' local investigations.
However, these discussions are usually not supported technologically, nor are they well
integrated with the local activity. The result is a completely fragmented experience for
the students, where the learner centered investigations are disconnected with the teacher
centered discussions.

Notice also that the student is isolated at the center of the diagram. Collaboration and
interaction with peers is not central, nor even necessary, from this perspective. One of the
major criticisms of both Learner Centered Design environments and the information
processing model of cognition itself, is that they foster a view of learning as a highly
individualistic, autonomous, non-social activity (Lave, 1996). The LCD perspective has
led researchers to design hermetically sealed learning environments which severely limit
the range of social interactions with both one's teacher and one's peers. Developing
learning environments based on the LCD model is shortsighted on several accounts. First,
it often goes to far in reducing the role that the teacher plays, denying the student access
the accumulated wisdom, experiences, and empathy of expert teachers. Second, like
Domain Centered Design, it ignores the social context of learning and the important role
of conversation and collaboration as part of the active learning process. Third, the
environments are focused on individual student misconceptions, which need to be
changed to the normative conceptual understanding. While both naive and normative
concepts are important to consider in the design process, they are situated in domains of
practice­the embodied and contextualized knowledge of how to participate in concrete
socially defined activities. LCD's failure to recognize the irreducible, reflexive
relationship between conceptual understanding and the activities in which they arise has
led to compartmentalized learning activities that do not attempt to build off one another
or connect with students' lived experiences.

The Need for an Alternative Framework for CSCL

While the recent work of the CSCL community avoids the narrow focus on the
individual, much of the CSCL research is still attempting to build on the ideas and
assumptions of Learner Centered Design. Instead of individuals however, at the center of
the model are collaborative groups of students. While this is certainly an improvement, it
repeats the errors of the bolt-on model of instructional design. In effect, it bolts-on
collaboration to an individualistic and narrowly conceived view of intelligence without
altering the basic activity structures or assumptions of the Learner Centered model of
design.

Activity Centered Design

We propose Activity Theory (AT) as a starting place for a new theoretical framework for
CSCL. The basic concept behind a theory of socially-situated and artifact-mediated
human activity can be traced back to Lev Vygotsky (1978) and his colleagues A. R. Luria
(1976) and A. N. Leont'ev (1979). At the core of AT is the idea that internal activities
emerge out of practical external activity and therefore the unit of analysis must include
the individual and his/her culturally defined environment (Wertsch, 1979). AT has
already made significant contributions to the field of Computer Supported Collaborative
Work (e.g. Nardi, 1996; Bodker, 1997) but has yet to make a significant impact on the
design of learning environments (for a significant exception see Cole, 1996).

In developing a theoretical framework for CSCL, we propose to build on three of the
central tenets of Activity Theory: a) that activity is mediated by cultural artifacts; b) that
activity must be analyzed at various levels; and c) that internal activity (i.e. thinking) first
occurs in the social plane (i.e. contextualized activity). Each of these insights will be
outlined and their educational implications discussed.

The first insight of activity theory is the observation that culturally defined tools mediate
all activity. From this perspective, mediation does not make tasks easier but
fundamentally changes the nature of the task and can even lead to the creations of new
types of activity (Wertsch, 1979). On this point activity theory is closely aligned with
distributed cognition (Hutchins, 1995; Pea, 1993; Norman, 1991). This simple
observation, that activity is mediated, has enormous implications for instructional design
because it redefines the nature of learning. Instead of viewing learning as the rational
abstraction of mental representations from one's experience, learning is re-conceptualized
as learning to participate in a cultural practice. Learning to participate in a cultural
practice means moving from partial participation in that practice­where one's
participation is heavily mediated by more capable others (Vygotsky, 1978) and the
physical constraints of the physical world (Hutchins, 1995)­towards full participation in
the practice.

The second insight of activity theory that has implications for the design of CSCL
environments is that activity can be analyzed on least three levels. At the highest level,
activities are distinguished by their organizing motives or the object towards which they
are oriented. Moving down in grain size, activities can also be examined in terms of their
actions and the short-term goals. Finally, at the most detailed level of analysis activity
can seen as consisting of specific operations and the concrete conditions in which they
are carried out. For a detailed examination of the unit of analysis for Activity Theory see
Leont'ev (1979).

These three levels of analysis contribute a rich perspective on the interplay between
cognition and its material and social context. One way to visualize this more inclusive
perspective on the context of cognition is the mediated-action triangle shown in Figure 3
(adapted from Engestrom, 1987). The vertex of Figure 3 shows that the "object" or
function of cognition is mediated by historically and culturally constituted tools. The
bottom three nodes of Figure 3 demonstrate the social nature of human activity that
individuals (subjects) are situated in communities which are mediated by rules of
participation and by divisions of labor (Engestrom, 1987). One way the mediational
triangle can be used to inform the design of learning environments is as a "checklist" of
the connections and interdependencies that must be considered. Applying this checklist to
Learner Centered Design, one quickly sees that LCD's myopic focus on the tool's
relation to the learner ignores the interdependencies between activity and its context
within a community (represented by the bottom 3 nodes of the triangle).

The third insight of Activity Theory is that cognition and the cultural tools that mediate it
have their origins in social interaction. In particular, it stresses that the higher order
psychological functions develop first interpsychologically, and then are translated into
intrapsychological, mental functions (Vygotsky, 1978; Wertsch, 1979). This has two
major implications for the design of learning environments. First, it recognizes the
fundamental role of social interaction and conversation in learning. This makes it a
particularly attractive theoretical framework for CSCL. Second, it implies that the way
activity (and cognition) are organized can only be understood by examining the historical
context from which the activity has arisen. This means, as designers, we must pay
attention to the interaction between multiple trajectories: the sociogenesis of cultural
practice; the ontogenesis of people within a practice; and the microgenesis of ways of
participating within that cultural practice.

Based on the implications of Activity Theory, we propose to design and analyze CSCL
environments based on the Activity Centered Design model depicted in Figure 4. Instead
of placing either the teacher or the students at the center of the model, we propose that the
focus should be to design activities that help learners develop the ability to carry out
socially formulated, goal directed action through the use of mediating material and social
structures. From this perspective both other social actors and cultural tools are seen as
resources that the students coordinate during activity. The layering seen in Figure 4 is
meant to demonstrate that each activity is situated on a learning trajectory, where each
activity is designed to build off and relate to the other activities. An attractive aspect of
the Activity Centered Model stems from what it is not. It is neither teacher-centered, like
the instruction provided within conventionally organized classrooms, nor is it student-
centered, like the instruction provided by intelligent tutoring systems. The instructional
settings afforded by both of these models of computer-mediated instruction leave intact
the questionable presumption that learning consists the transfer of intact chunks of
knowledge from either the minds of teachers into the minds of their students, or from
computer-mediated instructional materials into the minds of students. In the Activity
Centered Model, as students move through the activities they progress from being partial
participants, heavily dependent on the material mediation of tools, to full participants,
able to more flexibly use the cultural tools of the normative practice.

The Probability Inquiry Environment from the Activity Centered Design
Perspective

In this section we briefly critique the Probability Inquiry Environment from the
perspective of Activity Centered Design, taking each of the tenets is turn. PIE is a
computer-mediated inquiry environment proven to help middle school students learn
elementary probability (Enyedy, Vahey & Gifford, 1997; Vahey, Enyedy & Gifford,
under review; Vahey Enyedy & Gifford, 1999). PIE was implemented as a three week
curriculum, which included computer-simulation activities, hands-on activities and whole
class discussions. Each computer activity was designed to focus on a particular aspect of
probability and to promote specific interactions in the classroom culture (Enyedy, Vahey
& Gifford, 1998). In PIE, students actively investigate probability by trying to figure out
if particular games of chance are fair to all participants. The students' collaborative
activity is structured around articulating their intuitions, systematically testing their ideas
by gathering and analyzing empirical data, and communicating their revised
understanding of the domain to their classmates. The computer-mediated activities are
then followed by hands-on activities in which students flip coins, roll dice, etc. as they
investigate aspects of probability without using the computer simulations. Throughout the
curriculum the students also participate in whole-class discussions, in which each pair
relates their findings from the activities.

It is important to note that PIE's original conception and design was best characterized as
somewhere between the Learner Centered Design and Activity Centered Design models.
It was during its implementation and subsequent analysis that our own theoretical
perspective evolved into the Activity Centered framework presented above. This
evolution creates some apparent conflicts between PIE's design and our theoretical
framework. For example, Activity Theory approaches to education are often associated
with apprenticeship, whereas PIE's approach seems to assume that students learn
probability by doing scientific investigations. However, as we attempt to show below, we
believe the students were actually learning mathematical practices ways of perceiving
and talking about probability that were accepted by the classroom community as
successful methods for justifying claims (e.g. the claim that a given game was fair).

Mediating Probabilistic Reasoning

When we examined PIE from the perspective of how it mediated probabilistic reasoning,
we found that by the end of the three weeks most students justified their claims about
probability by calculating the probability of a compound event (Vahey, Enyedy &
Gifford, under review). The students' practice in most cases was structured around the
probability tree as an ordered inscription of the fully enumerated sample space (i.e. all the
possible outcomes). Elsewhere, we have outlined the trajectory of this particular cultural
tool within the classroom (Enyedy et al., 1997) and the different social contexts in which
the tool was used (Enyedy et al., 1998).

The Interdependencies of Mediation

However, there is more to an activity system and learning environment than the
relationship between a tool and a method of reasoning. In our analysis of PIE, both the
division of labor between students and the "rules" by which they interact effect the
organization of activity and ultimately the students' learning outcomes. Both of these
mediating factors will be examined in turn.
We use Figure 5 to graphically show the reduced set of interdependencies we examine in
our analysis of how the different configurations of who did what during the PIE activities
effected the students' learning. In the prediction phase of the students' investigations we
saw at least two distinct divisions of labor. Although the students worked in pairs, PIE
was designed with only one text box to record their predictions. Dissent from their shared
answer, was intended to be expressed through the use of "agreement bars." One way in
which the students organized themselves to accomplish this task was to alternate who
was responsible for that particular question. Alternatively, some students attempted to
reach consensus on each and every question. These two ways of dividing the labor within
the constraints of the mediating tool resulted in different patterns of interaction and
different learning trajectories.

Under the alternating responsibility method, points of disagreement between student
understanding often went undiscovered or ignored. Alternating responsibility
compartmentalized their answers and eliminated the need for coherence across the
questions. This presented a difficulty for a curriculum based on the ideal of students
refining their ideas because of cognitive dissonance. It effectively eliminated the social
accountability for their answers, and as a result students using this method did not often
refine their ideas based on the input of others. On the other hand, trying to reach
consensus on each question had its own strengths and weaknesses. While the process of
collaboratively reaching consensus made differences between students visible to each
other, it did not always lead to deep reflection about those ideas. It has been pointed out
that high bandwidth systems, which immediately attempt to reach consensus, tend to
settle on a solution nearest to the initial center of gravity regardless of what the evidence
suggests as the "best" solution (Hutchins, 1995). In PIE this meant that the students who
tried to reach consensus on their predictions, often agreed on the first explanation that
seemed sensible to them without fully exploring it or its alternatives.

What is clear from this quick look at some of the ways that students answered the
predictive questions of PIE is that the tool that mediated the articulation of their intuitions
(i.e. a shared space for answers) was in turn mediated by the way the students divided
their labor. While it is unrealistic to think that we can predict or completely determine
how students will use a tool, this example shows that in designing CSCL systems it is
important to consider how the larger context of the activity system will mediate the tools
use and the students learning trajectory.
We also examined how the participation structures (i.e. rules) for student-to-student
interaction mediated the way in which PIE was used and what the students learned from
the activity. Figure 6 shows the set of interdependencies we examine in the analysis of
two students as they answered a predictive question that asked about the probability
distribution of two coin flips. This interaction is shown in Figure 7.
Figure  7:  Rosa  and Maria   setting  the  frame   for their   interaction.

The first turn of this interaction shows Rosa attempting to establish a shared
understanding of their current task by reading the Predictive Question into the public
interactional space. Having a shared understanding of the task has enormous implications
for what actually gets done and what the students eventually understand. What is
interesting about this interaction is that the students do not read the entire question (In
Figure 7, compare Turn 1 to the text on the top left of the computer display). The part of
the question that they do not read aloud, is exactly the parameter of the task they end up
ignoring. Even though the teacher in Turn 8 reminds them that they need to consider the
total number of points of their prediction, the students do not make any attempt to make
their prediction add up to twenty. In fact, they do not seem to be attuned to quantity at all.
Nowhere in this interaction to they mention the cardinal value of any outcome or class of
outcomes. Rather, they use relative terms like "higher" and "highest" to talk about the
ordinal relations of the classes of outcomes. For this interaction, then, their activity only
partially corresponds to the intended activity, because they negotiated the task to include
only the relative value of the histogram bars. Even so, in Turn 3 and 4 we see that the two
girls collaborating to create a preliminary conjecture that is backed by a justification, that
in turn incorporates one of the inscription systems of PIE. That is, even though their
assertion is incorrect, its form reflects the desired participation structure of a well-formed
argument.

The Sociogenetic, Ontogenetic and Microgenetic Context of PIE

Finally, examining how PIE is situated with respect to the possible socio- and ontogenetic
trajectories reveals both some of the strengths and weakness of our design. At the
sociogenetic level, we find that PIE takes a somewhat restricted view of the context of
probability in relation to the larger domain of practice. In all of the PIE activities, the
context for probabilistic reasoning was analyzing games of chance. This corresponds well
to the historical roots of classical probability in which probabilistic situations, usually
games, are analyzed in terms the number of favorable and non-favorable equiprobable
outcomes. It does not, however, address the many real world and far less structured
contexts where students might profit by leveraging probability, such as the assessment of
risk, or understanding the reliability of a medical test. Our restriction of the activities to
game playing is likely directly tied to the students' limited success at probabilistic
reasoning in contexts outside of gaming (see Vahey et al, under review). At the
ontogenetic level, however, we believe our choice of games was justified. Games and
fairness are authentic interests of students of this age. The gaming context leveraged this
interest and helped motivate the students throughout the activities. Finally, we found that
students' microgenetic trajectories through PIE were fundamentally conversations
anchored by the available material resources. In some cases, the inscriptions of PIE
anchored these conversations in ways that helped them realize the relevance of the
normative resources of probability which they previously ignored (e.g. the sample space).
In other cases, the inscriptions conflicted with the students' intuitive practices and led
them to totally reorganize they way conceptualized the domain (Enyedy, in process).

Conclusion

There is still an enormous amount of research needed to develop our understanding of
how the material, social and mental worlds interpenetrate in mediated activity. Activity
Theory begins to lay out some of the dimensions of this task, but it is not yet clear how to
apply the insights of Activity Theory to the design (rather than merely critique) of
Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Environments. Activity Centered Design is
an attempt to move us toward a more appropriate theoretical framework for CSCL
environments that will lead to a number of concrete design principles, but this promise is
as of yet largely unrealized. What ACD has accomplished to date is to identify and
provide a unifying theoretical perspective on some of the major areas where design
principles for CSCL are needed. The areas addressed in this article included: how cultural
tools mediate cognition, how activity systems (and thus cognition) are mediated by social
interactions and different participation structures, and how activity systems are situated in
larger communities and their practices.

Acknowledgements

This research was funded in part by a grant from the UC Urban Community-School
Collaborative. Additionally, Noel Enyedy's research was supported by a National
Science Foundation Science and Design Traineeship and a Spencer Foundation
Fellowship. We would also like to thank Phil Vahey and Jesse Ragent for their assistance
in the design and implementation of PIE, and Cynthia Carter Ching for her helpful
comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

References

Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the mind. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Berson, M. J. (1996). Effectiveness of computer technology in the social studies: A
review of the literature. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 28, 486-499.

Bodker, S. (1997). Computers in Mediated Human Activity. Mind, Culture and Activity,
4(3), 149-158.

Cole, M. (1996). Cultural Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Engestrom, Y. (1987). Learning by Expanding: An Activity-Theoretical Approach to
Developmental Research. Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.

Enyedy, N. (in process). Material Structures, Communication and Intuitions: Resources
for Learning in the Probability Inquiry Environment. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.

Enyedy, N., Vahey, P. and Gifford, B. (1997). Active and Supportive Computer-
Mediated Resources for Student-to-Student Conversations. In Computer Support for
Collaborative Learning `97, R. Hall, N. Miyake, and N. Enyedy (Eds.). University of
Toronto.

Enyedy, N., Vahey, P. and Gifford, B. (1998). "...It's fair because they each have two."
The Development of a Mathematical Practice Across Two Social Contexts, In the
Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences 98, AACE,
Atlanta, GA.

Gifford, B. R. (1996). Bernie Gifford on the changing educational technical landscape.
Educom Review, 31(4), 14-19.

Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kulik, J. A. (1994). Meta-analytical studies of findings on computer-based instruction. In
E. L. Baker & H. F. O'Neil, Jr. (Eds.), Technology assessment in education and training
(pp. 9-33). Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Lave, J. (1996). Teaching, as learning, in practice. Mind, Culture and Activity, 3(3), 149-
164.

Leont'ev, A.N. (1979). The Problem of Activity in Psychology. In J. Wertsch (Ed.), The
concept of Activity in Soviet Pyschology. Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.

Luria, A.R. (1975). The Historical development of Cognitive Processes. Moscow: Nauka
Publishers.

Nardi, B. (1996). Context and Consciousness: AT and Human Computer Interaction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Norman, D. A. (1991). Cognitive Artifacts. In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), Designing interaction:
Psychology at the human-computer interface (pp. 17-38). New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Pea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G.
Salomon (Ed.) Distributed Cogntitions: Psychological and Educational considerations,
(pp. 47-87). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Pea, R. (1994). Seeing What We Build Together: Distributed Multimedia Learning
Environments for Transformative Communications. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 3(3), 219-225.

Vahey, P. Enyedy, N. and Gifford, B. (1999). The Probability Inquiry Environment: a
collaborative, inquiry-based simulation environment. In the Proceedings of the Thirty
Second Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences.

Vahey, P. Enyedy, N. and Gifford, B. (under review). The Probability Inquiry
Environment: Learning Probability Using a Collaborative, Inquiry-Based Simulation
Environment. Submitted to The Journal of Interactive Learning Environments.

Weller, H. G. (1996). Assessing the impact of computer-based learning in science.
Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 28, 461-485.

Wertsch, J. (1979). The concept of Activity in Soviet Psychology: An Introduction. In J.
Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of Activity in Soviet Psychology. Armonk, New York: M.E.
Sharpe, Inc.

White, B. (1993). ThinkerTools: Causal Models, Conceptual Change, and Science
Education. Cognition and Instruction 10 (1), 1-100.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Order Psychological
Processes. (Eds.) M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner and E. Souberman. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Authors' Addresses

Bernard R. Gifford (bgifford@socrates.berkeley.edu)
University of California at Berkeley; Graduate School of Education, Education in
Mathematics Science and Technology; 4533 Tolman Hall; Berkeley, CA 94720-1670
Noel Enyedy (enyedy@socrates.berkeley.edu)
University of California at Berkeley; Graduate School of Education, Education in
Mathematics Science and Technology; 4533 Tolman Hall; Berkeley, CA 94720-1670
