Zora: a Graphical Multi-user Environment to Share
Stories about the Self
Marina Umaschi Bers

MIT, Media Laboratory

      Abstract: Zora is a narrative-based graphical multi-user environment
      purposefully design to help people understand and affect the ways in
      which identity and values are actively constructed by both an individual
      and a community. Zora engages young people in building artifacts as
      representations of their complex self and creating communities in which
      values and attitudes are put to the test. It supports 1) creation of a virtual
      city with its different spaces, objects and interactive characters, 2)
      communication between the users, and 3) introspection about role models,
      personal and community values. This paper describes the theoretical
      framework that conceives identity as dynamically constructed by putting
      together diverse and conflicting elements and values. Based on this
      framework, Zora's design principles are presented, as well as preliminary
      results from a pilot experience in which young people used Zora to learn
      about identity and values in a hands-on, constructionist way.

      Keywords: multi-user virtual environments, design framework,
      psychology, narrative

Introduction

There is a growing amount of research on virtual environments which concentrates on
characteristics, both from a technical and social perspective, that foster the development
of community (Donath, 1996). The work presented in this paper also looks at virtual
environments but focuses on issues of personal identity and values. The goal is to
develop an approach, both in terms of theory and design principles, to help people learn
about their own identity in the real world and the values they live by or consider
important. Since identity and values do not develop in a vacuum but in constant
relationship with others, a community is needed for this type of learning to happen;
therefore the choice of a multi-user virtual environment as the technological
infrastructure.

Sherry Turkle proposes MUDs and other examples of computer mediated
communication on the Internet to have "become a significant social laboratory for
experimenting with the constructions and re-constructions of self that characterize
postmodern life" (Turkle, 1995). Despite the growing body of analytical and descriptive
research on identity in cyberspace (Suller, 1996), the challenge still is in how to design
environments and social contexts to purposefully support exploration of identity and
values, and not only their expression, in a constructionist and hands-on way (Bers, 1998).
Math and science educators recognized the computer's potential to make this type of
active learning possible in their fields and have been working on the design of
computational learning environments for a long time. But people interested in the inner
world have yet to discover how to design their own computational tools to influence new
ways of thinking. I strongly believe that what computers were in the 80's to revolutionize
the ways of thinking, learning and teaching about math and sciences, today they can be to
the realm of identity and values. However, there are still many more questions than
answers and research in this area is needed.

This paper is intended to highlight the need for approaches that use new technologies to
address learning about identity and values in a "learn by doing" way, and to map out a
new area of application for virtual worlds. Zora is an example of a narrative-based
graphical virtual world, particularly designed to help people understand and affect the
ways in which identity and values are constructed.

In the design world, the term affordance refers to the attributes of the thing that determine
how the thing could possibly be used (Norman, 1988). When the thing is a technological
learning environment, like Zora, "affordance" not only refers to usability but also to
content to be learned. In my opinion, these environments raise three questions. First, how
can we use the thing to learn? Second, which is the theoretical framework upon which the
thing organizes its content? Third, what specific content does the thing afford to learn?

In this paper I will answer the above three questions for the case of Zora. The first
question refers to methodological issues about how can use Zora to learn in a
constructionist way and will be addressed in section 2.2. The second question refers to
the theoretical foundation that conceives identity as a complex dynamic construction
resulting from integrating different aspects and values. This framework, upon which Zora
is designed, will be presented in section 3.The third question refers to the content about
identity and values that Zora's design affords to explore and will be looked at in section
5. Preliminary results from empirical work using Zora with a multi-cultural population of
pre-teens and teens will be reported by highlighting the powerful ideas about identity and
values that were explored.

What is Zora?

      "This city is like a honeycomb in whose cells each of us can place the
      things we want to remember: names of famous men and women, virtues,
      numbers, vegetable and mineral classifications, dates of battles...So the
      world's most wise people are those who know Zora. "

      (Italo Calvino, "Invisible Cities", 1972)

Zora is a 3-D multi-user environment particularly designed to help people explore the
powerful idea that identity is constructed by diverse and conflicting aspects and values.
People can build artifacts and characters as representations that make a complex self, as
well as communities in which personal values are realized and put to test. Users are
graphically represented by avatars with the owners' picture. They can navigate around
the virtual city, converse with others in real-time and construct the city's private and
public spaces: personal homes, community centers and temples. Temples are shared
public spaces that represent cultural traditions or interests (see fig. 1). Users can populate
these spaces with objects and interactive characters, role models and anti role models,
who can be programmed to engage in storytelling interactions with visitors.

Fig. 1: The Zora Jewish temple built by a teenager. On the left, the values dictionary.

In the same spirit as other constructionist virtual worlds such as the text-based MOOSE
Crossing (Bruckman, 1994) and Pueblo (Bobrow et al, 1995) and the graphical Pet Park
(DeBonte, 1996), kids can communicate with each other as well as populate the world
with their own interactive creations. Similar to SAGE (Bers & Cassell, 1998), they can
program their characters to engage in storytelling conversations with other users. For
example, they can describe the underlying turn-taking rules between user and character as
well as define the stories to be told in response to certain inputs.

Zora is an object-oriented environment, meaning that users can make new objects by
cloning existing ones. Every object in the world has six content-based attributes and two
administration attributes that structure a way of thinking about them. The content-based
attributes are: 1) graphical appearance, 2) textual description, 3) stories, 4) values, 5)
conversations, and 6) motion. The administration attributes are ownership, which
determines who owns the object and therefore can edit it, and permissions, which sets if
the object can be cloned. Zora is being implemented using Microsoft's Virtual Worlds
research platform, a software development kit for building distributed multi-user
environments (Vellon et al).

Zora is designed to support exploration of identity and values in a constructionist way.
Constructionism is a philosophy of education, based on Piaget's constructivism, says that
we learn better when we are engaged in building an external artifact that we can reflect
upon and share with others in a community (Papert, 1980). By constructing an external
object to reflect upon, we also construct internal knowledge. What would it be like to
purposefully construct an artifact that represents who we are? What kind of knowledge
about values and aspects of the self will we be constructing? My hypothesis is that
environments like Zora, particularly designed to respond to these questions, can enable
people to integrate the different aspects of the self and to reflect upon conflicting values
while putting them to test in a learning community.

Learners using Zora engage in three types of activities: creation, communication and
introspection. Creation happens in different ways. First, users create the world by
designing new spaces and objects. Second, they write stories and values for their objects.
Eventually they will also be able to create computer programs for their objects to engage
in storytelling conversations. Communication takes both synchronous (real-time) and
asynchronous (stored) form. On the one hand, users can converse with other users
through their avatars or can engage in interactions with characters with already
programmed conversations. On the other hand, they can read and write stories stored in
their creations. Introspection, both individually and as a group, happens throughout the
experience with Zora. In this sense, Zora serves one of the functions that has been
attributed to the idea of the Sabbath: a time for reflection (Heschel, 1951). A time for
stopping the work and looking back at who we are, how we are feeling and how we are
building a caring, just and responsible community.

The theoretical framework

In this section I present the theoretical framework upon which Zora is designed. This
framework has three fundamental pillars: 1) Identity is dynamically constructed by
integrating diverse and conflicting aspects of the self, culture and society; 2) Personal
values are important aspects of identity, therefore they need to be explored in relationship
to it; 3) Both identity and values are narrative constructions.

The first pillar has foundations in theories of Artificial Intelligence and postmodern
theories of identity that look at identity as composed by different conflicting elements.
For example, the society of mind theory proposes a mind as a collection of many smaller
processes, called agents, which can only do very simple things. Yet when they join in
societies it leads to intelligence and complex behavior (Minsky, 1987). Postmodern
theories of identity suggest that each individual is a "multiple populated self" containing
a multiplicity of voices that may not harmonize with each other (Gergen,1991; Glass,
1993). Both AI and postmodern psychological theories deny the existence of an
intentional unique center. In contrast, my approach, despite its emphasis on multiple
aspects, recognizes that a core sense of self is critical to live a healthy life. I conceive
identity as a dynamic construction in which different fragments are integrated by an ego
capable of unifying an individual's experience and action in an adaptive manner. This
pillar informs Zora's design by providing a structure for people to create: 1) a virtual
home populated by different objects, which represents the complex evolving self; and 2)
a unique and never-changing avatar that represents the core intentional ego in charge of
picking and choosing the different aspects to take into the virtual home.

The second pillar of the theoretical framework states that personal values are important
aspects of identity and need to be understood in its context. Personal values might include
family, cultural and religious values as well as moral values, universal and structured by
underlying concepts of justice, rights and welfare, and social values, arbitrary, context
dependent and determined by agreement about the social system. Personal values are
externalized through actions that impact both self and society. This theoretical pillar
becomes concrete by two of Zora's design features. First, when creating an object, users
attach to it one or more values and their definitions. The relationship between identity
and values becomes explicit by instantiating the values in concrete objects that represent
aspects of the self. The second design feature is the collaborative values dictionary which
displays all the values, and their multiple definitions, held by the Zora community. In this
case, values are associated not only with personal identity but also with the identity of the
community.

The third pillar highlights the role that narrative plays in the construction of identity and
the organization of its aspects and values in a coherent way (Polkinghorne, 1988).
Identity, neither values, are a stamp put on our forehead by our ancestors. By telling the
story of who we are, we construct our sense of self; by telling the story of what or how do
we want to become, we construct our sense of personal values. This pillar becomes
explicit throughout all Zora's design. Users write their biography, stories for their objects
and values definitions. Storytelling is the main way in which they express themselves and
find coherence between their different aspects. In Zora narrative is not only a
communication genre, but also a cognitive tool.

These three fundamental pillars outline the theoretical framework of the research
presented in this paper. The constructionist methodology applied to this framework
enables the design of computational tools that provoke thinking about our own
psychology (Turkle, 1984), and support the construction of artifacts that represent our
own complex identity. These artifacts might serve the same function of transitional
objects by enabling the passage between who we are and who we want to become, both
individually and as a community.

Zora workshops

A preliminary experience was held with students from a public high school in Boston.
During this pilot I did not use the Zora virtual environment, but cardboard mock-ups. The
goal was to engage in a participatory design experience by testing the concept and
receiving feedback from students and teacher before final implementation. Details can be
found at http://www.media.mit.edu/~marinau/Zora/.

Feedback from this experience allowed me to refine Zora's design. During August 1999 I
conducted an intensive three-week pilot workshop with a multi-cultural group of eleven
kids between 11 and 15 years old who used the Zora multi-user environment. Eight kids
came to the Media Lab and three worked remotely from their homes and met face-to-face
only on the first and last days of the workshop. Participants were recruited through
mailing lists and through a program that helps inner city kids enter into private schools.
An older child, a senior in high school who had previous experience with Zora, served as
a mentor. An undergraduate research assistant helped with the programming and the
technical aspects. All participants had e-mail and were subscribed to the workshop
mailing list. Parents were also subscribed to a parent's mailing list and were invited to an
open house to see their kid's work. Engaging parents is very important in any learning
process, but particularly needed when the content to be learned has to do with values and
identity.

The methodology used for the study was based on an ethnographic approach. I did
observations of on-line and face-to-face children's interaction, analysis of system logs
that recorded, with date and time, everything they said or did on-line, videotaping and
extended personal interviews. The data collected is still under analysis.

Design principles that facilitate powerful ideas

Powerful ideas are content worth learning while approaching new domains, either by
evolving personal intuitions or by acquiring and refining concepts already existing in
society. Below I present some of the powerful ideas about identity and values that the
young people participating in the workshop explored. This exploration was facilitated by
the structure set by Zora's design. I introduce each powerful idea with a short explanation
of its underlying theoretical foundation followed by Zora's design feature that enabled
people to access and experiment with it.

Identity as a complex dynamic construction.

The self is composed by a plurality of co-existent and conflicting aspects and values, thus
becomes a complex construction. These aspects are constructed by identifying with
people and objects in the surrounding culture. Zora's design affordances made the
psychological process of identification into a concrete experience. People created their
own homes and temples populated with collections of objects and characters, heroes (role
models) and villains (anti role models) representing different personal aspects.

For example, thirteen-year old Pablo built a virtual house with objects displaying pictures
from his family and pets, flags from his homeland, a gold chain given by his
grandmother, and other personal items. Pablo paid special attention to put only objects
that represented the different aspects of his identity. Other kids chose to express the
different aspects of their identity by building many different temples and cloning into
their homes, objects from each of them. For example, Martin built the Britney Spears
temple, in honor of his favorite pop singer, the Sports Arena, and his own home with
objects from different temples built by himself and others. Most of the virtual homes built
by the workshop participants became a complex evolving representation of a constructed
self composed by meaningful elements from the surrounding cultures or temples.

Relationship between "I", "we" and "them".

Identity is a dynamic process resulting from the constant tension between the
identification with a community and the differentiation from it. As Erik Erikson points
out, "no ego can develop outside of social processes that offer workable prototypes and
roles" (Erikson ,1950). Virtual communities such as Zora are ideal for playing out these
kind of social processes.
The Zora City Hall is a space designed to discuss issues that have to do with the
relationship between "I", "we" and "them". Kids dropped cases, objects representing
events or circumstances that need to be discussed among the community members. Most
of the cases were about things left in the wrong places or invitations to add heroes or
villains to some of the temples. However, during the second week of the workshop, a
different case was dropped. Elisa, who built the virtual Jewish temple, placed in the City
Hall a web link to the shooting in the Jewish Community Center in L.A that had
happened the day before. This case was not about the life of the Zora community, but
about the life in society at large. A meeting was called to discuss the news. Elisa started
the meeting by clarifying the facts and asking people to check the web site she had
attached to the case _to which she also added and defined the value tolerance.

During the hour and a half that lasted the meeting, the conversation evolved in the
following way, with almost no intervention on my part: 1) concern [Janet says: why
would people be so prejudice? I thought this kind of thing was over] [Pablo says: there
isn't anything we can do about it]; 2) discussing punishment and death penalty [Nino
says: this guy should be dragged out of his cell and flayed alive. You take a life, you give
your own life as punishment.] [Sheila says: I think by killing him we show that we have
given up and the only way to solve things is to kill somebody, and I know that is not
right]; 3) the role of education and family [Pablo says: the only prevention is at home.
People need to be brought up knowing that discrimination is wrong] [Sheila says: I think
we can't do that much for adults, but I know we can do a lot for the kids in school.]; 4)
the lack of talk about these issues in a meaningful way at school [Janet says: no one
talks about it in my school. It first came an issue when we heard about the Colorado
shootings. They don't want to make it a big deal] [Pablo says: my school holds forums to
talk about these issues but usually they don't really care and it's just PC mambo jumbo];
5) sharing personal experiences [Janet says: I go to a predominantly white school and
things like this might embarrass me. One mentioning of black people, I feel people
starring] [Pablo says: same thing with me, but I bring attention to the fact I'm Latino. In
no way does it handicaps me]; 6) ignorance about other cultures or religions [Elisa
says: To tell you the truth, I had a few classic misconceptions that were a little
prejudiced, that were all because of ignorance] [Janet says: knowing things about other
cultures and races is good for everyone and should be happening more often.]; 7)
deciding to build more temples in the Zora city [Sheila says: I really don't know, but
we just need a way to get familiar with each other] [Elisa says: People should build the
other temples and check out the ones already built. the temples will help us learn more
about other cultures].

Although the conversation excerpts shown above are very short, they highlight the role of
Zora's City Hall in providing a space where to think, individually and with others, about
the relationships between "I", "we' and "them". Personal identity and values evolve in the
constant process of differentiating from others and integrating into a group, Zora
provided an opportunity to experiment with this.
The role of participatory democracy in the development of identity and values.

Extensive research suggests that social institutions, group decision-making and self-
government are critical in shaping individual's moral development (Kohlberg, 1982). The
establishment of a participatory democracy in the learning environment serves as a model
of the larger political community in which the child would participate as an adult. In
Zora, the virtual community centers, like the City Hall, engage children in the creation of
social institutions and tools to regulate the community.

For example, during the second day of the workshop kids discovered the need to create
laws to make living in Zora easier. In the first City Hall virtual meeting a boy was elected
as the mayor and took charge of coordinating the writing of the rules of Zora on a wall of
the City Hall. Kids experimented with different on-line voting systems to decide on the
laws, such as "press 1 if you agree" or "stand on the left side of the room if you disagree"
but had a very hard time organizing themselves so everyone was heard and consensus
was reached. However, once they agreed on nine basic rules, such as "no putting things in
people's personal rooms", "no warping people or their things", "set the properties of the
objects placed in public spaces so others can clon them", "fess up to what you do", and
"there will be no jail", they carefully respected them.

In the same spirit as Kholberg's just community approach, the virtual community centers
provided public forums for participatory democracy and decision-making about authentic
dilemmas. The community centers are spaces where the values of the Zora community
develop and individual's values are put to the test.

Narrative serves a cognitive, emotional and communicative function.

There is abundant research that asserts that narrative is a fundamental mode of
understanding. From a cognitive perspective, stories are the fundamental constituents of
human memory (Schank & Abelson, 1995). From a psychological point of view, as
Charlotte Linde (1993) has shown, stories serve to put together different fragments of
experiences into a coherent life story. From a cultural perspective, stories serve to give
cohesion to share beliefs and transmit values (Campbell, 1988).

In Zora kids experienced the diverse functions of stories by writing narratives for each of
their objects and characters. For example, Sheila wrote the following story an attached it
to an object representing her friend: "Ayan is my best friend from Somalia. She came here
to escape the war there. She lives with her 23 years old sister, her husband and their two
children, one a couple of months, and the other around three years old. Ayan has to take
care of them both! Her older brother in high school also lives with them. Her father lives
in Canada, because he doesn't want to live with the rest of the family". The story not only
served Sheila to communicate to others in the Zora community who her best friend was,
but also to understand what is it like to have a different life, like the one Ayan has. Other
kids also chose to write stories about themselves and placed them in their avatar's
biography. For example, this is what sixth-grader Kay wrote. "I was born here in
Massachusetts. I came to West Roxbury when I got older. I am going to an all girls
private school. I'm very athletic and my favorite sports are basketball and soccer. I have
six sisters and out of the seven I'm the last one (the youngest). My favorite team is the San
Antonio Spurs and my favorite player is Tim Duncan."

In Zora narrative also serves to think about the meaning of values by having to define
them. For example, the values dictionary created by the Zora community of kids, has 39
values , such as fun, entertainment, connection with the past, modernization and
communication, with multiple definitions entered by the different participants. For
example, the value "equality" has the following definitions: "Kay says that equality is
being treated the same as everyone else black, white, Hispanic." "Nino says that every
person is equal and has the same number of basic rights." "Elisa says that equality is
because we are all made in God's image and therefore, we have an inherent equivalence".
As shown above, the diverse ways in which storytelling is used in Zora allowed kids to
express diverse aspects of their identity by serving communicative, emotional and
cognitive functions.

Role taking as a mechanism for gaining multiple points of view.

Role taking, or seeing the world as others do, understanding their motivations and
actions, is a fundamental mechanism for broadening one's perspective and recognizing
that events can be understood through multiple points of view. In Zora this type of
experience is facilitated by the programming language that enables kids to program
storytelling interactions for their objects and characters to engage in with visitors. As
shown in previous work done with SAGE (Bers & Cassell, 1998) designing interactions
allows children to decenter and move out of the phase of egocentrism where one cannot
differentiate somebody else's point of view from one's own. This opens up the possibility
of engaging in playful role-taking. The user maintains its sameness and inner stability,
represented by the avatar, but takes different roles and points of view by programming
and talking through different characters. Since the programming language has not being
fully implemented in a way that makes it simple for kids to access, no examples can be
presented yet.

Objects as collective repositories of meaning.

The object-oriented programming metaphor says that objects have characteristics or
properties that define its identity. Furthermore, a child-object can inherit some or all of
the properties of the parent-object. The properties of objects set the structure that define
the object as well as the frame of mind with which the object is thought upon. In Zora,
objects have properties that have to do not only with their shape and functionality, but
also with the meaning or values that we assign to them. For example, Elisa assigned the
value "love" to a picture of ketubah, a Jewish marriage contract: "The ketuba symbolizes
the union that the couple is willing to join because of their love and mutual devotion."
She was not only thinking about the concrete attributes of the ketubah but also about the
meaning that it carries. When other kids cloned the object, they cloned its meaning
(stored in its associated stories and values) and added new meanings, thus converting
objects into collective repositories of meaning. In Zora this constant process of re-
appropriation and negotiation of meaning is made concrete by allowing people to re-
create the object in their own way through cloning them within an object-oriented
paradigm. Most of the kids pointed out that before using Zora they never thought about
objects as carriers of both personal and collective values.

Conclusions

The core contribution of this paper is the presentation of how a theoretical framework can
inform the design of a multi-user environment that affords exploration of powerful ideas
about identity and values in a constructionist way. As the pilot workshop experience
shows, Zora is a powerful tool to explore identity as a complex construction composed by
diverse aspects and values. Asking and responding to questions such as who am I? What
are the values I hold and cherish? What are my roots? Which is my place in the world?
Where am I going? helps to develop a type of knowledge that Howard Gardner calls
personal intelligence (Gardner, 1983). According to Gardner this type of intelligence
involves two forms of knowledge that are intimately intermingled: intrapersonal, which
involves looking inward to develop a sense of self-knowledge and self-awareness, and
interpersonal, which looks outward at the other individuals and the community.

This type of personal knowledge is very hard to assess and evaluate in traditional ways.
However, when missing, it is easily identifiable. At a personal level, experimenting with
a multiplicity of aspects and values by integrating them into a core grounded self or
virtual home, provides an alternative to monolithic ways of thinking about identity that
do not take into consideration the personal struggles of living in multi-cultural societies.
At a social level, making these ideas accessible for children serves a double educational
function: preventing hate crimes based on the fundamentalist belief that there is only one
"right" way of being, and consolidating democratic societies.

Future Work

Diverse populations might profit from an environment that supports creation of a new
envisioned self and community, communication to facilitate collaboration and learning,
and introspection to reflect about existential issues. One of these populations is young
patients at children's hospitals. A study in the Hemodialysis Unit of Boston's Children's
Hospital is currently starting in collaboration with professionals in the Department of
Psychiatry. To introduce a fun, self exploratory and community-building computer
activity might have several positive benefits. Children could use their extensive time in
dialysis in a creative way interacting with other young patients in similar situation. They
could develop new ways of thinking about aspects of their identity and values as well as
learn about computational technologies thus gaining confidence in themselves as
learners, and acquiring useful skills in today's world.

Acknowldegments

I am grateful to my advisor Seymour Papert and Sherry Turkle, Mitchel Resnick, Harvey
Cox and Judith Donath. Thanks to Linda Stone and her team at Microsoft Virtual Worlds
research group; to undergraduate research assistant Daniel Vlasic and Aaron Arakawa
and to Josh Bers for editorial comments.
References

Bers. M. (1998) A constructionist approach to values through on-line narrative tools. In
Proceedings of ICLS 98, AACE, pp 49-55.

Bers, M & Cassell, J (1998) "Interactive storytelling systems for children: using
technology to explore language and identity." Journal of Interactive Learning Research,
volume 9 (2).

Bobrow, D.; O'Day, V.; Saraswat, V.; Hughes, B.; Walters, J.(1995) Building intentional
networked learning communities. Presentation to the American Anthropological
Association, Washington, DC.

Bruckman, A. (1994) MOOSE Crossing: Construction, Community and Learning in a
Networked Virtual World for Kids. Ph.D.dissertation. MIT, Cambridge, MA

Campbell, J. (1988) The power of myth. NY: Doubleday.

De Bonte, A. (1996) Pet Park: Learning in a Virtual Community. MS Thesis, MIT.

Donath, J. (1996) Inhabiting the virtual city: the design of social environments for
electronic communities. Ph.D.dissertation. MIT, Cambridge, MA

Erikson, E. H. (1950) Childhood and Society. NY: Norton and company.

Gardner, H. (1983) Frames of mind: the theory of multiple intelligences. NY : Basic
Books

Gergen, K. (1991) The saturated Self. Harper Collinss.

Glass, J. (1993) Shattered Selves: Multiple Personality in a Postmodern World. Cornell
University Press.

Heschel, A. J. (1951) The Sabbath: its meaning for modern man. NY: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux.

Kohlberg, L. (1982) "The just community approach to moral education in theory and in
practice". In International Conference on Moral Education. Fribourg, Switzerland.

Lifton, R. (1993) The Protean Self: Human Resilience in an Age of Fragmentation. NY:
HarperCollins.

Linde, C. (1993) Life Stories. The Creation of Coherence. Oxford University Press.
Minsky, M. (1987) The society of mind. NY: Simon & Schuster.

Norman, D. (1988) The Design of Everyday Things. NY: Doubleday
Polkinghorne, D. (1988) Narrative Knowing and the Human Sciences. State University of
NY Press.

Schank, R. & Abelson R. (1995) Knowledge and Memory: The Real Story. Advances in
Social Cognition, vol. VIII, 1-85. NJ: Lawrence Elbaum.

Suler, J. (1996) "The Psychology of Avatars and Graphical Space in Multimedia Chat
Communities" Rider University http://www1.rider.edu/~Suler/psycyber/psyav.html

Turkle, S. (1984) The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit. NY: Basic Books.

Turkle, S. (1995) Life on the screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet. NY: Simon &
Schuster.

Vellon, M. Marple, K. Mitchell, D. & Drucker, S. The Architecture of a Distributed
Virtual Worlds System. Virtual Worlds Group. Microsoft Research.

Winnicott D.W. (1971) Playing and Reality. London: Tavistock Publications.

Author's address

Marina Umaschi Bers (marinau@media.mit.edu)

MIT, Media Laboratory; 20 Ames St E15-320A; Cambridge, MA 02139. Tel. (617) 253-
0379. Fax (617) 253-6215.
