Networks of Information Sharing among Computer-
Supported Distance Learners
Caroline Haythornthwaite

Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign

      Abstract: Collaborative learning requires interaction and exchange among
      learners as they share experiences and solve problems cooperatively. In
      computer-supported distance learning classes it is often difficult to know
      to what extent individuals are interacting and how much they
      communicate with other class members. To explore intra-class interaction,
      social network data were gathered on the exchange of information and
      advice about class work among members of four distance learning classes,
      and the use of media for this exchange. Results present a preliminary
      evaluation of characteristics of the "typical" student's network in these
      classes, including the size of the network, the frequency of exchanges, and
      the media used, and its relation to students sense of belonging to the class.

      Keywords: computer-mediated communication, distance learners, social
      networks

Introduction

Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) represents a meeting of two trends:
the penetration of computer technology throughout society, and a new approach to
learning known as collaborative learning (Bannon, 1989; Crook, 1989; Kaye, 1995;
Koschmann, 1996). As telecommuncation infrastructures and the Internet grow, they
continue to open up new avenues for delivering education, reaching students who do not
meet face-to-face, but instead meet synchronously and asynchronously via computer
media. At the same time, what is normal and what constitutes best practice for education
delivery via this medium is still in the formative stage.

Unlike the distance programs of the past, the success of new Internet-based programs is
more than just a matter of delivering the information from the instructor to the students.
The emphasis is on providing an environment for CSCL. One of the key elements for
successful collaborative learning is peer-to-peer sharing of experiences. Free-flow of
information, ideas, and advice from many participants is important for increasing
exposure to different problem-solving approaches, different viewpoints, and different
spheres of knowledge, each of which enhances an individual's learning, adaptiveness,
and ability to recognize opportunities (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990; Dede, 1990;
Granovetter, 1973; Harasim et al, 1995; Haythornthwaite, 1996). Extended contact
"outside class" achieved through computer media also allows for more sustained
interaction and the creation of closer interpersonal bonds that further support the CSCL
environment (Harasim et al, 1995; Kaye, 1995). Sharing of experiences, informal
communication, socialization, and the group bonding that results are important for the
creation of a community of learners, who share resources in pursuit of their learning goal
(Bruffee, 1993; Kaye, 1995). For individuals this provides a sense of belonging, a sense
of feeling part of the class. For the group as a whole, this provides wider sharing of
information, increasing the likelihood that information will reach each member of the
class.

While the values of peer-to-peer communication are extolled, few studies have examined
the way in which information circulates in a CSCL environment, or how this contributes
to a sense of belonging to the class. One way of examining interactions is to look at the
social networks of communication among members of CSCL classes, asking: Who talks
to whom and about what? Such data reveal patterns of interaction among class members
that show how information circulates between individuals, and among all members of the
class (Wasserman & Faust, 1994; Haythornthwaite, 1996; Wellman & Berkowitz, 1998.).
It also shows the range of others with whom each class member maintains contact, and
what types of interaction they engage in ­ from instrumental exchanges of information to
exchanges of emotional support. Extending the "who talks to whom" question to include
"... and via which media" then allows exploration of the way in which computer media
support exchanges and the learning community.

To explore peer-to-peer communication in this way, social network data were gathered
on interactions among members of four computer-supported distance classes. Four types
of exchanges were examined: collaborative work, exchange of information or advice
about class work, socializing, and exchange of emotional support. It is beyond the scope
of this paper to report on all these exchanges. This paper focuses only on the exchange of
information and advice about class work. The emphasis here is on exploring what the
social network of a "typical" class member looks like, e.g., How many others do they
communicate with, how often, and via which media? -- and how this is associated
with.their feelings of belonging to the class. (For in-depth examination of the networks of
one of these classes, see Haythornthwaite 1999a, 1999b, in press).

The Study

Data were collected from members of four classes of Internet-based, distance learners
enrolled in the distance option (LEEP) of the Master of Science in Library and
Information Science at the Graduate School of Library and Information Science,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (http://alexia.lis.uiuc.edu/gslis/leep3/). This
program started in 1996 with 31 students and in January 1999 had enrollment of
approximately 90 students.

LEEP classes are conducted using combinations of "live" (synchronous) online sessions
and asynchronous computer-mediated communication. During live sessions, instructors
use RealAudio and PowerPoint slides to present classes over the Internet and students use
Internet Relay Chat (IRC) to submit questions. IRC is also used for break-out discussion
groups during class time, and for online office hours. Live sessions may be held as
frequently as weekly or as infrequently as monthly.

Asychronous, class-wide discussion is carried out via the Webboard, usually in
association with assigned weekly exercises and readings. All students have Email
accounts and use them to communicate with each other and with the instructors. All
students also have access to their own telephones, and a toll-free 800 number is available
for them to call instructors or other members of GSLIS. Students meet face-to-face when
they come to campus for a two-week on-campus introductory course at the beginning of
their program. They also meet once per course during short on-campus sessions held each
term for each class (usually 1 day per course). Student grading is usually based on
combinations of individual projects, group projects, and class participation, with work
generally "handed in" via the Web or as email attachments.

Data Collection

Students were interviewed by phone and asked how often they had given or received
information or advice about class work, with each other member of the class, and via
each of the available media. (For three of the classes, data on receiving information or
advice, and on giving it, were collected separately. In earlier work these relations were
found to be highly correlated and have been averaged into one relation.) Follow-up
questions asked students about the extent to which (1) the class worked together, (2) the
class included social interation, and (3) they felt part of the class (answered on a 5 point
scale from "never" to "throughout the whole course").

Reports of interaction were used rather than monitoring actual transactions because the
questions required the student to judge the nature of the interaction. Reports also provide
a consistent measure between means of communication that could be logged and those
that could not, e.g., between Email and face-to-face. The use of reports of interaction is
consistent with standard survey research practice (Bernard, Johnsen, Killworth, McCarty,
Shelley & Robinson, 1990). Response rates are given in Table 1.

Table 1: Response Rates

Information and Advice Networks

Using a social network perspective it is possible to build a picture of a students' "typical"
circle of contacts, i.e., their ego-centric network including: how many others they
exchange information and advice with, known as their degree; the proportion of all others
with whom they communicate, i.e., the density of the network; how frequently they
communicate with others, an indication of the strength of the tie; and which media they
use.

Degree and density provide an indication of activity in the network, i.e., the extent to
which class members are engaged in exchanging information or advice. The more
connections maintained, and the more frequently, the more exposure there is to
information circulating the network, and the more likely an individual will receive it in a
timely manner. Maximum exposure to information and ideas is achieved when there is
complete connectivity among all members of a group (a density of 1.0). However, with
large group or class sizes, such wide-spread exchange may only lead to information
overload. At present we do not know what is an "optimal" density, nor even what is a
"normal" density for a manageable collaborative learning environment. Results are
presented here as a first look at these network measures.

Across the four classes average densities range from .56 to .93., even though class
members at both ends of that range reported contact with 12 others (see Table 2). These
differences suggest that a constant factor across classes may be the number, rather than
the proportion, of others with whom an individual maintains contact (i.e., degree rather
density).

Students' networks contained 9.5 to 13 others with whom they communicate at least once
during the term, including 2-7 others with whom they maintained a stronger tie,
communicating weekly or greater. Classes that stressed group work (A97, C98, D98)
show larger networks of frequently maintained ties (5.5 to 7) than the class which gave
less emphasis to group work (B98, 2.3 ties; see Table 2). Group projects require more
interaction, and this appears to have encouraged pairs to interact frequently to share
information and advice.

Table 2: Network Size by Frequency of Communication

Frequent: weekly or greater; Moderate: at least monthly and less than weekly; Infrequent: at least once and
less than monthly.

Larger networks of frequent contacts may also account for differences in judgements of
intra-class community. Responses to each of the follow-up questions were much more
favorable for the C98 and D98 classes and more neutral for the other classes (see Table
3). However, across all respondents, the number of frequent contacts is significantly
associated only with responses regarding whether the class included social interaction (R-
square=0.13, p=.009), although it may also play some part in whether individuals felt
"part of the class" (R-square=.05, p=0.13).
Table 3: Response to Follow Up Questions

Media Use

Each class appears to have relied on one major medium for class-wide communication
connecting most members of the network. For three classes this medium was the
Webboard, used in each of these classes to a greater or lesser extent for weekly
asynchronous discussion. The other class (B98) relied mostly on IRC, using the weekly
live sessions to discuss exercises that individuals completed on their own or in
consultation with others during the week (see Figure 1).

Of the remaining media, Email was used more frequently and with more others. Email
was also used more among members of classes that stress group work (A97, C98, D98)
than for B98 where work was not completed by groups. A more in-depth analysis of A97
has shown that email was used predominantly to maintain contact with group project
members (see Haythornthwaite, 1999, under review).

The number of media used also increases with increasing frequency of communication.
Those with infrequent or only moderately frequent ties used only one medium (range
from 1.0 to 1.2 across the four classes), mostly the Webboard or IRC according to the
class norm. Those who communicated frequently used more media, with averages of 1.2
(D98), 1.5 (C98), 1.8 (B98), and 2.7 (A97) across the classes.

  Figure 1: Mean Number of Correspondents and Frequency of Communication
                           by Medium and by Class
Ego-Centric Networks

These data allow us to draw a picture of the "typical" distance student's ego-centric
network for information exchange. Students maintain more frequent contacts with more
others in classes that stressed group work, and they maintained these ties through
multiple media (Webboard and/or IRC, plus Email).Weaker ties were maintained less
frequently and through fewer media, relying mainly on class-wide contact via Webboard
or IRC.

While the number of cases here is still relatively small, the results suggest some trends
worth further examination. Group work appears to promote the maintenance of larger
circles of stronger ties, and the size of this circle is associated with socializing, an
element necessary for interpersonal bonding and the promotion of feelings of belonging
to a community. This suggests that group work may serve an important role in CSCL
classes in promoting community by having the intermediary effect of increasing the size
of close social circles. Moreover, frequent communicators are also users of more media.
This suggests the utility, if not the necessity, of having multiple means of communication
available to encourage frequent, peer-to-peer exchanges, that in turn may foster a sense of
belonging to a community.

References

Bannon, L. (1989). Issues in computer supported collaborative learning. In C. O'Malley
(Ed.) Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 267-282). Berlin: Springer-
Verlag.

Bernard, H.R., Hohnsen, E.C., Killworth, P.D. McCarty, C., Shelley, G.A., & Robinson,
S. (1990). Comparing four different methods for measuring personal social networks.
Social Networks, 12, 179-215.

Bruffee, K. A. (1993). Collaborative Learning: Higher Education, Interdependence, and
the Authority of Knowledge. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.

Cohen, W.M., & Levinthal, D.A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on
learning and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 128-152.

Crook, C. (1989). Educational practice within two local computer networks. In C.
O'Malley (Ed.) Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (pp.165-182). Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.

Dede, C. (1990). The evolution of distance learning: technology-mediated interactive
learning. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 22, 247-264.

Granovetter, M.S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78,
1360-1380.
Harasim, L., Hiltz, S.R., Teles, L., & Turoff, M. (1995). Learning Networks: A Field
Guide to Teaching and Learning Online. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Haythornthwaite, C. & Wellman, B. (1998).Work, friendship and media use for
information exchange in a networked organization. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, 46(12), 1101-1114.

Haythornthwaite, C. (1996). Social network analysis: An approach and technique for the
study of information exchange. Library and Information Science Research, 18 (4), 323-
342.

Haythornthwaite, C. (Jan., 1999a). Collaborative work networks among distributed
learners. Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
Maui, Hawaii.

Haythornthwaite, C. (Jan., 1999b). Network structures among computer-supported
distance learners: Multiple relations, multiple media, and time. Paper presented at the
ALISE conference, Philadelphia, PA.

Kaye, A. (1995). Computer supported collaborative learning. In N. Heap, R. Thomas, G.
Einon, R. Mason, & H. MacKay (Eds.), Information Technology and Society (pp. 192-
210). London: Sage.

Koschmann, T. (Ed.) (1996). CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.

Wellman, B., & Berkowitz, S.D. (Eds.) (1998). Social Structures: A Network Approach,
2nd Ed. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Authors' addresses

Caroline Haythornthwaite (mailto:haythorn@uiuc.edu)
Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, 501 East Daniel, Champaign, IL, 61820. Tel. (217) 244-7453. Fax
(217)244-3302.
