Collaboration and Learning in Immersive Virtual
Environments
Randolph L. Jackson, William Winn

College of Education, University of Washington

      Abstract: We are investigating collaboration and learning in immersive
      virtual environments. Preliminary studies of 110 sixth and ninth grade
      students have been conducted where students worked in pairs while
      investigating the concept of global warming within a fully immersive, 3-
      D, virtual reality based model of Seattle called Global Change World
      (GCW). Field research being conducted during June of 1999 is expanding
      on these preliminary studies by seeking to identify differences in science
      concept learning between solitary users, paired-peer users, and agent-
      guided users interacting within the GCW virtual learning environment
      (VLE).We have observed that most students thoroughly enjoy their
      experiences with GCW. It is also apparent that peer collaboration plays a
      significant role in regards to the level of student engagement within the
      VLE. Therefore, we believe that the potential for GCW to facilitate
      valuable collaborative learning experiences in conjunction with more
      traditional classroom activities is great. Our continuing research is
      intended to focus more closely on the impact of both peer and expert-
      novice collaboration on the preconceived or "naive" scientific concepts
      held by students. The paper that follows describes our research to date,
      and will be amended to include the methods and results of our research-in-
      progress.

      Keywords: conceptual change, multi-user virtual environments, virtual
      reality

Introduction

The application of virtual reality (VR) to the educational process is becoming more
commonplace, with large numbers of students of all ages experiencing virtual
environments (VEs) in educational settings. For example, Youngblut (1998) identifies
over forty examples of VR applications that are specifically designed to support learning.
These learning experiences can come in many forms, from virtual worlds created via
VRML to fully immersive VEs that utilize stereoscopic headmounted display systems.
Moreover, with ever-increasing computational processing power, the rapid growth of the
World Wide Web, and the ongoing construction of a digital communications
infrastructure, the creation of distributed fully immersive, multi-participant VEs running
on the Internet are on the technological horizon. Given the growing interest in distance
learning and distributed education among educators, it is fair to assume that many fully
immersive, multi-participant, educational VEs will come on line as the technology
becomes less expensive and more readily available.

Most educational applications of VR are designed to make use of its unique features.
These features provide opportunities for students to gain a greater understanding of
abstract concepts through the creation of visual metaphors or representations and the
ability to scale and manipulate these representations. Working with these representations
allows students to investigate relationships between objects in VEs which are unbounded
by distance, time, or safety concerns. Designers of educational VEs believe that students
retain, master and generalize new knowledge better when given the opportunity to
become actively involved in constructing that knowledge through a coherent, firsthand
interaction with knowledge domain representations (Winn, 1993).

As it becomes possible to place more than one student within a VE, questions arise
regarding the potential impact of collaboration on learning. The purpose of this paper is
to report the progress of a proof-of-concept project which is being conducted by members
of the University of Washingtonís College of Education and the Learning Center at the
Human Interface Technology Laboratory (HITL) at the University of Washington.
Funded by a grant from the UW Royalty Research Fund, this project seeks to investigate
the nature of peer collaboration within VEs. We describe an investigation that looked at
how easily school children adapted to working together towards the ultimate goal of
developing and testing hypotheses regarding environmental factors that affect climate
change in a VE designed for use in science education.

Background

Arriving at an understanding of exactly how to use immersive VR to support the teaching
and learning of abstract concepts continues to be a challenging and elusive goal for
researchers of virtual learning environments (VLEs). The potential for VR to benefit
education is widely recognized and a number of studies have been conducted that have
demonstrated a capability to teach content using VR under certain prescribed conditions
(e.g. Byrne, 1996; Dede, 1995; McLellan, 1996; Osberg, 1997; Winn, 1997; Youngblut,
1998). A significant challenge, however, remains in fusing of the affordances of VLEs
and educational methods of exploiting them into a demonstrable theory of learning for
VR.

Zeltzer (1992) refers to the three attributes of autonomy, presence, and interaction in
describing the affordances VR provides. Autonomy refers to the notion that a virtual
environment (VE) is to some extent capable of performing its own actions, independent
of user intervention. An autonomous VE follows its own path to goals and may or may
not change course in response to user actions. Presence is simply the experience the user
has of being in a real place when immersed within a VE. Zeltzer claims that for presence
to be high, the user must be allowed to interact with the VE both naturally and intuitively;
when presence is high the computer interface disappears. Finally, interaction involves the
ability of the user to perform actions in the VE according to a logical rationale. Even
though the user may have to learn how to function appropriately within the environment,
the laws that govern the VE should become apparent over time, allowing for a
meaningful interactive experience.

Most educational applications for VR are designed to make use of these and other unique
features and affordances. Other affordances include: 1. Allowing students to gain a
greater understanding of abstract concepts through the creation of visual metaphors, 2.
Allowing students to directly manipulate and scale virtual objects or environments for
clearer understandings, and 3. Allowing students to visit places and interact with events
that distance, time, or safety concerns would normally prohibit (Winn, 1993, Youngblut,
1998). Designers of VLEs tend to believe that students retain, master and generalize new
knowledge better when given the opportunity to become actively involved in constructing
that knowledge through a coherent, firsthand interaction with knowledge domain
representations.

Much of the appeal for applying VR in education is derived from the observations of
educational theorists like Bruner (1986) and Piaget (1929) who have long stressed the
value of actualizing learning through making it more real for students. VR technology
allows for the creation of a VLEs where students can learn by interacting with virtual
objects similar to how they would interact with real objects. Through immersion in a VE,
students become a part of the phenomena that surround them. Learning is facilitated
through the construction of concepts built from the intuitions that arise out of their direct
experience of the environment. More recently, research (Clancey, 1993; Bricken, 1990)
has supported the notion that VLEs, by their very nature, increase the human capacity for
certain types of learning by allowing users to cross the boundary between third and first
person experience, negating the need for a highly abstract symbol system. In traditional
education, learning the symbol system of a particular knowledge domain is often a
prerequisite to learning its content, as in the case of mathematics or music (Winn, 1993).
The problem with this type of learning is that mastery of the symbol system can often be
mistaken for mastery of the content, and teaching may end well before students make the
link between the two.

First person, or direct, interaction within a VE allows students to construct knowledge out
of their own experience without relying on symbol systems. This concept of knowledge
construction among learners is more generally referred to as constructivism (Duffy &
Jonassen, 1992). Self-constructed knowledge is highly individualized and may represent
an improvement over similar knowledge learned by other methods because the learners
shape the learning experience themselves. In other words, instead of relying on third-
person instructor or text-based accounts of how things occur in the world, students
immersed within VLEs can directly experience and interact with the concepts, principles,
rules, and procedures found in the domain. VLEs designed from the constructivist
approach are seen by some as having great potential for providing powerful learning
experiences (Bricken, 1990).

Constructivism has entertained a long history in education and philosophy and is
representative of a wide diversity of views that may be summed up in the following
points: 1. Learning is an active process of constructing rather than acquiring knowledge,
and 2. Instruction is a process of supporting that construction rather than communicating
knowledge (Duffy & Cunningham, 1996). While constructivism is seen to imply that
there is a tangible world, it argues that it is individuals who impose meaning on that
world. Consequently, there can be many meanings or perspectives for any event or
concept and the goal of education can no longer be one of instilling an absolute, correct
meaning (Duffy & Jonassen, 1992). More importantly, constructivism brings with it the
underlying assumption of a learner-centered approach to instruction. Constructivist
arguments are often used to defend the design and implementation of VLEs.

Traditionally, most VLEs have placed a single student within the VE. However, as the
technology becomes available educators are becoming interested in investigating the
potential for collaborative learning in VEs. There has been considerable research on the
value of collaborative learning. OíMalley (1995) found that much of the research on
collaborative learning has evolved from the works of Piaget (1985) and Vygotsky (1978).
Crook (1994), for example, views peer collaboration as having three basic cognitive
benefits; articulation, conflict, and co-construction. According to Crook, peer
collaboration forces students to make their ideas explicit and public. To do so, they need
to learn to clearly articulate their opinions, predictions, and interpretations. Conflict may
arise when students disagree in regards to their interpretations. To resolve the conflict
engendered by collaboration, they must justify and defend their positions and are thus
forced into reflection. Piaget (1985) offered a similar view, noting that socio-cognitive
conflict often arises when students holding inadequate or differing views work
collaboratively. As these differing views are sorted out, students are forced to reflect
upon their own conceptions. Crookís concept of co-construction is based upon
Vygotskyís (1978) belief that learning is the sharing of meaning in a social context.
Students collaboratively co-construct shared knowledge and understanding by building
upon each otherís ideas. Given the ability of VLEs to support multi-participant activities,
it is easy to see why educators are very interested in examining the potential for using
them to support collaborative learning.

Global Change World

Global Change World (GCW) is a VLE that was designed and programmed by the
Learning Center of the Human Interface Technology Lab (HITL) on the University of
Washington campus. The GCW environment is created by two networked Hewlett-
Packard 9000 workstations running DVISE VR software. Hardware manufactured by
Division provides the physical user-interface and consists of an audio/visual rendering
system connected to a headmounted display helmet (HMD), a navigation and control
wand, and a position tracking system. GCW is capable of supporting peer collaboration
by allowing more than one student to be immersed and interactive within the same VE at
the same time.

In GCW, student pairs enter a virtual model of Seattle in the current year. They are able
to navigate their way around the world using the wand while viewing the world through
the stereoscopic HMD. Within the world, the virtual representation of each of the
participants appears to the other as a cartoonish pair of large eyes, spiral ears, a
triangular-shaped mouth, and a singular cyber hand with which they can manipulate
objects. In addition, students are able to speak to and hear each other by means of an
intercom system that is built into the HMD. In order to perform tasks within GCW,
students access a virtual tool kit that allows them to measure air temperature, amount of
greenhouse gasses in parts per million, and yearly rainfall. They are able to adjust such
variables as the amount of green plant biomass as symbolized by trees, the number of
factories, and the number of automobiles present in the world. After making
measurements and adjustments, they can then use a "time portal" to go to a selected year
in the future and repeat their measurements in order to determine the impact of their
actions on the climate of the future.

In preliminary studies, GCW has been taken to College Place Elementary School in
Edmonds, Washington, and Redmond Junior High School in Redmond, Washington
where a total of 110 students have participated in collaborative VLE activities. Through
these visits we hoped to gather information concerning the educational effectiveness of
employing a multi-participant VE as a science education tool. Our subjects were eighteen
11 and 12 year-old boys and girls (9 female, 9 male) from a single sixth-grade class and
ninety-two 14 and 15 year-old boys and girls (47 female, 45 male) from three ninth-grade
class sections. Differences in navigation and general task performance abilities between
the older students and the younger students did not appear to be substantial.

Our first task was simply to familiarize the students with the interface, scientific
measuring tasks, and basic nature of GCW. The goal of this first phase of the GCW peer
collaboration investigation was to observe and record the student interactions with each
other in both world navigation and in performing specific tasks. As noted earlier, the
HMDs were fitted with microphones so that the students could speak to each other from
within the world. This allowed the students to communicate with each other in their
normal voice and appeared to improve communication, facilitate collaboration and
enhance feelings of presence. Each student pair spent an average of 20 minutes in GCW.

Results

Upon exiting GCW, students were given a nine-question survey that employed a Likert-
type scale. The questionnaire asked them to rate the quality of their experiences within
the VE. The results of the survey indicated that the students found the experience to be
highly enjoyable and most students said they would like to repeat the experience. About
5% of the students reported malaise (dizziness or disorientation). A few students reported
problems with using the wand and seeing clearly in the HMD. Ratings of presence were
high for most respondents.

Clearly, the overwhelming majority of students thoroughly enjoyed their experience with
GCW and most of the students felt highly immersed within the VE. It was apparent that
peer collaboration played a significant role in regards to the level of student engagement
within the VE. The ability of the students to speak clearly to each other while in the VE
seemed to greatly facilitate peer collaboration. Many pairs of students were highly
communicative. As they navigated through the world or performed the requested tasks,
they were engaged in near constant conversation regarding where to go, what to do next,
and how to do things.

Observation revealed substantial peer collaboration among almost all pairings of
students, though some pairs needed initial prompting and encouragement to begin
conversing with their partner. Expert/expert pairs of females, who were comfortable with
the interface, were the most vocally communicative. Novice/expert and novice/novice
pairings of all gender combinations were somewhat less communicative. Expert/expert
male pairings appeared to involve more action, such as racing, but still incorporated a
significant amount of conversation, as well as the inclusion of vocal "sound-effects" that
were related to actions being made, particularly among the younger students.

Male/female expert/expert pairings, as well as male/female expert/novice parings,
resulted in what appeared to be a more self-reflective, thinking out loud style of
conversation with the experts doing far more talking. These pairs would play hide-and-
seek, in the case of experts, or simply try to keep track of each other by talking about
what they were seeing. Most groups developed strategies for finding each other by
identifying prominent landmarks and agreeing to meet at them. Some individuals picked
up and carried large brightly colored objects, such as cars or boats, and waved them
around or carried them along with them so the other at a distance could see them.

Though students can fly through the world with their hand controller, many of them were
physically active as well. Many students were observed to be pointing at virtual objects
with their free hand in the real world while talking to their companion in the virtual
world. Several students were quite surprised that they had walked almost halfway across
the room when we removed the HMD; they had assumed that they stood fairly still while
they were flying around the VE. The students who were the most at ease with the
interface were the most animated in their physical movements while immersed within
GCW.

A number of students found GCW to be easy to use and made full use of the tools
provided. These subjects quickly mastered navigational skills and the use of the
environment measuring tools that allowed them to view the VEís current temperature, the
amount of greenhouse gases present, and the amount of annual rainfall. While in the
world, they were instructed on the use of the wheels controlling the quantity of the VE
variables of cars, factories, and biomass. These students flew through the time portal,
time and time again, in efforts to determine what the impacts of their changes would be
and test theories regarding what changing the variables would do to the environment over
time. These students typically rated the experience highly and reported a strong sensation
of immersion.

Other students, however, had more difficulty mastering the use of the environmental tool
kit and in trying to come up with theories for future environmental outcomes based upon
changes made to the variables. Some dyads never got to the point of being comfortable
enough with the interface to successfully investigate the environmental research elements
of GCW. Those who did often disagreed on the expected outcomes. Time, as well as the
scope of this preliminary study, did not allow us to perform a further investigation into
the existence or nature of hypothesis generation and testing within GCW. We do know
that the students were highly motivated, very willing to work in pairs, interested in
exploring virtual space, and capable of performing investigative tasks within GCW.
Further research that focuses more closely on the impact of peer collaboration on
preconceived or "naive" scientific concepts and the possible conceptual change inspired
by collaboration within GCW is planned and data collection will be underway throughout
1999.

Concluding Remarks

While the potential for VR to facilitate collaborative learning experiences appears to be
great, much more research is needed before effective collaborative learning strategies can
be developed. It is anticipated that these strategies will vary, depending on the kind of
educational experience desired and the learning environment employed. However, for
this potential to be realized, designers of hardware, software, and instruction must make
sure that it is easy for multiple participants to collaboratively navigate and perform within
VEs. This requires improvements of today's input devices including improvements in
spatialized audio systems, less cumbersome HMDs, simpler wands, and the eventual
introduction of haptic (force feedback) devices. The need for these technical advances is
essential, considering that the networking of multi-participant, collaborative virtual
environments appears to represent a significant trend for future applications of VR both
within and outside of the educational domain.

Bibliography

Bricken, W. (1990). Learning in virtual reality (HITL Memo No. M-90-5). Seattle, WA:
Human Interface Technology Laboratory. [Available as online HTML document:
http://www.hitl.washington.edu/publications/m-90-5].

Bruner, J. (1986). Actual Minds, Possible Worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Byrne, C. M. (1996). Water on Tap: The Use of Virtual Reality as an Educational Tool.
Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.

Clancey, W.J. (1993). Situated action: A neuropsychological interpretation: Response to
Vera and Simon. Cognitive Science, 17, 87-116.

Crook, C. (1994). Computers and the collaborative experiences of learning. London:
Routledge.

Dede, C. (1995). The Evolution of Constructivist Learning Environments: Immersion in
Distributed, Virtual Worlds. Educational Technology, 35(5), 46-52.
Duffy, T. M., & Cunningham, D. J. (1996). Constructivism: Implications for the Design
and Delivery of Instruction. In D. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of Research for Educational
Communications and Technology . New York, NY: Simon & Shuster Macmillan.

Duffy, T. M., & Jonassen, D. H. (1992). Constructivism: New Implications for
Instructional Technology. In T. M. Duffy & D. H. Jonassen (Eds.), Constructivism and
the technology of instruction : A conversation . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

McLellan, H. (1996). Virtual Realities. In D. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of Research for
Educational Communications and Technology . New York, NY: Simon & Shuster
Macmillan.

OíMalley, C. (Ed.)(1995). Computer supported collaborative learning. New York:
Springer-Verlag.

Osberg, K. M. (1997). Constructivism in Practice: The Case for Meaning-making in the
Virtual World. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.

Piaget, J. (1929). The Child's Conception of the World. New York, NY: Harcourt &
Brace.

Piaget, J. (1985). The equilibration of cognitive structure. Chicago: Chicago University
Press.

Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological
processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Winn, W. (1993). A conceptual basis for educational applications of virtual reality.
(HITL Technical Report No. TR-93-9). Seattle, WA: Human Interface Technology
Laboratory. [Available as online HTML document:
http://www.hitl.washington.edu/publications/r-93-9].

Winn, W. (1997). The Impact of Three-Dimensional Immersive Virtual Environments on
Modern Pedagogy. HIT Lab Technical Report R-97-15. Seattle: Human Interface
Technology Laboratory.

Youngblut, C. (1998). Educational uses of virtual reality technology. Alexandria, VA:
Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA Document D-2128).

Zeltzer, D. (1992). Autonomy, interaction, and presence. Presence, 1, 127-132.
Authors' addresses

Randolph L. Jackson (ranjack@u.washington.edu)
University of Washington, College of Education; 10612 176th Ct. NE; Redmond,
Washington 98052.

William Winn (billwinn@u.washington.edu)
University of Washington, College of Education; Box 353600; Seattle, Washington
98195.
