An analysis of learner arguments in a collective learning
environment
Patrick Jermann, Pierre Dillenbourg
TECFA, University of Geneva, Switzerland

   Abstract: This contribution analyses the arguments of students in a learning activity
   entitled "Argue Graph". This activity is intended to make students understand the
   relationship between learning theories and design choices in courseware development.
   The analysis of arguments is centered on the effects of discussion and opinion conflict on
   the elaboration of arguments. We then use an adaptation of a collective intelligence
   model to describe the knowledge flow among people and artifacts during the learning
   activity. Finally, the representations produced by the system, used by students to write a
   synthesis and by the teacher to debrief the class are analysed in relation to metacognition.
   We propose to consider these representations as metacognitive tools which structure the
   learning activity.

   Keywords: constructivism, distributed intelligence, shared knowledge

Introduction

TECFA virtual campus relies on design principles drawn from our five-years experience in
teaching with Internet. Its audience are 20 students participating to our master in educational
technology. They attend courses for one week at the University and then work remotely for 5 to
7 weeks using a combination of media (e-mail, discussion groups, MOOs, phone,...).

While most web-based university training is restricted to presenting texts and multimedia
documents, our design focuses on learning activities which mediate and organise the access of
students to resources. We follow constructivist principles by providing the students with the
opportunity to process/produce the knowledge to be acquired instead of simply absorbing it.
Although the activities in the TECFA virtual campus rely on Internet tools, they concern both
distance teaching and presential interactions.

Designing learning activities is relatively easy when the learning goal is an activity itself. For
instance, we teach our students how to program with Authorware by asking them to go through a
large set of programming exercises. However, when acquiring declarative knowledge (principles,
theories, laws, concepts,...) the learning task cannot simply be derived from the task to be
mastered.

Therefore we have implemented various learning activities that support the acquisition of
declarative knowledge. They follow a similar scenario. Students first complete a task not directly
related to the target knowledge to be acquired. While they do so, the system records their activity
and then produces a synthetic graphical representation of their performance. Finally, the teacher
uses this representation to debrief the class. He turns students' experiential knowledge into
academic knowledge by putting labels on new concepts and by structuring the outcome. We
introduced the notion of pseudo-task to refer to a task which is not the skill to be mastered, but
which produces learning by experience. The synthesis provided by the system represents the
students as a collectivity. "Collective" differs from "collaborative" due to the fact that it does not
necessarily imply rich interactions among students. Simply, the system collects individual
productions or data and makes them available for the whole group. Collective representations
bring the social plane into the frame of reference used during the debriefing session. (Jermann,
Dillenbourg & Brouze, 1999).

This contribution concerns a learning activity entitled "Argue Graph". We first describe the steps
which compose it. We then propose an analysis of arguments produced by students during the
activity. In the discussion, we use an adaptation of a collective intelligence model (Smith, 1994)
to describe the knowledge flow among people and artifacts during the learning activity. We will
finally have a closer look at the representations produced by the system, used by students to
write a synthesis and by the teacher to debrief the class.

Description of the "Argue Graph" activity

The goal of the "Argue Graph" activity is to make students understand the relationship between
learning theories (e.g. constructivism, behaviorism,...) and design choices in courseware
development.

The scenario consists of six steps:

   1.  Students fill in a questionnaire concerning design choices in courseware development
       (See subsection 'Coding Example' for an example). There are no wrong or correct
       answers but questions reflect different teaching styles and theoretical backgrounds that
       the teacher wants to address.

   2.  The choices made at step 1 are then transformed into two scores reflecting whether
       students privilege system- vs. user-driven interactions on the one hand and a discovery
       vs. teaching based pedagogy on the other hand. The system draws a scatter plot on the
       basis of these scores and represents each student's position (Figure 1). The rule used to
       transform answers into scores was not subject to a formal scaling. The purpose of scores
       is not to diagnose real teaching styles but rather to provide a basis for the rest of the
       activity.

   3.  Pairs are formed so as to maximise distances between students' positions on the graph.
       Then pairs fill in the same questionnaire. While filling in the questionnaire, they see the
       arguments they gave to support their answers in the individual phase. They have to agree
       on a common answer and provide a common argument.

   4.  The system produces a synthesis and a scatterplot representing the "migration" of each
       student from his initial position to the common position. The synthesis lists the individual
       and common arguments given for each question and draws a pie chart with the
       distribution of answers. Finally, a brief statement presents the relationship between
       underlying theories and the options the students can select in a question.

   5.  During this debriefing phase, the teacher reviews all arguments produced by individuals
       and pairs and articulates them with respect to the various theoretical frameworks in the
       domain.
   6.  Finally, students get some homework. They have to analyse the answers to one of the
       questions including thereby theoretical stakes and their own opinion.

This scenario takes 4 hours to complete (without step 6).

 Figure 1: Scatterplot of individual answers. The students' position in the graph represent their
 teaching style, as inferred from their answers. The horizontal axis opposes system vs. learner
 driven interaction. The vertical axis opposes discovery based learning vs. teaching. Names of
              students have been removed from this figure for confidentiality.

Research question

Our experience reveals a high degree of learner involvement during all steps which indicates that
this pedagogical scenario works well. However, the tool was not subject to a formal evaluation
procedure. Nevertheless, we collected all answers and arguments in order to grasp learning
mechanisms. Namely, we investigate the differences between individual answers and pairs
answers.

Subjects

We ran two pre-experiments, with 15 students in 1997 and 17 students in 1998 respectively, after
which the system was improved with regard to various functionalities. The experiment reported
here was run in October 1998 with 18 students. Most students were located in the same quarter
of the graph (Figure 1). This phenomenon is probably due to the fact that the questions did too
clearly reflect the pedagogical values sponsored at TECFA and did not take into account the
technical or financial dimensions of courseware development.
Variables

From now on, we will designate the first time students answer as `solo' condition and the second
time as `duo' condition. Since students answer twice to the same questionnaire, we have the
opportunity to examine what differentiates answers given alone and in pairs. In these
experiments, subjects seat next to each other in front of the machine. We did not record their
discussion (this will be done in the next experiment). Hence, the analysis is restricted to their
answers, i.e. the answer selected and the arguments introduced into the system to justify this
choice. We describe these answers with three variables:

Category of argument (solo and duo):

   ·   Accept: the argument provided supports the option selected, e.g. "I choose option 2
       because it makes the learner autonomous".

   ·   Discard: the argument rejects another option, e.g. "I choose option 2 because option 3 is
       too heavy to implement".

   ·   Condition: the argument states some conditions for the option selected, e.g. "I choose
       option 2 if the learner is very young".

Degree of elaboration of argument (solo and duo):

   ·   Justification: the argument contains at least one idea not present in the phrasing of the
       selected option.

   ·   Reformulation: the argument does not contain an idea not present in the selected option.

Semantic relation between solo arguments and duo argument:

   ·   Union: the duo argument contains the ideas stated by both solo arguments.

   ·   Victory: the duo argument contains the ideas of one of the solo arguments.

   ·   New: the duo argument contains an idea which is not present in either solo arguments.

Coding example

Table 1 illustrates the usage of this coding scheme for the solo and duo answers of one pair at
question 1. Questions 1 is:

In a courseware, when a student makes an error, it is better to:

   1.  Tell the student he made a mistake and give him the correct answer.

   2.  Tell the student he made a mistake and give him an indication towards the correct
       answer.

   3.  Show the student a blinking icon which allows him to ask the tutor for help.

   4.  Give the student some time to find out the mistake by himself"
Table 1: Coding example

Con flict Op tio n    Argument (we translate)                                               Code

    2              SO If he is directly given the correct answer, he might not remember it, if we L don't say anything, he might not be aware of his error... The help icon is O certainly a good solution, if one can see clearly that it gives help and that 1 it appears only on errors. D1J +D4J +C3J

                   SO
    3              LO Trade-off between paternalism and neo liberalism                      A3J
                   2

YES 3              DU It allows him to ask for help when he needs it.O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NewA3JContent

The first solo argument (SOLO1) shows a combination of several types of arguments: options 1
and 4 are discarded and options 3 is accepted conditionally. Notice that option 2, which is the
actual choice of the student, is not addressed explicitly by the corresponding argument.
Arguments with this level of complexity are quite rare, for most of the arguments were coded
with a single category and degree of elaboration, like it is the case for the second solo argument
(SOLO2). All three arguments were considered as `Justifications' because they contain new ideas
with regard to the option stated in the question. The duo argument is `New' with respect to the
semantic content, because it introduces the idea of the learner's autonomy which was not stated
as such in the solo arguments.

Results

The system collected 180 solo answers and 90 duo answers to the questionnaire respectively.
Some answers were incomplete, for instance when a student made a choice without providing an
argument. The valid cases remaining for the analysis are 166 solo arguments and 67 duo
arguments. The arguments were coded once by the two authors of this contribution and we did
not use a second judge to validate the coding. Yet, most of the coding was straightforward.

Conflicts does occur

For 52% of the duo answers there was a conflict between the two solos answers. In other words,
the method used to form pairs was rather effective. There is some relation between the distance
in the graph and the frequency of conflict (the five pairs with a distance of 1 have a disagreement
rate of 38%, while the pairs with a larger distance have a disagreement rate of 52.5%), but the
size of the sample is not sufficient to compute a correlation rate.

These situations are of particular interest with respect to collaborative interaction because they
enable socio-cognitive conflict (Doise & Mugny, 1981): a social conflict (having a different
perspective) has to be solved through a cognitive coordination of the points of view. However,
further studies showed that conflict is neither a necessary, nor a sufficient condition for cognitive
change. Beyond the intensity of conflict, it is the verbalisation necessary to solve the conflict
which seems related to learning effects (Blaye, 1988; Butterworth, 1982). The role of
verbalisation in learning is confirmed by the work on reciprocal teaching (Brown & Palincsar,
1989) and on self-explanation (Chi & al.,1989).

The category of arguments varies between solo and duo conditions

Table 2 presents categories of arguments for the solo and duo conditions. We computed three
proportion tests to compare the solo and duo conditions. The proportion of `Accept' arguments is
similar in both conditions even if significantly higher in the solo condition (p < .05). It appears
that the proportion of `Discard' arguments in the solo phase is higher than in the duo phase (p <
.05). The proportion of `Condition' arguments is higher in the duo phase than it is in the solo
phase (p < .05). We will comment on the `Condition' arguments when examining the effect of
conflict on duo arguments.

Table 2: Category of arguments across Solo and Duo conditions

                                           Solo    %    Duo          %        u

Category ofargument        Accept          136     82   51           76       0.048

                           Condition       8       5    12           18       0.034

                           Discard         22      13   4            6        0.037

                                           166     100  67           100

The degree of elaboration of arguments varies between solo and duo conditions

Table 3 presents the degree of elaboration of the arguments for the solo and duo conditions. The
proportion of `Reformulation' is very high in the solo phase (more than half of the answers are
simple reformulations of the choices proposed in the question). This proportion is much lower in
the duo phase (p < .05). We interpret this difference as follows. When answering alone, students
had no reason to make the effort to justify their choice with an elaborated argument even if they
elaborated one in their head. In pairs, the discussion which was necessary to agree on an
argument seems to force students to make it explicit and to elaborate it. This interesting
observation confirms the usefulness of this method. The difference could however also be due to
the fact that student feel obliged to be produce a more elaborated answer when they answer for
the second time to the same question.
Table 3: Degree of elaboration of the arguments across Solo and Duo conditions

                                                                      Solo  %   Duo %     u

Degree of elaboration of theargument       Justification              72    43  57  0.42  0.059

                                           Reformulation              94    57  10  0.42  0.060

                                                                      166   100 67

The category of duo arguments varies according to conflict

Let us now look at the duo arguments. Because we designed the learning activity in order to
create conflicts, we focus the analysis around the variable of conflict to see if it has an influence
on the category and degree of elaboration of the arguments.

Overall, there is not one student who wins all conflicts to the detriment of his colleague. For each
AB pair, we counted the number of times that AB's duo answer corresponds to A's previous solo
answer, versus the times it corresponds to B's previous solo answer. We thereby observe that
pairs are rather symmetrical, the difference ranging between 0 and 2, with the exception of 2
pairs.

Table 4 presents the category of duo arguments for situations with and without conflict. In both
cases `Accept' arguments are predominant, students give an argument which directly supports
their common choice. `Condition' arguments are interesting because they violate the instructions
given to the students: they were asked to choose only one possible option and to give an
argument supporting it. This way of proceeding corresponds to the production of `Accept'
arguments. Paradoxically, the `Condition' arguments match the underlying pedagogical goals of
the activity better than the `Accept' type. It is the goal for the students to discover that there is
not only one correct theory in courseware design but that each design choice depends on specific
contextual features.

All but one of the `Condition' arguments are given in a conflictual situation where students have
to defend their choice against another's opinion. The production of this category of argument is a
way to solve the conflict by complexifying the argument. Indeed, establishing `if..then..else'
constructions allows to make concessions to the loser of the conflict.

Unfortunately we cannot compute a reliable Chi-square test to validate these observations.
Table 4: Conflict and type of arguments

                      Duo type of argument

                      Accept        Condition       Discard     Total

Conflict       NO     28            1               3           32

               YES    23            11              1           35

Total                 51            12              4           67

The semantic relation between solo and duo arguments varies according to conflict

The semantic relation between solo and duo arguments relates to conflict as can be seen in Table
5. When there is no conflict, students often take the arguments they gave in the solo phase and
put them together to produce a `Union' argument. The production of a `Victory' argument
corresponds to the pair choosing one of the two arguments and use it as duo argument.

When there is a conflict between the choices students made in the solo phase, the `New' and
`Victory' arguments are more numerous. A `Victory' in this context corresponds to one student
winning the conflict on both aspects of the answer: the choice and the argument. The production
of `New' arguments can be understood as a way to handle the conflict. Even if the choice of one
student is chosen by the pair, the 'New' argument has no relation with previous solo arguments.
Interestingly, 9 out of 12 `Condition' arguments given in the duo phase are at the same time
`New' arguments.

Table 5: Conflict and Semantic relation between solo arguments and duo argument

(X2= 6.136, p = .047)         Relation between solo and duo arguments

                              New                Union             Victory                     Total

Conflict      NO              6                  16                10                          32

              YES             14                 8                 13                          35

Total                         20                 24                23                          67

Discussion

Answering together to the questionnaire had an impact on the degree of elaboration of arguments
(Reformulation vs. Justification) produced by the students. The duo arguments are more
elaborated than the solo arguments. We propose that the reason for this change is that students
make their opinions explicit and thereby more elaborated during the discussion. The category of
arguments (Accept vs. Discard vs. Condition) also varies across solo and duo conditions.
`Discard' arguments are more frequent in the solo condition while `Condition' arguments are
more frequent in the duo condition.
In the duo condition, half of the cases are conflictual, i.e. students did not make the same choice
in the solo condition. `Condition' arguments appear mostly in a conflictual situation. There is
also an increased production of semantically 'New' arguments. We interpret that the production
these arguments results from a strategy intended to solve the conflict more fairly than by a
`Victory' of one of the students. It also indicates that students produce knowledge and explore
the domain.

Furthering our study, we propose to broaden the analysis by using a distributed cognition
approach. The central idea of the distributed cognition approach is that our object of
investigation is no more restricted to `knowledge in the head' as it was in the case of traditional
cognitive science, but includes several agents and the artifacts they use to mediate their activity.
Authors like Hutchins (1995) and Smith (1994) analysed the ongoing activity in a system by
observing the knowledge flow among different artifacts. As Nardi (1996) points out, there is also
a particular interest in the analysis of external and internal representations and of the
transformations they undergo when travelling through the system.

We will now describe the learning activity presented above from two viewpoints, knowledge
flow and external representations.

Knowledge flow model

Smith (1994) proposes a model of collective intelligence restricted to collaborative groups of 3 to
30 individuals working together for a long period of time to build an intellectual product. He
presents a knowledge typology based on the information's persistence of display, i.e how long
knowledge can be viewed on a particular medium (See also Dillenbourg & al., 1997). Tangible
knowledge is persistent and manipulated by individuals. It comprises the final product (called
`target product') and `instrumental products' which support the group's work towards the target
but are not part of it. Intangible knowledge is not physically accessible and constitutes the shared
and private knowledge people have in mind. Ephemeral products which temporarily take a
physical form lie between these two types of knowledge. These allow the transformation of
knowledge from one type into the other by the contributions of several members of the group. A
semi-persistent media is associated to this type of knowledge. We now attempt to use the same
terminology to describe the transformations the knowledge undergoes in the learning activity
described above.
 Figure 2: Knowledge flow and types in the Argue-Graph learning activity, adapted from Smith
(1994). P=Private; S=Shared; I=Instrumental; T=Target. Numbers represent steps in the activity.

During steps 1 and 2, private intangible knowledge becomes shared through the mediation of an
ephemeral representation. According to Smith's model, ephemeral knowledge is built by the
people themselves. In our case, the system produces a collective representation of the
individuals' opinions (Figure 1). Since this representation is accessible to everyone, the students'
opinions are already shared to some extent. Students don't know the detailed positions of each of
their colleagues but they get an overview of the diversity of opinions. We have labelled this
collective representation with the term `social'.

In step 3, the passage between private and shared knowledge is more fine grained than in step 1
and 2 because two students have to explicit and discuss their specific choices. There is no
physical intermediate representation mediating the transformation of private to shared
knowledge. But the questionnaire the students fill in contains the answers and arguments they
gave at step 1 and they can rely on these informations to structure their discussion. Smith's model
does not include collaborative interactions between two persons. According to Smith's typology
the knowledge produced during the argumentative process is not observable and should be
labelled intangible. Nevertheless, we propose to add an inter-individual ephemeral knowledge
type to refer to the process of discussion, which mediates the passage between private and shared
knowledge.

Step 4 consists in an instrumental representation. It is persistent and will be used to produce
target knowledge. It shows all the arguments and the answers to the questionnaire in a tangible
manner accessible to everyone.

Step 5 transforms the instrumental knowledge into private intangible knowledge. The teacher
uses the instrumental knowledge produced by the system in step 4 to debrief the class. He
reorganises the arguments and puts `scientific' labels on them.

Step 6 is individual and transforms intangible private knowledge students have acquired during
the debriefing into tangible target knowledge: students have to choose one of the questions from
step 1 and write a short synthesis containing related theoretical stakes and their personal opinion.
Students intensively used the instrumental knowledge from step 4 to compose their synthesis.

It appears in the model we just described that the knowledge to be acquired stems from a
construction where students take an active role. Most of the arguments in favour or against the
learning theories appear in the answers given by the students. Knowledge is mediated by various
artefacts like graphs, discussions, syntheses. The level of interaction between people also varies
from dyadic argumentation to group discussion during the debriefing. Can we deduce that the
richer the environment and the interactions it supports, the better the learning? It is certainly not
this trivial but the redundancy of information (Hutchins, 1991) may play a positive role in
knowledge acquisition.

Collective representations as a support for learning

Nickerson (1993) addresses the question whether a group of people have metaknowlege.
Metacognition has multiple meanings, ranging from the knowledge an individual has of his own
mental activity to action regulation and control processes, for instance planification of the
activity, supervision of the effects of actions. Finally, metacognition also comprises conception
an intuitions the subjects has about the situation he's in (Schoenfeld, 1987).

We used Nickerson's hypothesis on group metacognition as a starting point for the design of
several pedagogical scenarios with the common goal to acquire declarative knowledge. The
"Argue Graph" activity described in the beginning of this paper is one of those. Some other
activities also use representations of students' performance in a pseudo-task. In the "ergonomics
laboratory" a bar chart illustrates measures of students' performance when using the six
interfaces (number of errors, time,...). In the "Multiple choice questionnaires defects" activity, a
scatter plot illustrates the mismatch between the students' self-evaluation of their competence in
a domain and the real scores they get. A detailed description of these activities can be found in
Jermann, Dillenbourg & Brouze (op. cit.).

The collective representations we described present various aspects of differentiation (either
between interfaces or between self-evaluation and score or between opinions). We have
interpreted the efforts to understand the differences that appear in the representation of
performances as being a major source of learning in a previous contribution (Jermann,
Dillenbourg & Brouze, op. cit.).

These collective representations and syntheses give a trace of the group activity. In some cases,
when the students' names appear, they can deduce information about their own behaviour from
the representation. When this is not the case, they get a global image of the group. It is not clear
though if knowledge like `we have different opinions', `we all make the same mistakes', `we all
overestimated our competence' or `I am an extremist', `I succeeded better than my colleagues'
have the same impact. We saw that students were fond of representations where they could see
their own position and it seems that the comparison with others is strongly motivating.

From a metacognitive viewpoint, the representations are used as tools which guide and motivate
the construction of knowledge. Students take over the knowledge by interpreting the graphs and
data they get.

Conclusion

This contribution presented an analysis of arguments produced by students in a learning activity
entitled "Argue Graph" where students twice answer to a questionnaire, a first time alone and
then in pairs. We observed that answering in pairs had a positive impact on the elaboration of
arguments provided to justify the choices in the questionnaire. We interpreted the improvement
of arguments as stemming from the discussion necessary to give a common answer. Students
make their opinions explicit and thereby more elaborated during the discussion. We then used a
distributed cognition approach to analyse the "Argue Graph" learning activity. Smith's (1994)
model of collective intelligence allowed us to describe the transformations knowledge undergoes
during the learning process. Following Nickerson (1993) we addressed the question of collective
metacognition and proposed to consider collective representations as tools which guide the
knowledge acquisition.

Acknowlegments

TECFA Virtual Campus has been developed with the help of Cyril Roiron, David Ott, Daniel
Schneider, Daniel Peraya, Patrick Mendelsohn, Philippe Lemay and Didier Strasser.

Bibliography

Blaye, A. (1988) - Confrontation socio-cognitive et résolution de problème (A propos du produit
de deux sous-ensembles). Doctorat de l'Université de Provence.

Brown, A.L. & Palincsar, A.S. (1989). Guided cooperative learning and individual knowledge
acquisition. In L.B. Resnick (Ed). Knowling, learning and instruction, essays in honor of Robert
Glaser. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Publisher.

Butterworth, G. (1982) A brief account of the conflict between the individual & the social in
models of cognitive growth. In G. Butterworth & P. Light (Eds) Social Cognition (pp. 3-16).
Brighton, Sussex: Harvester Press.

Chi M.T.H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M.W., Reimann, P. & Glaser, R. (1989) Self-Explanations: How
Students Study and Use Examples in Learning to Solve Problems. Cognitive Science, 13,145-
182.
Doise, W. & Mugny, G. (1981) - Le développement social de l'intelligence. Paris: InterEditions.

Dillenbourg, P., Jermann, P., Schneider, D., Traum, D. and Buiu, C. (1997) - The design of
MOO agents: Implications from a study on multi-modal collaborative problem solving. In
Proceedings of AI&ED'97 Conference. B. du Boulay and R. Mizoguchi (Eds.). IOS Press.

Hutchins, E. (1991) - The social organization of distributed cognition. In L. B. Resnick , J. M.
Levine & S.D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition.

Hutchins (1995) - How a Cockpit Remembers Its Speeds. Cognitive Science 19, 265-288.

Jermann, P., Dillenbourg, P. & Brouze, J.-C. (1999) - Dialectics for collective activities: an
approach to virtual campus design. In S.P. Lajoie and M. Vivet (Eds.) Artificial Intelligence in
Education. IOS Press. pp.570-577.

Nardi B. A. (Ed.) (1996) - Context and Consciousness. Activity Theory and Human-Computer
Interaction. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

Nickerson, R.S. (1993) - On the distribution of cognition: some reflections. In G. Salomon (Ed)
Distributed Cognition (pp. 229-261). Cambridge University Press, New York.

Schoenfeld, A. H. (1987) - What's All the Fuss About Metacognition ? In Cognitive Science and
Mathematics Education. Ed: Alan H. Schoenfeld. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Smith, J.B. (1994) . Collective Intelligence in Computer-Based Collaboration. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.

Authors' addresses

Patrick Jermann (Patrick.Jermann@tecfa.unige.ch)

TECFA, University of Geneva; 40, Bvd du Pont d'Arve; CH-1205 GENEVA; Switzerland. Tel.
(+41 22) 705 93 76.

Pierre Dillenbourg (Pierre.Dillenbourg@tecfa.unige.ch)

TECFA, University of Geneva; 40, Bvd du Pont d'Arve; CH-1205 GENEVA; Switzerland. Tel.
(+41 22) 705 93 76.
