Taking without consent: Stolen knowledge and the
place of abstractions and assessment in situated
learning.
Christopher R. Jones

CSALT, Lancaster University, UK.

      Abstract: This paper explores the idea of situated learning and the related
      idea of a community of practice. These ideas have had a seminal influence
      in the CSCL community, yet they have received little serious attention in
      refining their use. This paper uses material from a recently completed
      piece of research to reflect on the educational (mis)use of the idea of
      situation. It argues that the view of situation popularized in the works of
      John Seely Brown and others contains a moral imperative. It maintains
      that a better understanding of situation might be achieved by adopting a
      stance that does not privilege a certain type of situation above others.

      This paper states a case for abstraction and formalization as forming part
      of the resources from which a community constitutes itself. In this way it
      resituates learning as both a participation in a community and a
      transmission of resources.

      Keywords: situated learning, computer-mediated-communications,
      qualitative methods

Introduction

The much-referenced account of situated learning by Brown, Collins and Duguid (1989)
has had particular importance for computer supported learning as it drew conclusions
about collaborative learning. The idea of situated learning has provided one of the core
accounts supporting a new paradigm for research in educational technology (Koschmann
1996). This paper tries to examine some aspects of situated learning in the context of a
computer conferencing system being used to deliver an undergraduate course with
explicitly collaborative intent.

The idea of situation proposed by Brown et al (1989) is summed up in the contrast
between 'know what' and 'know how'. Situations are described as co-producing
knowledge through activity. The breach between know how and know what is said to be
internalized within educational practice in a separation between knowing and doing.
Brown et al argue that situations co-produce knowledge so that educational practice
would be improved by taking into account the situated nature of learning. The re-
conceptualized educational practice advanced in the work of Brown et al is a variety of
cognitive apprenticeship, an approach also to be found in the works of Lave, Wenger and
Rogoff (Lave and Wenger 1991, Rogoff 1990, Wenger 1998).

The account they give of cognitive apprenticeship rests upon a distinction between
authentic activity and school activity.

      "Authentic activities are then most simply defined as the ordinary
      practices of the culture" (Brown et al 1989 p 34).

Cognitive apprenticeships try to enculture students in 'authentic practices' through
activity and social interaction. Authentic practices are ordinary practices as opposed to
'ersatz' activity.

The computer conference as a situation

The idea of school culture is related to the transmissive model, which has been heavily
criticised as inappropriate for computer conferencing. Cooperative or collaborative
learning is often advocated in contrast to the transmissive model.

      "The asynchronous nature of the interaction leads to new paradigms for
      teaching and learning, with both unique problems of coordination and
      unique opportunities to support active, collaborative (group or team-
      based) learning. Collaborative learning appears to be crucial to the
      effectiveness of online learning environments." (Hiltz and Benbunan-Fich
      1997 p1)

In this view computer conferencing has features that both enable the use of collaboration
and require cooperation as a guarantee of effectiveness. There is a clear relationship
between descriptions of a technological imperative and the requirements of a situated
learning approach to provide authenticity in learning.

The background to the research

The research reported here was undertaken at Manchester Metropolitan University
between 1994 and 1996 as part of a doctoral programme. The course unit observed was
part of the BA in Information Technology and Society Degree (BAITS). The Technology
in Communications course was a second year option taught on-line using the FirstClass
computer conferencing system. The course was still being run in a slightly modified form
in 1998/99. The University recruits students from a wide range of academic and social
backgrounds and has a large number of 'home' students from Greater Manchester and the
surrounding region.

The approach adopted by the course leader was online working with collaborative
working as a natural outcome of using computer conferencing. Assessment on the course
unit was 100% coursework; two essays and a final project that counted for 50% of the
mark followed an initial skills based module. Module 1 was rated 10%, Module 2 15%
and Module 3 at 25%. The marking scheme emphasized the production of group work
but it was the tutor's intention to allocate individual marks. The course structure was
devised in such a way as to emphasise the accomplishment of particular tasks. These
would provide feedback to the tutor and the students and were also to 'prompt' the
students to work online.

An ethnographic methodology was employed to generate a description of a university
course transposed from a traditional setting into a computer-based technology using
collaborative methods. In this research it was a concern with the social properties of the
educational setting that suggested the appropriateness of ethnographic methods. The
extensive nature of the final report is a feature of ethnographic description allowing only
brief illustrative examples to be included in this paper. Within education the ethnographic
approach to research has a long tradition (e.g. Fetterman 1984, Fetterman and Pitman
1986). It has more recently been employed to study distance students using computer
conferencing at a US university (Eastmond 1995).

For the entire two years of observation there were many examples of the work that
students and the tutor were required to do in order to enable the collaborative work of the
computer conference and its educational design to be realised. The work that was done
was organised in part on-line though much of the activity was off-line and ratified rather
than conducted on the system. Students when working amongst themselves, distributed
their work between on and off-line working. A central finding of the research was that all
participants in the course had to cooperate together in order to determine just what
collaboration meant (Jones 1999). This confirmed a fundamental insight of the situated
learning perspective (Jones 1998).

The tutor

Prior to the course running the tutor had identified a potential problem of the course
having 'weaker' structures on-line.

     "Students are given responsibility to do the work, what happens if they
     don't work? - therefore deadlines - therefore a schedule of tasks, readings
     for example, log on, send a message etc." (Interview course tutor 10/94)

Continuous assessment and deadlines set throughout the course were devised as prompts
to encourage the students both to work and to work on-line. The emphasis was on the
'flexibility' available for students in terms of when work might be done, and the
opportunity for synthesis and reflection. The course outline provided the mechanism for
an anticipatory account of the course. It was through the production of this
documentation that the tutor was accountable to the students and wider institution for the
content and teaching methods of the course. It is through the detailed control of what
work is to be done and how that work is done that the tutor uses the resource he/she has
provided in the course documentation and planning. The following two examples explore
how the collaborative nature of the course emerged and how the assessment procedure
developed.
Collaboration

The tutor made extensive comments on the process of the work done and gave advice for
future work. The first part of one message is included below:

Friday,  November     3,  1995  10:59:27   am
TIC95  MODULE    1  Item
From:  J.  A.  C
Subject:   Pats    on the  back,   advice  and  a bit  of  a  warning
To:  TIC95    MODULE  1
1              I  have   been  very  pleased  to  see  that   a significant   section
2              of  TIC-95   students   are  acquiring   the   on line  skills  which
3              we  have   been  discussing   over  the  last  few   weeks.  I have
4              received    a number   of replies   via  my  post   box to  the
5              queries    that  I raised   on the  work  for  module   one.
6              Furthermore,     in at  least  two  of  the  sub-conferences     we
7              have   seen  real  debate   about  the  constitution    of  groups
8              and  how   marks  should  be  allocated.   ....................
15             ......................................           Some  of  the  messages
I  have
16             received    have  avoided   the issue   of relative
17             contributions.     I  don't  want  to  make  a big   issue  out  of this
18             but  I  do  want  to  award  marks  fairly   so  that  effort  is
19             rewarded.

The tutor clearly puts a great emphasis on the process of collaboration and use of the
system (Lines 1-8). Equally emphasis is placed upon allocating marks to individuals so
that 'effort' is rewarded (lines 18-19). This concentration on how the work was done
inverted the intention to stress the content of the course not the 'system' or the method of
work. It would seem that the day-to-day concerns of the tutor outweighed the original
design consideration that the content of the course should not be submerged by the
mechanism of delivery. The tutor saw the concentration on the conferencing process as a
diversion from the work he intended.

Assessment

The tutor's comments throughout the course show him to be concerned with academic
standards, a defender of course quality. Sections of an extensive message to all students
are reproduced below:

5      First   and  foremost    the  mark  for a  particular    group  has  been
6      determined     by  the  quality  of  the  piece  submitted.    I  have looked
7      for    originality,   evidence   of  research   into   the  topic  and the
8      degree    to which   the  question   set  has  been  answered.
9      Secondly    I  have  looked   at the  way  in  which   group  members
10     have   worked   together   in  constructing    the  answer   and the
11     efficiency     with  which  material   coming   from   different   individuals
12     has    been put   together  into  a  coherent   whole.

                       (Tutor to Module 2 23/1/96)
The tutor began by setting out standard marking criteria. Later a plea was made for
analysis 'which goes beyond description' dealing with abstract and conceptual issues. The
tutor was advising students on how to do academic work and also how to talk about it.
The tutor ends by advising students to read two sub-conferences from Module 2 in TiC95
as examples of good practice.

40     As you     move  to  the end  of  this  unit  and  prepare  for  your  third
year,
41     you     should  be beginning   to  produce  analytical    work  which  goes
42     beyond     description   and  shows  that  you  can  deal  with  conceptual
43     and     abstract  issues.   We can  learn  from  one  another   in this unit
as
44     all     the work  is  available   on the  conferencing    system.  Please    have
45     a look     at  other  contributions   and  see  if  you  can find useful
ideas.  I
46     recommend      everyone  to  look  at the  report   produced   in the  BLL
47     group.     This  was  a model  of  how  material   should  be  organised    and
48      how    a  coherent   answer  can  be constructed.    I  recommend   that   you
49     look    in  the  xxxxx  conference   to  see  a good  example   of how  a   group
50     sought     to  work  together  and  had  a good  deal  of  success   and some
51     failures     in  achieving   cooperation.
                                      (Tutor   to Module   2 23/1/96)

There were two related standards being applied, a common academic standard of
intellectual discourse and a more specific injunction as to how to work within the
conferencing system. This displayed an orientation in the conference through which the
tutor was encouraging the social process of doing conferencing as well as providing
academic guidance.

Students' talk

Students came to the course with a variety of orientations and approached their work in a
number of different ways. Despite this divergence the messaging displayed a
predominantly functional tone. Messages were largely organizational dealing with how to
organize the work, arranging meetings or delivering sections and drafts. Those students
who got beyond this basic level, swapped drafts of work and commented on each others
contributions. Nevertheless students generally confined themselves to 'doing the work'
and did not indulge in wide ranging discussion of the subject under consideration.

The examples below are from a project sub-conference in TiC94. The sample of
messages were sent one month before the completed project was submitted and comprise
a string of messages concerning the first of three drafts which were produced before the
final submission.
        Wednesday,   May  3,  1995  6:37:09  pm
        Satellites   Item
        From:  laura  m.  murrell
        Subject:   third  bit  finalise
        To:  Satellites
        Cc:  vera  stewart
        ANTHONY   P. RICHARDS
1      I will  put  some  thing  on  tomorrow  for  my  third  bit.
2      Maybe  we  can fianalise   on  line  as it  is  difficult  for
3      anthony  to  get  in to  college  or  vera  and  i could  get
4      started  tomorrow.   Vera's   idea  to scan  something   in  is
5      a good  one  so  we can  try  that  tomorrow
6      laura

        Wednesday,   May  10,  1995  6:17:30  pm
        Satellites   Item
        From:  vera  stewart
        Subject:   Re:  Editing  bits
        To:  Satellites
       Anthony
7      Laura  and  I will  do  the  introduction   and  conclusion
8      when  you  have  finished  editing.
9      I think  Laura   has done  some  more  work.
10     Do  you think  we  have  done  enough?  There   are so  many
11     areas  we  could  cover  it's  impossiable   to  include  them
12     all.
13     We  will make  the  introduction    and conclusion   quite
14     long  and  we still  hope  scan  an  image  in.
15     Vera

        Wednesday,   May  10,  1995  7:44:37  am
        Satellites   Item
        From:  ANTHONY   P. RICHARDS
        Subject:   Editing  bits
        To:  Satellites
        Cc:  laura  m.  murrell
        vera  stewart
16     i have  downloaded   all  the  sections   we have  written so
17     far  and will  edit  them  for  a first   draft  which  i will
18     put  on the  system  at  the  weekend.  If  you  have written
19     any  more,  can  you let  me  know  so i  don't  miss  out any
20     work.
21     Anthony

The messages show an orientation to the goal of completion. The significant point in the
three messages comes when Vera asks; "Do you think we have done enough?" (line 10).
All three messages are designed to draw the work together into a coherent whole, and
display an inclination to the sorts of course requirements outlined in the tutor's messages.
They show a local negotiation of the contingencies of interaction, "it is difficult for
anthony" (lines 2 and 3), "I think Laura has done some more work" (line 9) and "if you
have written any more" (lines 18 and 19). This is set within the overall context of doing
'enough'. Vera notes that because there are so many areas the task is impossible (lines 10
and 11). Thoroughness is linked to bulk and Vera adds, "We will make the introduction
and conclusion quite long" (lines 13 and 14) and Anthony is concerned not to "miss out
any work" (lines 19 and 20). It is clear from these concerns that 'enough' is connected to
assessment rather than completeness. The aim for students is to comply with the course
deadlines, meet the assessment criteria by doing what is sufficient. Sufficiency is not a
clearly identifiable outcome and requires negotiation as to how much is 'enough'.

Overall the type of talk found in both student and staff 'talk' in the system is organized
according to a common understanding of a task. That task is the completion of individual
modules and of the course. The outcomes of the course are apparently issued from the top
down but it is in and through the interactional specifics of their implementation that they
are achieved. It is not clear to either the student or the tutor exactly what in each
particular circumstance counts as a sufficient answer. The students are concerned with
what is 'enough', while the tutor offers examples of good practice to illuminate the formal
requirements of the course.

Discussion

The institutional position of the tutor is exhibited in the production and use of the course
aims and objectives. The tutor controls the definition of what counts as success within the
conference. Assessment confirms that the tutor is in the position of holding specialist and
superior knowledge. Despite the equation of computer conferencing with collaborative
learning and the shift from knowledge giver to facilitator, the wider educational context
remains one of assessment and accreditation. The tutor is the first line of that institutional
system of accreditation of knowledge, determining what counts and how much is enough.

There is of course a second sense in which the tutor remains in command of superior
knowledge despite no longer delivering lectures. The tutors are likely to know the
answers to the questions they have set. Even when relying on the students' own
experience, the arbiter of the validity of these experiences remains the tutor, who is
assumed to have a superior subject knowledge to the student.

For Brown et al (1989) the idea of situation is a means to distinguish authentic and
inauthentic settings. Thus, in their paper their position is made clear at the outset:

      " Many methods of didactic education assume a separation between
      knowing and doing, treating knowledge as an integral, self-sufficient
      substance, theoretically independent of the situations in which it is learned
      and used." (Brown et al 1989 p32)

They argue that the primary reason for learning failure is to do with the abstract approach
to cognition taken in schooling and advocate a variety of apprenticeship, whereby
learning takes place in a 'real world' context as more appropriate and effective. This use
of apprenticeship can be taken to imply that authenticity in learning varies according to
how situated the learning is.

In a powerful analogy Brown and Duguid (1996) liken learning to theft. Knowledge is
'stolen' and a particular example is identified in the driving of a car.
      "Cars are socially so well integrated that the learning becomes almost
      invisible. The success of learner drivers - with or without instruction-
      should undoubtedly be the envy and object of many who design far less
      complex consumer or workplace appliances. " (Brown and Duguid 1996
      p51)

The link between cars and stolen knowledge, brings to mind juvenile car theft, a practice
known in the United Kingdom as "twocing" (pronounced with a hard c), taking without
consent. Juveniles take and drive cars, often at speed and in competition with police
drivers. There is clearly an aspect of driving which is common social knowledge that can
be informally appropriated. However I and presumably many of the readers of this paper
do not wish to encounter a stolen car driven by an untrained driver. The driving of the
occupants may or may not be particularly skillful. The driver might observe common
road conventions, or they may not. In short the driving of a car taken without consent is
unaccredited and the quality of the basic skills and knowledge of the driver are not
assured. One of the obvious features of the educational setting observed was how much
of the work conducted was oriented towards the documenting and authorizing of the
practices of the participants. Educators and the students exhibit in their activity an
orientation towards achieving not simply knowledge but accredited knowledge. Stolen
knowledge is uncertain knowledge. Knowledge and learning are socially acknowledged
in and through the practices of accounting and audit within an educational setting.

The use of the idea of 'stolen' knowledge highlights the idea of explicit elements of
practice. Brown and Duguid emphasize that a great deal of what comprises a web of
practice cannot be made explicit. The problem they claim is not abstraction per se but the
detachment of abstraction from the practices in which they play a part.

      "Abstractions detached from practice distort or obscure intricacies of that
      practice" (Brown and Duguid 1996 p59)

I would argue that this formulation of the problem and hence the juxtaposition between
schooling and apprenticeship is mistaken on two counts.

Firstly it misunderstands the use to which formalisations are put with the definitions
themselves. In many 'authentic' situations formal definitions, manuals, instruction sets
etc. form a part of the situation. They are not self-contained though they are abstractions.
In order to drive knowledge is required of a variety of abstractions, a Highway Code (in
the UK), a vehicle manual and a variety of driving examination documents and a formal
written test. These documents are part of the formal 'school practices' of learning to drive
rather than the 'authentic' practices of driving. This is surely a 'know what' abstraction
rather than 'know how' practice, but it illustrates the common use to which abstractions
are routinely put. The social requirements for learning to drive rather than driving without
consent acknowledge the distinction between accredited performance and informal
practice.
Secondly the contrast depends upon the natural or 'authentic' setting appearing more
efficient in educational terms, yet education depends for its existence on the acceptance
of the view that natural settings do not suffice to educate. In their 1989 paper Brown et al
use an extended analogy taken from Miller and Gildea (1987) that contrasts 'normally'
learned vocabulary with use taught from dictionary definitions and exemplary sentences.
They conclude that teaching using definitions and abstracted sentences is slow and
unsuccessful. Elsewhere Brown and Duguid suggest that:

      " rather than deciding ahead of time what a learner needs to know and
      making this explicitly available to the exclusion of everything else,
      designers and instructors need to make available as much as possible of
      the whole rich web of practice - explicit and implicit, allowing the learner
      to call upon aspects of practice, latent on the periphery, as they are
      needed." (Brown et al 1989 p54)

Making available a wide range of resources, the 'rich web of practice', without an explicit
aim might seem to many educators a waste of valuable time. The idea of providing
abstractions and formalizations in many educational settings is to provide scaffolding for
learning, so that the natural process is rendered less opaque and the time spent
deciphering a complex situation is reduced. Abstraction and formalizations cannot be
contrasted to an authentic situation as they form part of it. The appeal being made here is
to describe empirically situations for learning rather than to artificially divide them
between school and authentic practices.

Macbeth (1996) makes the point that while the situated character of sense, meaning and
social action stands as a fundamental insight, the argument Brown et al advance rests on a
distinction between 'the ordinary practices of a culture' and classroom tasks taking place
'in the culture of school life itself'. Situatedness does not separate tasks within the
classroom from those without as both are authentic in their own right neither more nor
less situated. The moral question of the choice of schooling or apprenticeship styles of
teaching becomes hidden. Macbeth recommends an alternative analysis that is both more
and less than that offered by Brown et al:

              "It is `more' in that by the fullness of the concept we come into possession
              of an analytic commitment to describe the local, embodied, situated
              practices of teaching and learning in classrooms and elsewhere. It is `less'
              however, in that this situatedness promises nothing to projects of ordering
              and / or reforming the affairs we study." (Macbeth 1996 p 281)

I would argue that the observations recorded here would support Macbeth in his
contention.

In terms of computer conferencing it could be suggested that there is nothing to suggest
that computer conferencing in use escapes the 'school culture'. It has been argued that
examinations and testing are themselves both a test of the students and a test of the
acceptance of a 'body of knowledge' (Kvale 1993). School culture is about passing on a
formalised and relatively fixed set of items to the student, a form of instruction.
Universities at undergraduate levels are generally about the transmission of existing
knowledge rather than the invention of new knowledge. The course unit observed was
organised around group sub-conferences. Teaching was accomplished without a formal
structure of lectures and tutorials and there were no examinations. Nonetheless the tutor
assessed students for their understanding of existing knowledge.

Both staff and students oriented to this and made efforts to achieve assessable texts and
visible processes so that the tutor could accredit the work done. The computer conference
exhibits in its interactions 'school culture'. In this respect the assumption that the
flexibility of computer conferencing can provide for collaboration in a way in which the
classroom cannot is undercut by the wider institutional framework to which the
participants clearly orient.

Conclusions

The situation of learning can be anywhere. The insights of the situated learning model
were a corrective to those that emphasized abstract 'canonical practices' to the exclusion
of the hidden work enshrined in informal practices (Brown and Duguid 1991). They have
since been taken up widely alongside other related theories to develop into a
formalization of their own. Situated learning is taken to be an approach to education. This
paper has tried to reflect on a situation of learning that has been proposed as a prime site
for the development of some of the features of a situated learning model. Computer
conferencing and CMC in general has been heralded as requiring cooperative and
collaborative approaches. The tutor is said to be more a facilitator and a guide than a
'sage' imparting truths from on high. The most arresting feature of the computer
conferencing setting observed was the pervasiveness of the assessment and accreditation
procedures.

It was striking that for many observing educational settings as 'learning' the most
characteristic element of education in practice had disappeared. This has echoes of
Button's comments with regard to the sociology of technology where in a similar manner
theoretical approaches rendered the particular features of the object of study invisible
(Button 1993). A situated view of learning needs to describe just what it is in those
practices identified as sites for learning that make them 'just that'. Learning as a social
practice can be seen in this example to be produced in and through all its interactions,
including the production of formalizations, canonical practices, assessed and accredited
performances and artifacts. Many of the documents and formalizations produced can be
seen as part of the 'technology of accountability' (Suchman 1993). They do not stand
independent of the setting but are used as resources such that the work of accounting, in
the sense of giving a reasoned explanation, can be done.

The nature of collaborative effort was oriented towards the expectations embedded in the
course structure. How these expectations were achieved was subject to ad-hoc and
mundane interventions. Collaboration was not something that could be pre-planned,
either by good software design or by the pedagogic design of the course unit. It relied
upon in situ day-to-day management by and for the members of the conference. Similarly
assessment, though specified in course documentation, was a persistent problem for the
tutor in day to day management of the course. Collaboration and assessment are in this
sense the common accomplishment of the members of the conference. This conclusion
points towards the understanding of planning for educational applications as 'situated
action' (Suchman 1987). However the observations recorded here tend to support the
view that all educational practices are situated and that collaborative or co-operative
methods are no more or less situated than traditional methods.

Acknowledgments

The author gratefully acknowledges the support of Manchester Metropolitan University,
Department of Information and Communications and Department of Sociology for
supporting my research. I would also like to acknowledge Dave Randall and Terry
Hemmings for their original ideas on the place of formalizations within a situation.

Bibliography

Brown, J. S., Collins, A., and Duguid, P. (1989). Situated Cognition and the Culture of
Learning. Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32 -42.

Brown, J. S., and Duguid, P. (1991). Organizational Learning and Communities-of
Practice: Towards a unified view of working, learning and innovation. Organizational
Science. Vol. 2, No1.

Brown, J. S., and Duguid, P. (1996). Stolen Knowledge. In H, McLellan (Ed). Situated
Learning Perspectives Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Educational Technology Publications.

Button, G. (1993). The Curious Case of the Vanishing Technology. In G, Button (Ed).
Technology in Working Order. London : Routledge.

Eastmond, D. V. (1995). Alone But Together: Adult Distance Study Through Computer
Conferencing. Cresskill, N.J.: Hampton Press, Inc.

Fetterman, D. M. (1984). Ethnography in Educational Evaluation. Beverly Hills, CA.:
Sage.

Fetterman, D. M., and Pitman, M.A. (Ed.). (1986). Educational Evaluation: Ethnography
in theory, practice and politics. Beverly Hills, CA.: Sage.

Hiltz, S. R., and Benbunan-Fich, R. (1997). Supporting Collaborative Learning in
Asynchronous Learning Networks. In UNESCO / OPEN UNIVERSITY International
Colloquium: Virtual Learning Environments and the Role of the Teacher. Milton Keynes:
Open University. http://eies.njit.edu/~roxanne/.
Jones, C. (1999). Co-operating to Collaborate: Course delivery using computer
conferencing in Higher Education. In A. Eurlings et al (Eds) Integrating Information &
Communication Technology in Higher Education. Deventer: Kluwer.

Jones, C. (1998). Context, Content and Cooperation: An Ethnographic Study of
Collaborative Learning Online. Ph.D. Thesis. Manchester Metropolitan University.

Koschmann, T. (Ed). (1996). CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm.
Mahwah, NJ.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Kvale, S. (1993). Examinations reexamined: Certification of students or certification of
knowledge? In S. Chaiklin and Lave, J. (Eds.), Understanding Practice: Perspectives on
activity and context . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

Lave, J., and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Macbeth, D. (1996). The Discovery of Situated Worlds: Analytic Commitments, or
Moral Orders? Human Studies, 19, 267-287.

Miller, G. A., and Gildea, P.M. (1987). How children learn words. Scientific American,
257(3), 94 - 99.

Rogoff, B. (Ed.). (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social
context. New York: Oxford University Press.

Suchman, L. (1987), Plans and situated actions: The problem of human-machine
communication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Suchman, L. (1993), Technologies of accountability: On lizards and airplanes, in G.
Button (Ed) Technology in Working Order. London: Routledge.

Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Authors' address

Christopher R. Jones (c.r.jones@lancaster.ac.uk)
Center for the Study of Advanced Learning Technology. Department of Educational
Research, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YL, United Kingdom. Tel. +44(0)1524-
593421.
