The Design Discussion Area:
A Collaborative Learning Tool in Support of Learning
from Problem-Solving and Design Activities
Janet L. Kolodner and Kristine Nagel

Georgia Institute of Technology, College of Computing

      Abstract: The Design Discussion Area (DDA) supports student reports to
      each other about their design efforts as they are learning science from
      design activities. Its scaffolding was designed to support both the writing
      of well-formed stories about their design efforts and discussion about each
      design effort. At their best, these discussions are a source of ideas for
      other students; a venue for talking science, using evidence in support of
      claims, getting advice, and providing explanations that others can
      understand; and a vehicle for some of the reflection necessary to turn
      one's experiences into well-formed and well-indexed cases in one's
      memory. DDA was trialed with 200 students; it was easy for students to
      use but it wasn't as straightforward to integrate into classroom activities as
      we had supposed and didn't provide as useful scaffolding as we had
      imagined.

      Keywords: learning through design, case-based reasoning, inquiry

Introduction

Learning well from complex problem-solving, design, or project activity almost
necessarily requires collaborative activity (refs --Kafai, Soloway -- Kafai from ICLS
98; any project-based learning or Model-it paper w/ Soloway and/or Krajcik).(Kafai and
Ching, 1998; Jackson, et. al., 1996). When problems students are addressing are of
serious complexity, they need each other. Sharing perspectives, experiences, insights, and
understandings helps learners to come up with ideas, to debug their ideas, and to notice
the complexities of concepts and skills. From the other side, evidence shows that if
collaborative learning is done well, learners can solve much more complex problems and
come to far more sophisticated understandings than they could do on their own (Barrows,
1986).1985).

But it is a long way from what research suggests to figuring out the practices that will
promote success in the average classroom. For each of the successful learning-from-
problem-solving or learning-from-design, or project-based learning classroom, there are
others that are a disaster. What does it take to orchestrate and facilitate collaboration to
insure that students have success in their project endeavors and gain a sophisticated
understanding of the targeted concepts and skills? And how can the computer help?
We address these issues in the context of Learning by Design, an approach to learning
from hands-on design activities (Kolodner, 1997; Kolodner, et. al., 1998). Learning by
Design builds on a variety of cognitive theories addressing learning (e.g., case-based
reasoning, constructivism) and classroom practices supporting collaborative learning and
learning from hands-on activities (e.g., PBL, communities of learners). In Learning by
Design (LBD), students learn science (grades 6 to 8) by addressing design challenges that
require application of science for their best solution. The need to address the design
challenge motivates students to ask questions, provides a purpose for learning science,
and gives students a vehicle for applying what they are learning. As students iteratively
plan, construct, test, and refine solutions to design challenges, their understanding of
science concepts and skills becomes more and more sophisticated. Students learning
about motion and forces, for example, design and build miniature vehicles and their
propulsion systems, achieving the challenge of their vehicles getting over a hill and as far
beyond as possible.

Collaborative learning is a central value in LBD. Students collaborate in small groups to
achieve design challenges. They also collaborate with each other in whole-class
discussions, sharing their ideas and what they've found out so that others can provide
them with advice and suggestions and so that they can benefit from each others' ideas.
The LBD approach encourages students to build on the work other students have done,
adapting the ideas of others and integrating them with their own. The most important
vehicle for making such collaboration happen in an LBD classroom is the "gallery walk"
(Kolodner et al., 1998). Groups present their in-progress design solutions to the rest of
the class for suggestions, comments, and advice.

The Design Discussion Area (DDA) was designed to support and enhance gallery walks,
allowing students to report to and get feedback and ideas from groups outside of their
own class. It supports both the small-group collaboration needed to describe one's project
in a way that others can understand well and larger-scale between-group and between-
class discussion about design ideas. Its scaffolding structures these activities, provides
hints, and provides examples. Both students and teachers have been excited about and
engaged in using the tool. But it had to be integrated into classroom activities somewhat
differently than we had planned, and once integrated, we were surprised by some of the
ways it was and wasn't used.

Our approach to promoting and supporting collaborative learning

Our approach to promoting and supporting collaboration and collaborative learning is
based on a variety of approaches. Problem-Based Learning's approach (Barrows, 1986)
1985) is seen in the orchestration of activities, the roles the teacher takes on, the
interactions between individual and group activities, and the centrality of reflection.
Students work together in small groups to address challenges: designing and running
experiments; planning, constructing, trying out, and analyzing solutions; and preparing to
present to the class. Whole-class time is spent on generating questions for inquiry,
sharing insights, reflecting on what's been learned, and presenting ideas and experiences
to each other. Homework provides time for individual students to prepare themselves for
small-group activities or reflect on those small-group activities, make sense of them, and
articulate what they've learned.

Case-based reasoning's (Kolodner, 1993) suggestions can be seen in the orchestration of
the classroom and in the content of student reports and class discussions. The challenge
of constructing, testing, and making physical devices work provides students with
experiences to anchor their discussions. They discuss science in the context of the needs
that come up as they are trying to achieve a real challenge. The challenge pushes them to
talk about what they need to learn, what they are confused about, and how they made
things work. Turning their experiences into cases requires making connections between
goals, implementations, and results, and the need to report to the class requires them to
reflect on their experiences in such a way that they can draw those connections and report
them to the others. Telling their story to the class helps them make sense of their
experience. Hearing the stories of others allows them to vicariously experience what
others have done, giving them additional experience with the results of applying the skills
and concepts they are learning.

The design studio approach complements PBL and CBR and can be seen in the setup of
the classroom. In addition to formal pin-ups and gallery walks, design ideas and plans of
students are displayed around the classroom, and students have free access to each other.

In our 1996-97 experiment with paper-and-pencil and computer-based tools
(ref),(Puntambekar et. al., 1997), we found that different kinds of discussions were
natural within and between groups, and that both were needed for deep learning. Within
groups, students tend to focus on how things work and how to make them work better,
discussing the structure and behavior of things they are building but not always focusing
on the why's. They use science within groups but don't tend to talk science. On the other
hand, discussion across groups requires making one's goals, analyses, and justifications
clear. Here is where more science talk resides, in the explanations of function and
mechanisms, and use of evidence to justify. Each type of talk, we discovered, needed
different kinds of scaffolding. We said then that we would move forward by providing
better between-group facilitation to support sharing, critique, and analysis.

Our tool: The Design Discussion Area

The "gallery walk" implements the suggestions made by all three approaches and by our
previous experiment, and it is this ritual that we initially supported in the Design
Discussion Area (DDA). During a gallery walk, each student group shows off the device
they are building, explaining their design decisions, showing the class how their device
works, reporting on the data they've collected and their analysis of it, and talking about
their proposed next steps. Other students ask questions about things they don't
understand or about why different choices were made, point out problems, and make
suggestions about how to proceed. Students are motivated to play both roles. Showing off
what they've done puts them into the spotlight and gives them an opportunity to get help
from the rest of the class. At its best, the gallery walk is not only a source of ideas but
also provides a venue for talking science, using evidence in support of claims, and
providing explanations that others can understand.

The gallery walk has two collaborative parts to it. First, each small group needs to decide
what to tell the rest of the class. Second, the presentations each group makes become
anchors for large-group discussion. DDA supports both kinds of collaboration (Figure 1):
(a) Collaboration within groups focuses on describing design ideas and results so that
others can understand them. (b) Collaboration across groups is anchored in the design
ideas and results of each small collaborative group.

Figure 1 shows the1. Design Discussion areaArea during discussion.

Figure 1

Helping small groups report on their designs

Student teams use the tool to report on their construction-and-test experiences. The
system prompts them for important concepts they should include in their report -- what
they were trying to accomplish, how they decided to do it and why, what they were
expecting to happen, how it actually worked, and why it worked that way. The structure
within which they do their reporting implicitly organizes the students' articulation of their
experiences, while the hints accompanying each prompt explicitly guide the students in
what information to include. The structure and hints are adaptable for different
challenges.
Figure 2 --DDA prompts for writing up one's design experiences

                                 ideas

Supporting discussion across groups and classes

After a team reports its design results, their report is available to other teams by clicking
on its hyperlinked title. Looking at another team's idea will open two side-by-side
windows: the presentation on the left and a comment window on the right. This anchored
collaboration (ref -- Guzdial)(Guzdial et al., 1997) ties each student presentation to its
own threaded discussion space. Other students may add a new comment or question for
the team (a new thread) or insert a comment into an existing discussion. Scaffolding is
quite minimal, so as not to get in the way, but serves two essential purposes: (1) It
differentiates between continuing an old discussion and beginning a new one. (2)
Suggestions are made to students about the kinds of comments they might want to make
-- "praises," "wonders," and "suggests" for new threads; "replies," "wonders," and
"suggests" for continuing threads. Students can also add their own new types.
Figure 3 -- Prompts for participating in discussion

Scaffolding in the Design Discussion Area

In both modes, scaffolding is in three forms: structuring, hints, and examples. Structuring
implicitly helps students organize their thoughts. Hints provide explicit pointers on what
to write. Examples serve as exemplars of what is expected; students use examples both to
figure out what to write and to evaluate whether what they've written is good enough.
The user interface integrates the three forms of scaffolding. Hints are to the right of each
area where the students enter text, and a completed example is available by clicking the
"example" icon at the bottomtop of the screen (Figure 2). In addition, we provide a
guided tour with screen shots.

The classroom experiences

The Design Discussion Area was used during the 1998-99 academic year in two middle
schools located in different suburban school districts of Atlanta, Georgia. The physical
science teacher was in his second year with the LBD project and had five classes with
102 students. The earth science teacher was in her fourth year with the project and had
four classes with 105 students.

Each classroom had an intranet of computers with one computer per team. Both teachers
had used Web-SMILE (Guzdial et al., 1997), the predecessor to DDA, with prior versions
of the same curriculum unit. Each class was well versed at gallery walks before
beginning use of the tool.

The earth science students used DDA as one of many resources during their three weeks
in the "Plate Tectonic Jump" problem. Each team chose one of seven specified latitude-
longitude pairs and researched plate movement in that area to predict five hundred
million years into the future. The teacher encouraged collaboration across her many
classes, to insure that each group had at least one other group to talk to about their
research and predictions. As well, the seven locations were not entirely disjoint from each
other, so students' discussions with those working on different locations could also help
students with the one they selected. Although the teacher directed the groups to share
ideas and research notes, she left it up to the team members to determine exactly what to
present to each other and how much to interact in the discussion area. The computers
were set on each team's table every day and were always physically in the midst of each
group. The teacher took the server home each night to read what students had entered
during the day and to contribute her own comments.

In the physical science class, DDA was used over a two-month span to support our
Vehicles in Motion unit. Students built, experimented with, and optimized a variety of
propulsion systems during this time, and DDA was used during the development of each.
Each team designed and built a balloon-powered vehicle, a Rubberband or Falling
Weight-powered vehicle, and a final vehicle powered by a combination of propulsion
systems. The teacher created four display spaces within DDA -- one for each of the types
of vehicles -- and students entered descriptions of each of the propulsion systems they
designed. Computers were set on countertops along the classroom walls; students used
them in "kiosk" fashion, standing at the computer and going to it as needed or directed.
The classroom had a certain quality of the design studio to it with walls covered with pin-
ups and shelves of models in various states.

Students stayed within the same group through the Vehicles unit. However, DDA was
used quite differently throughout the unit. Early on, when students were working on their
balloon-powered vehicles, the teacher had students use DDA to report on experiments
they had done testing the effects of different lengths and diameters of straws and different
numbers of balloons on the behavior of their vehicles. They first reported to the class in
gallery walks and then recorded their results in DDA -- to be used as a repository.
Students continued by designing the best balloon-powered vehicle they could taking into
account the full set of reported experimental results. For the Rubberband and Falling
Weight cars, where students were doing more informal exploration of each car's
propulsion characteristics, he had students write in DDA in preparation for their gallery
walk. For the final challenge, he had students write in DDA as they were planning how
they would merge the three propulsion systems into a hybrid that could go over a hill and
beyond.

Analysis of classroom experiences

We were interested in finding out several things:

      ·      Feasibility: Are students able to do the kinds of writing and have the
      kinds of interaction we expected from them? Are teachers able to facilitate its use
      well?

      ·      Patterns of Use, Integration into Classroom Activities, and Usefulness:
      Are they using it in ways we had predicted? If not, how are they using it, and
      why? What purposes is it serving well? What purposes should it serve better?
      How natural does its use seem, and can we make it more natural?
      ·        Effects: In what ways do students seem to be benefiting from its use -- in
      terms of content learning and/or in terms of communication and collaboration
      skills?

To find these things out, we watched classroom use of the tool; interviewed teachers
with regard to use, expectations, and observations; analyzed student patterns of use
of the tool (using log files); and coded students' entries for appropriate use of
science concepts, ability to communicate, how systematic their presentations were,
and how well they were doing at justifying their claims and predictions.

Feasibility

Both classes began use of the tool with a high level of scaffolding by the teacher aimed at
helping them learn to navigate the tool and to develop an understanding of what to
include in their presentations. The teachers purposely provided less and less help over the
course of DDA's use. Students made some use of the on-line tutorial with images of the
various displays they would encounter. They had no problem with the web browser
interface but some took a few sessions to become clear on the multiple windows and how
they were related.

Students in both sets of classes were able to collaborate to write their reports, though each
did it differently. In the physical science classes, which were far more structured, students
wrote their reports based on a variety of resources: written homework of individually
conceived ideas, group whiteboards written on butcher paper, and pin-ups of prior
vehicles on the classroom walls. While one of member of a group always acted as
recorder (typist), he or she was constantly consulting and negotiating with the others
about what to write and how to write it. Though the computers were difficult to gather
around, students were engaged enough to do it anyway. In the earth science classes, on
the other hand, where collaboration around the computer was easy, students tended to
discuss in groups first, then ask somebody to write up their discussion. We can only
guess that these differences are due to the teachers' instructions and styles. Both seemed
to work fine.

Patterns of Use, Integration into Classroom Activities, and Usefulness

When we originally designed DDA, we intended that students would write up their
design experiences using the tool for students in other classes to see. This way, we
thought, we could increase students' access to the ideas of others. We had not foreseen,
however, how this writing would interact with the in-class gallery walks. When teachers
had students write in DDA after discussions in class; students were bored-- they had just
discussed their designs and were ready for the next iteration. On the other hand, their
presentations were quite clear, and students in other classes read them, asked questions,
and made comments. When they wrote before their in-class gallery walk; their on-line
presentations were not as clear and therefore not as useful to others; students in other
classes therefore weren't very inclined to make suggestions.
How DDA was integrated into the classroom activities had a large effect on the number
of comments made and the quality of those comments. In the physical science classes,
students used the computers on particular days that the teacher chose. In the earth science
classes, the computer was always available, and there was little interaction using planned
gallery walks; DDA was their way of doing gallery walks. In the earth science classes,
there were many more comments made per presentation (1.6 in phys. sci. vs. 2.7 in earth
sci.) and the majority of the comments made in the earth science classes were on-task
(76%), while only a minority (31%) were in the physical science classes. It is, of course,
hard to say whether this difference was because DDA took the place of gallery walks in
the earth science classes or because students were more restricted in their use of DDA in
the physical science classes.

We also hadn't foreseen that teachers would use DDA for purposes other than those we
had designed it for. In earth science, DDA was used close enough to the way it was
intended to serve its role well. In physical science, however, the teacher used DDA for
three different purposes, only one of which we had anticipated, each requiring slightly
different kinds of reporting. Students in physical science used DDA to report to others
about the results of experiments they had run and their design plans in addition to using it
to report on the results of their design efforts. The system was designed only to scaffold
reports of design efforts, and there seemed to be some confusion among the students
about how to tell their stories when their needs didn't match the system's scaffolding.
The structure and hints we had provided were not always appropriate and didn't always
emphasize what was most important to report.

Both teachers were interested in DDA as a data repository; students in all the classes saw
DDA as a natural repository as well, and they at least tried to use it that way. Earth
science students report it useful as a repository, and we've already seen the numbers that
show that they used it for communication as well. Physical science students were not as
happy with it as a repository, because often the reports they found in there were not well
enough written to be useful. On the other hand, they tried. When we look at numbers of
accesses during design and planning, we see that the number is quite high. While working
on balloon cars, the 100 students (approx. 30 groups) accessed balloon-car reports over
1000 times. And when we look at access to the full range of reports on the days that
students were designing their hybrid propulsion systems, we see 17 lookups of balloon-
car reports, 96 of rubberband and falling-weight reports, and 295 accesses to their own
and others' hybrid designs.

6.3Effects

Are students benefiting from DDA? DDA has effects to the extent that it helps students
collaborate on line, that it promotes better in-class discussion, that it promotes sharing of
ideas across classes, or that it enhances students' abilities to communicate scientifically
with each other. Students in both sets of classes, when they saw benefit in communicating
across classes, used DDA for such communication. Did that help them perform better or
learn better? We don't know. The teachers tell us that indeed, in-class discussions
improved in quality and in science content over time, but we have no way of knowing
what of that is due to DDA. We saw in both contexts that students shared ideas across
classes. Some of that was due to reading about the ideas of others using DDA; other of
that sharing was due to lunchtime discussions with students in other classes. If DDA
promoted students' engagement in those discussions, we could say that it effected their
sharing, but we don't know for sure. Enhanced ability to communicate with each other
we could measure using student entries into DDA, if it had been used homogeneously
over time. Unfortunately, its use doesn't let us make any conclusions about enhanced
communication or scientific capabilities.

What about smaller effects? We saw some that confirm our predictions about student
learning and development. We saw more use of science vocabulary the second time using
the tool (for the rubberband and falling-weight cars) than we did the first time (for
balloon cars). This is expected, as vocabulary should be cumulative over time. We did
not see as much science vocabulary used the third time through -- for the final hybrid
design. This, we guess, is because students were only at a planning stage at the time of
writing. They had not yet tried their ideas out and gotten feedback from the physical
world. We would expect far more science discussion after they had tried out their ideas
and were in the process of revising them.

We analyzed discussions for communication skills, being systematic about investigations,
and justifying explanations and conclusions. Student ability to communicate (measured
by looking at how clearly they ??????)stated their hypothesis or design solution)
remained relatively constant across their reports, indicating that as the teacher's
scaffolding was lessened, students were still able to perform. Their ability to be
systematic about investigations (measured by looking at ???)how students attempted to
make repeated trials as fair as possible and what alternatives were compared in each
iteration) was highest for the balloon car, where they spent significant time planning
investigations, collected significant data, and spent significant time presenting their
results to the class and getting feedback before writing. Their ability to justify (measured
by looking at the type of evidence cited: experimental data, their own or others'
experiences, scientific concepts, ???)engineering and feasibility explanations) also was
highest for the balloon cars, but did not go down as significantly as it did for systematic
investigation. This might suggest that teacher scaffolding for these skills was removed
too soon. On the other hand, their later activities were quite a bit more complicated than
the balloon car. Even with much scaffolding removed, they were still able to perform,
suggesting that our system of scaffolding (shared by teacher, DDA, and classroom
rituals) is on the right track.

Discussion

Our design builds on what we and others have learned in past investigations, and a
large measure of its success is due to taking into account the lessons of those
projects, both those that report on creating a collaborative atmosphere (e.g.,
communities of learners, constructionism) and those that report on design of
collaboration software and its integration into the classroom: CSILE (Scardamalia,
et. al., 1994), CaMILE, McBAGEL, BGuILE (Tabak & Reiser, 1997) WebSMILE,
Belevedere (Suthers, et. al., 1997), KIE (Linn, 1995).

On the other hand, everything was still not completely smooth. We've learned several
additional lessons. (1) Students like publishing their work for others to see and like
looking at the publications of others, but they don't seem to like using it for discussion
when they can do that face to face. They're willing to read and comment on what others
have proposed, but only if they think it will have a benefit to them and only if what's
written is well-enough described to be worth commenting on. (2) Integration of
collaboration tools of this kind into the classroom requires quite a bit of planning to make
sure that time is provided both for reading and commenting and to make sure that use of
the tool and classroom discussion complement each other rather than being repetitive.
Sometimes this is easy for teachers to manage; other times it's complex enough that we
need to give teachers detailed guidelines about orchestration.

Next steps

In response to the broad uses the teachers have made of the DDA, we are making two
kinds of changes. First, we are making some changes in DDA itself. We've customized
the scaffolding for three different kinds of uses of DDA: reporting experimental results,
reporting about plans, and reporting on an iteration of constructing and testing. To
encourage more scientific talk, a domain specific concept list will accompany each
discussion area. We also need to help students assess their writing to make sure it has the
content in it that they intended to write. We will make it simple to include photos,
sketches, and videos of their artifacts. And we are working on an indexing scheme that
will make it easier for students to get to the reports they are looking for. Second, we're
making suggestions about how to integrate DDA better into classroom activities. While
writing before presentation helps students with their presentations, it doesn't promote
very good sharing of ideas. We will encourage separating out the writing to prepare for
in-class presentations from the writing to share with students in other classes, asking
teachers to have students revise their reports after their in-class discussions. We will have
to find a way that capitalizes on students' want to use DDA as a repository and
communication device and making sure they get some value added when they do their
revisions. Perhaps expanding communication to outside of their school will provide that
extra value. Perhaps the opportunity to go back and see how far they've come will be
engaging as well.

Acknowledgments

This research has been supported by the McDonnell Foundation and the National Science
Foundation.

Fishman, Gomez, How activities foster computer-mediated computer tools in the
classroom (p37) CSCL 97.

Guzdial, Mark, Info ecology, CSCL 97, p.83
Guzdial, AERA, 1999.

Kolodner, Janet L. (1997). Educational Implications of Analogy: A View from Case-
Based Reasoning. American Psychologist.References

Barrows, H.S. (1985). How to design a problem-based curriculum for the preclinical
years. NY: Springer.

Guzdial, M., Hmelo, C., Hubscher,R., Nagel, K., Newstetter, W., Puntambekar, S.,
Shabo, A., Turns, J., Kolodner, J. L. (1997). Integrating and Guiding Collaboration:
Lessons Learned In Computer-Supported Collaboration Learning Research at Georgia
Tech. In R.Hall, N.Miyake, & N. Enyedy (Eds.), Proceedings of Computer-Supported
Collaborative Learning '97 (pp. 91-100). Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Jackson, Shari, L., Stratford, S. Krajcik, J., and Soloway, E. (1996). A Learner-Centered
Tool for Students Building Models. Communications of the ACM, Vol. 39, No. 4, pp. 48-
49.

Kafai, Yasmin B., Ching, Cynthia C., (1998). Talking Science Through Design:
Children's Science Discourse Within Software Design Activities. In A. Bruckman, M.
Guzdial, J. Kolodner, & A. Ram (eds.), Proceedings of International Conference of the
Learning Sciences 1998 (pp. 160-166). Atlanta, Georgia.

Kolodner, J. (1998), ICLS proceedings.(1993). Case Based Reasoning. San Mateo, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.

Kolodner, J. L., (1997). Educational Implications of Analogy: A View from Case-Based
Reasoning. American Psychologistt, Vol. 52, No. 1, pp. 57-66.

Loh, Ben, et al. Progress Portfolio, CSCL 97 (p 169)Kolodner, J. L., Crismond, D., Gray,
J., Holbrook, J., Puntambekar, S. (1998). Learning by Design from Theory to Practice. In
A. Bruckman, M. Guzdial, J. Kolodner, & A. Ram (eds.), Proceedings of International
Conference of the Learning Sciences 1998 (pp. 16-22). Atlanta, Georgia.

Linn, M. C. (1995). Designing computer learning environments for engineering and
computer science: The scaffolded knowledge integration framework. Journal of Science
Education and Technology, 4(2), (pp. 103-126).

Puntambekar, S., Nagel, K., Hübscher,Hubscher, R., Guzdial, M., & Kolodner, J.L.
(1997). Intra-groupJ. L. (1997). Intragroup and Intergroup: An Exploration of Learning
with Complementary Collaboration Tools, CSCL Proceedings, 97, Toronto, Canada,
(207-214).Tools. In R.Hall, N.Miyake, & N. Enyedy (Eds.), Proceedings of Computer-
Supported Collaborative Learning '97 (pp. 207-214). Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, and Lamon, M., "The CSILE Project: Trying to Bring the
Classroom into World 3", in Classroom Lessons: Integrating Cognitive Theory and
Classroom Practice, K. McGilly, Ed. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1994, pp. 201-228.

Suthers, Daniel D., Toth, Eva E., Winer, Arlene (1997). An Integrated Approach to
Implementing Collaborative Inquiry in the Classroom. In R.Hall, N.Miyake, & N.
Enyedy (Eds.), Proceedings of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning '97 (pp. 272-
279). Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Tabak, Iris and Reiser, B.J. (1997). Complementary Roles of Software-based Scaffolding
and Teacher-Student Interactions in Inquiry Learning. In R.Hall, N.Miyake, & N. Enyedy
(Eds.), Proceedings of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning '97 (pp. 289-298).
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Shabo, CSCL, 97, JavaCAP: .

Tabak, Iris CSCL 97 Complementary roles of s/w-based scaffolding and teacher-student
interactions in inquiry learning (p.289)

Williamson, David, Design Studio metaphor for computer supported learning (ICLS
99)

Authors' addresses

Janet L. Kolodner (jlk@cc.gatech.edu)
GCATT Building, EduTech; 250 14th Street, NW, Suite #138; Atlanta, GA 30318. Tel.
(404) 894-7435. Fax (404) 894-5041.
Kristine Nagel (kris@cc.gatech.edu)
GCATT Building, EduTech; 250 14th Street, NW, Suite #130;#138; Atlanta, GA 30318.
Tel. (404) 894-7435. Fax (404) 894-5041.
Kristine Nagel (kris@cc.gatech.edu)
GCATT Building,EduTech; 250 14th Street, NW, Suite #140; Atlanta, GA 30318. Tel.
(404) 894-7435. Fax (404) 894-5041.
