Toward a Dialogic Theory of Learning: Bakhtin's
Contribution to Understanding Learning in Settings of
Collaboration
Timothy Koschmann

Southern Illinois University

      Abstract: I propose here a new theoretical framework for understanding
      learning as a socially-grounded phenomenon based the writings of the
      Russian philologist, M. M. Bakhtin. Bakhtin's writings on the dialogic
      nature of all texts provide the basis for a new view of language,
      knowledge, and learning. From this perspective, learning is seen as the
      process of multiple voices coming into contact, both within and across
      speaker-produced utterances. Examples are provided of two types of
      studies based on such a theory of learning: studies of the appropriation of
      a social language and studies of speech genres. I conclude by recounting
      the potential advantages of adopting dialogicality as a conceptual basis for
      ongoing work in CSCL.

      Keywords: Bakhtin, social languages, speech genres, theories of learning

             In ordinary everyday behavior, in what sense can we examine a
             talking unless we bring a hearing along with it into account?

                                        (Dewey & Bentley, 1991/1949, p. 127)

Introduction

In the conventional (and occasionally disputed) expansion of the acronym CSCL as
"Computer Support for Collaborative Learning," the expression collaborative learning is
sometimes understood as denoting a particular type of learning, in the same way that
creative writing denotes a particular type of writing. I would argue, on the other hand,
that collaborative learning might be better construed as a theory of pedagogy, specifically
the theory that learning is enhanced when it occurs in settings of joint activity. If
collaborative learning is a theory about teaching, however, what is the theory of learning
that underlies work in CSCL? I made the claim previously (Koschmann, 1996) that
research in CSCL can be distinguished from other work in educational technology in its
adoption of "socially-oriented" theories of learning and went on to describe three possible
candidate theories, namely Neo-Piagetian conflict theory, Cultural/Historical Activity
Theory (CHAT), and social practice theory.

Here I propose yet another theoretical framework for understanding learning as a
socially-grounded phenomenon based on the writings of the Russian philologist, M. M.
Bakhtin. References to Bakhtin have begun to appear with increasing frequency in work
on discourse and education. In this paper, I will attempt to show how Bakhtin's treatment
of "voice" and "dialogicality" can serve as a basis for reconceptualizing learning.

Bakhtin's Notion of Dialogicality

As a literary theorist, Bakhtin was centrally concerned with issues of language and
language use. He examined how novelists like Dickens and Dostoevsky employed
different voices in the development of their fictional works. Bakhtin's analysis extended
beyond literary text, however, to all uses of language. Indeed, Bakhtinian scholars such
as Kozulin (1996), have generalized his ideas to apply to all aspects of human conduct,
including "human thoughts, acts, and intentions" (p. 149). Bakhtin's writings on
dialogicality are profound and represent a substantive shift from prevailing views on the
nature of language and knowledge (Holquist, 1990).(1) Dialogicality is a term meant to
capture the relational nature of all texts. It shares two roots with the more commonly used
dialogue (the Greek dia for through and logos for word) and concerns the way in which
dialogue occurs within and across particular utterances. I will briefly survey some of the
ways that dialogicality has been developed in the work of Bakhtin and others.

Bakhtin demonstrated how the voices of others become woven into what we say, write,
and think. The term intertextuality (Kristeva, 1990) can be used to describe this property
of all texts, spoken, inscribed, or otherwise performed. Bakhtin used the terms
polyphonous and multivocal to describe text in which multiple voices can be discerned.
Polyphony is one way, therefore, in which single utterances can be viewed and analyzed
as dialogic.

Wertsch (1998) describes how our culture supplies us with various forms or
"patternings," which Bakhtin (1986) describe as social languages and speech genres
(about which I will have more to say later), to facilitate communication. Wertsch (1998)
argues that these cultural tools can be mastered and/or be appropriated. Mastery, for
Wertsch, is a special form of internalization that entails knowing how to use a social
language or construct text in a particular genre. Appropriation may go along with
mastery, but this is not always the case. Appropriation, for Wertsch, involves an aspect of
intentionality, that is a tool is appropriated when it can be bent to the agent's purposes. As
Wertsch says, "an agent may use a cultural tool but [do] so with a feeling of conflict or
resistance" (p. 56). Appropriation and mastery represent a form of tension within a text
and, as a result, are analyzable aspect of text production.

Wertsch (Wertsch & Bivens 1992; Wertsch & Smolka, 1993; Wertsch, 1998) also
described how the text itself may serve two distinct purposes. The "functional dualism"
of text is a concept Wertsch attributes to the Soviet semiotician, Lotman. Lotman (1985)
described how text serves both, "to convey meanings adequately and to generate new
meanings" (p. 34). Though this tension exists in all texts, the degree to which it evidences
itself may vary widely across text types. Some text may be designed to transmit meaning
in a way that inhibits all but one canonical reading (e.g., a legal document (2) or a formal
proof), while others (e.g., a short story, a poem) maybe designed to be read ambiguously.
Bakhtin described a dynamic tension between the centripetal (or centralizing) and the
centrifugal (or decentralizing) aspects of all living languages. Some forms of discourse
may be designed to suppress the destabilizing aspects of language use by seeking to
uphold a particular sanctioned viewpoint, an issue Bakhtin discussed in terms of
"authoritative" versus "internally-persuasive" discourses (Prior, 1995).

At its most fundamental, dialogicality addresses an ontological distinction between self
and other (Holquist, 1990). All speech (even internal) has an intended audience, a
property referred to as addressivity. The "other" enters into speech not only as an
audience and interlocutor, but is also embedded in our every utterance. Bakhtin wrote:

      . . . word is a two-sided act. It is determined equally by whose word it is
      and for whom it is meant. As word, it is precisely the product of the
      reciprocal relationship between speaker and listener, addresser and
      addressee. (Voloshinov, 1973, p. 86) (3)

This reciprocal relationship leads to a form of tension that Wertsch (1998) describes as
the conflict between intersubjectivity (i.e., the need to develop shared understanding with
others) and alterity (i.e., the opposing need to distinguish oneself from the other).
Ultimately, this conflict is the fundamental basis for what I am describing as
dialogicality.

Learning as Transaction: A Third Metaphor

Deborah Hicks (1996a) wrote, "Learning occurs as the co-construction (or
reconstruction) of social meanings from within the parameters of emergent, socially
negotiated, and discursive activity" (p. 136). What she is proposing is a theory of learning
based on Bakhtin's notion of dialogicality. Wertsch and Smolka (1993) described
dialogicality as concerning "the various ways in which two or more voices come into
contact" (p. 73) and go on to say, "understanding is a process wherein the utterances of a
listener come into contact with and confront the utterances of a speaker" (p. 74). There
are some important ramifications of shifting from our more commonly held views of
what constitutes learning to a dialogic view. First, such a move has the effect of
decentering learning, locating it in social interaction rather than in the head of any one
learner. Second, it effects a shift from viewing learning as a discrete achievement or
event to a more dynamic and process-based account. Third, since meaning for Bakhtin is
always constructed locally and is situationally determined (see definition of heteroglossia
in the Emerson and Holquist (1981) glossary), dialogicality treats the content of learning,
not as given, but rather as emergent, nondeterministic, and contingent (Hicks, 1996a).
Finally, there is an element of agency to dialogic learning that is missing in traditional
behavioral and cognitive accounts of learning. This aspect of agency adds a normative or
moralistic dimension to the theory, as seen in Clark and Holquist's (1984) discussion of
"answerability" or Hicks' (1996b) description of the development of self consciousness.

Sfard (1998) described two dominant metaphors for learning: the acquisition metaphor in
which learning is treated as "gaining possession over some commodity" (p. 6) and the
participation metaphor in which learning is conceptualized as changing roles and
identities within communities of shared practice. Current socially-oriented theories of
learning can be divided on the basis of the metaphor to which the theory appeals-neo-
Piagetian conflict theory, Vygotskian internalization theories, and distributed cognition
all treat learning as a form of acquisition; while social practice theory explicitly employs
a participation metaphor. Earlier (Koschmann, in press), I proposed a third possible
metaphor for learning based on Dewey's notion of transactionalism. Using the metaphor
of a simple sales transaction, learning can be seen as a transaction taking place between
the learner and the environing situation. Employing such a metaphor affords a broader
view of learning, one that includes both changes to the learner (acquisition effects) and to
the learner's social environment (participation effects).

Dialogue is itself a transactional process and, as a consequence, a dialogic theory of
learning might be considered to be a transactional theory. Hicks (1996a) described
thinking as a "boundary phenomenon," a term she attributes to Emerson (1983) and
Shotter (1993). As such, she argues, it does not exist "as a property of either the
individual or her culture" (p. 109). A dialogic theory of learning, however, attends to
changes in both, treating them as concomitant sides of a single transaction. To study
either side in isolation, as occurs when one applies a view of learning as strictly
acquisition or participation inevitably produces a distorted picture of the full unfolding
process. Focusing on participants' voices (and the voices within their voices), on the other
hand, offers a new and powerful framework for analyzing learning, one that allows for an
appreciation of changes taking place both within the individual and the social
environment.

Studying Learning as Discursive and Dialogic

In a panel presented at the last CSCL conference, Scardamalia (1997) described three
approaches being considered as a means of documenting "knowledge building"
(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996) on the part of students working in Knowledge Forum.
One approach was to simply report usage data (number of times read, number of times
referenced) for notes in the system. A second was to compare student-generated text to
that produced by a content expert using a statistical textual analysis technique (Landauer,
Foltz, & Laham, 1998). Finally, Scardamalia proposed analyzing the content of the
students' notes for evidence that the students considered their contributions "improvable."

Bakhtin's notion of dialogicality provides an alternative means for conceptualizing (and
making claims about) knowledge building. If knowledge is a "boundary object" as Hicks
(1996a) suggested and understanding occurs in the places where "two or more voices
come into contact" (in the words of Wertsch and Smolka, 1993), then knowledge building
should be analyzable as a property of the student-generated texts themselves.

Bakhtin advocated a unit of analysis based on utterances (Wertsch, 1991, 1998). The
utterance is the locus whereby we "appropriate the words of others and populate them
with [our] own intentions" (Wertsch, 1998, p. 78, quoting Bakhtin). Bakhtin (1986)
wrote, "An absolutely understood and completed sentence, if it is a sentence and not an
utterance comprised of one sentence, cannot evoke a responsive reaction: it is
comprehensible, but it is still not all." As a consequence, Wertsch (1998) specified that
utterances are not analyzable in isolation but must be studied instead with reference to the
culturally-supplied mediational structures of which they are instantiations. As mentioned
earlier in the description of dialogicality, Bakhtin distinguished between "two patternings
of utterances" (Wertsch, 1998, p. 74): social languages and speech genres. The former
allows for a classification of utterances on the basis of "particular groups of speakers"
(Wertsch, 1998, p. 76), while the latter categorizes utterances on the basis of the settings
within which the speech is produced .

In describing social languages, Wertsch (1998) pointed toward Bakhtin's description of
"professional, social, generational, and gender 'stratifications' of language" (p. 76).
Studies of how learners appropriate particular social languages, such as the specialized
languages of science abound (e.g., Ballenger, 1997; Leander & Brown, 1999; Lemke,
1993; Rosebery, Warren, & Conant, 1992). An example perhaps more familiar to this
community is Roschelle's (1996) study of the appropriation of the technical language of
physics by two students. One aspect of knowledge building, therefore, that could be
studied within the framework of dialogicality would be the appropriation of particular
social languages within the texts generated by students, not only noticing the occurrence
of special terminology, but also tracing its ontogenesis as was done in the Roschelle
(1996) study.

Bakhtin (1986) described speech genres in this way:

      Speech genres organize our speech in almost the same way as grammatical
      (syntactical) forms do. We learn to cast our speech in generic forms and,
      when hearing others' speech, we guess its genre from the first words; we
      predict a certain length (that is, the approximate length of the speech
      whole) and a certain compositional structure; we foresee the end; that is,
      from the very beginning we have a sense of the speech whole, which is
      only later differentiated during the speech process. (p. 87; quoted in
      Wertsch, 1998)

Classroom discourse has been extensively studied as a special form of speech genre.
There have been, for example, numerous studies of how teacher-organized talk provides
opportunities for students to voice their understandings (e.g., Forman, Larreamendy-
Joerns, Stein, & Brown, 1998; Forman, McCormick, & Danato, 1998; O'Connor &
Michaels, 1993; Wells, 1996). Others have studied how student-produced speech and text
become interanimated by the voices of others. Crook (1994), for example, described the
delicate interweaving of voices that occurred when two students planned a narrative
together at the computer. Wertsch and Toma (1995) analyzed videotape of fifth-grade
students discussing a balance beam experiment, focusing in particular on examples of
"indirect speech," that is, instances in which speakers incorporated text from prior talk.
They cited evidence that "pupils . . . treat their utterances and those of others as thinking
devices" (p. 171). In a series of more recent studies described by Wertsch (1998), college
undergraduates were asked to prepare essays on the historical origins of the U.S. These
essays were then analyzed to show how the texts demonstrated the voice of the agent
producing unique utterances within a culturally-provided genre, the genre of the class
essay. These studies involve understanding not only the degree to which learners
appropriate particular genres (i.e., classroom discourse, essay writing), but also the
degree to which the genres themselves afford opportunities for the expression of the
multivocal aspects of learner-produced utterances. This latter point is particularly
relevant in the context of the less well-studied and emergent genres made possible by
new mediating technologies such as the Knowledge Forum.

Toward a Theory of Learning in and through Collaboration

In his remarks in the closing panel at CSCL '97, Roy Pea (1997) posed the question, what
would represent a 'breakthrough' in CSCL research? Given the current state of the field,
however, it would be very difficult to formulate an answer to this question. Kuhn (1972)
illuminated how a shift in paradigm requires an attendant shift in the theoretical
underpinnings by which the research utilizing the new paradigm is motivated and
understood. An even cursory review of recently published in this area, however, would
suggest that a shared theoretical foundation has yet to be achieved. Absent such a
common framework, it is impossible to define a set of agreed upon research questions, an
obvious prerequisite to entertaining any discussions about 'breakthrough' or grand
challenges.

A "literary" (Kozulin, 1996) theory of learning, based on Bakhtin's notion of
dialogicality, is a particularly attractive candidate as an integrative theory of learning for
work in CSCL. Its focus on the analysis of voice in texts is useful in a field in which
much of what we have to study, like Scardamalia's Knowledge Forum notes, is text-
based. Further, it does not require us to abandon the most valuable features of other
socially-oriented theories of learning (e.g., conflict and accommodation, scaffolding,
communities of practice) as these can be easily assimilated within a dialogic theory. This
flexibility highlights the reflexive nature of the theory-not only does it seek to give an
account of the multivocal nature of text, it is itself a theory that allows for the expression
of multiple voices. It is, in short, just the right kind of theory for a polyphonous area of
research such as CSCL.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Paul Feltovich, Deborah Hicks, Eric Knuth, Gerry Stahl, Jim
Wertsch, and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on an earlier version
of this paper.

Footnotes

(1) I cannot hope to do justice to the extensive corpus of writing on and by Bakhtin here
and I encourage the interested reader to pursue these issues in greater depth in one or
more of the available translations of his work (e.g., Bakhtin, 1981, 1984, 1986;
Voloshinov, 1973), biographies (Clark & Holquist, 1984; Morson & Emerson, 1990), and
related commentaries (cf., Hicks, 1996a, 1996b; Holquist, 1990; Kozulin, 1996; Wertsch,
1991, 1998).

(2) But see Hanks (1995) on the "crisis of text" in law.

(3) This is one of the "disputed texts" assumed by many translators and commentators
(e.g., Clark & Holquist, 1989; Wertsh, 1998) to have been actually authored by Bakhtin.

Bibliography

Bakhtin, M. (1981). Discourse in the novel (M. Holquist & C. Emerson, Trans.). In M.
Holquist (Ed.), The dialogic imagination (pp. 259-422). Austin: University of Texas
Press.

Bakhtin, M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky's poetics. Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press.

Bakhtin, M. (1986). The problem of speech genres (V. McGee, Trans.). In C. Emerson &
M. Holquist (Eds.), Speech genres and other late essays (pp. 60-102). Austin: Univ. of
Texas Press.

Ballenger, C. (1997). Social identities, moral narratives, scientific argumentation: Science
talk in a bilingual classroom. Language and Education, 11, 1-14.

Clark, K. & Holquist, M. (1984). Mikhail Bakhtin. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Crook, C. (1994). Computers and the collaborative experience of learning. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Dewey, J. & Bentley, A. (1991/1949). Knowing and the known. In J. A. Boydston (Ed.),
John Dewey: The later works, 1949-1952, Vol. 16. Carbondale, IL: SIU Press. [Originally
published as Dewey, J. & Bentley, A. (1949). Knowing and the known. Beacon Press.]

Emerson, C. (1983). The outer and inner speech: Bakhtin, Vygotsky, and the
internalization of language. Critical Inquiry, 10, 245-264.

Emerson, C. & Holquist, M. (1981). Glossary. In M. Holquist (Ed.), The dialogic
imagination (pp. 423-434). Austin, TX: U. of Texas Press.

Forman, E., Larreamendy-Joerns, J., Stein, M.K., & Brown, C.A. (1998). "You're going
to want to find out which and prove it": Collective argumentation in a mathematics
classroom. Learning and Instruction, 8, 527-548.

Forman, E., McCormick, D., & Danato, R. (1998). Learning what counts as a
mathematics explanation. Linguistics and Education, 9, 313-339.
Hanks, W. (1995). When utterances become objects. Journal of Contemporary Legal
Issues, 6, 173-186.

Hicks, D. (1996a). Contextual inquiries: A discourse-oriented study of classroom
learning. In D. Hicks (Ed.), Discourse, Learning, and Schooling (pp. 104-141). New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Hicks, D. (1996b). Learning as a prosaic act. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 3, 102-118.

Holquist, M. (1990). Dialogism: Bakhtin and his world. London: Routledge.

Koschmann, T. (1996). Paradigm shifts and instructional technology. In T. Koschmann
(Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 1-23). Mahwah, NJ:
LEA.

Koschmann, T. (in press). A third metaphor for learning: Toward a Deweyan form of
trans-actional inquiry. To appear in D. Klahr & S. Carver (Eds.), Cognition and
instruction: 25 years of progress. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Kozulin, A. (1996). A literary model for psychology. In D. Hicks (Ed.), Discourse,
Learning, and Schooling (pp. 145-164). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Kristeva, J. (1990). Desire in language: A semiotic approach to literature and art. NY:
Columbia University Press.

Kuhn, T.S. (1972). The structure of scientific revolutions (2nd Ed.). Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Landauer, T., Foltz, P., & Laham D. (1990). An introduction to latent semantic
processing. Discourse Processes, 25, 259-84.

Leander, K. & Brown, D. (1999). "You understand, but you don't believe it": Tracing the
stabilities and instabilities of interaction in a physics classroom through a
multidimensional framework. Cognition and Instruction, 17, 93-135.

Lemke, J. (1993). Talking science: Language, learning, and values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Lotman, Y.M. (1988). Text within a text. Soviet Psychology, 26(3), 32-51.

Morson, G. & Emerson, C. (1990). Mikhail Bakhtin: Creation of a prosaics. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.

O'Connor, M.C. & Michaels, S. (1993). Aligning academic task and participation status
through revoicing: Analysis of a classroom discourse strategy. Anthropology and
Education Quarterly, 24, 318-335.
Pea, R. (1997, December). Comments at a panel entitled, "Where do we go from here?"
at CSCL '97, Toronto, Ontario. [Avail. on CSCL '97 CD-ROM]

Prior, P. (1995). Tracing authoritative and internally persuasive discourses: A case study
of response, revision, and disciplinary enculturation. Research in the Teaching of
English, 29, 288-325.

Roschelle, J. (1996). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. In T.
Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm (pp. 209-248).
Mahwah, NJ: LEA.

Rosebery, A., Warren, B., & Conant, F. (1992). Appropriating scientific discourse:
Findings from language minority classrooms. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 61-94.

Scardamalia, M. (1997, December). Presented at a panel entitled, "TeleLearning Network
Centres of Excellence" at CSCL '97, Toronto, Ontario. [Avail. at:
http://www.oise.on.ca/cscl/]

Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge-building
communities. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging
Paradigm (pp. 249-268). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.

Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one.
Educational Researcher, 27(2), 4-13.

Shotter, J. (1993). Cultural politics of everyday life: Social constructionism, rhetoric, and
knowing of the third kind. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Voloshinov, V.N. (1973). Marxism and the philosophy of language (L. Matejka & I.R.
Titunik, Trans.). New York: Seminar Press.

Wells, G. (1996). Using the tool-kit of discourse in the activity of learning and teaching.
Mind, Culture and Activity, 3, 74-101.

Wertsch, J. (1991). Voices of the mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Wertsch, J. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.

Wertsch, J. & Bivens, J.A. (1992). The social origins of individual mental functioning:
Alternatives and perspectives. Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory of Comparative
Human Cognition, 14(2), 35-44.

Wertsch, J. & Smolka, A.L. (1993). Continuing the dialogue: Vygotsky, Bakhtin, and
Lotman. In H. Daniels (Ed.), Charting the agenda: Educational activity after Vygotsky
(pp. 69-92). London: Routledge.
Wertsch, J. & Toma, C. (1995). Discourse and learning in the classroom: A sociocultural
approach. In L. Steffe & J. Gale (Eds.), Constructivism in education (pp. 159-174).
Mahwah, NJ: LEA.

Author's addresses

Timothy (tkoschmann@acm.org)
Department of Medical Education; Southern Illinois University; School of Medicine;
P.O. Box 19230, Springfield, IL 62704-9230. Tel. (217) 785-4396. Fax (217) 524-0192.
