A System for Supporting Group Learning that
Enhances Interactions
Fusako Kusunoki

Tama Art University, Department of Information Design

Masanori Sugimoto

University of Tokyo, Information Technology Center

Hiromichi Hashizume

National Center for Science Information Systems, Research and Development
Department

      Abstract: In this paper, we describe and evaluate a system for supporting
      group learning that enhances interactions among learners. To date we have
      constructed several systems for supporting collaborative learning. One of
      the aims of CSCL is to promote mutual learning through interactions and
      discussions among learners. Our previous experiments, however, have
      shown that these systems may not be so effective for supporting
      interactions and discussions at times. In order to enhance interactions
      further, a system should support externalization of each learner in an
      easily recognizable manner. Through such externalization, learners can
      actively collaborate or conflict with each other through discussions.

      The proposed system integrates a board game and a computer simulation,
      and is used for studying urban planning and environmental problems.
      Each learner externalizes and represents his/her own ideas on a board
      game, which allows him/her to actively participate in a learning situation
      and to share the representations with other learners. The computer
      simulation helps the learners to understand the status of the town
      constructed on the board game.

      Several experiments were carried out in a public elementary school. The
      results show that our system is effective for enhancing interactions,
      discussions and learner engagement.

      Keywords: game, simulation, evaluation

Introduction

In this paper, we describe and evaluate a system for supporting group learning that
enhances interactions. To date we have constructed several systems for supporting
collaborative learning [Kusunoki97][Kusunoki98]. One of the aims of CSCL (Computer-
Supported Collaborative Learning) [Koschmann96] is to promote mutual learning
through interactions and discussions among learners. Our previous experiments, however,
have shown that these systems may not be so effective for supporting interactions and
discussions at times [Kusunoki98]. In order to enhance interactions further, a system
should support externalization of each learner in an easily recognizable manner. Through
such externalization, learners can actively collaborate or conflict with each other through
discussions.

The proposed system integrates a board game and a computer simulation [Arias97], and
is used for studying urban planning and environmental problems. Each learner
externalizes and represents his/her own ideas on a board game, which allows him/her to
actively participate in a learning situation and to share the representations with other
learners. The computer simulation helps the learners to understand the status of the town
constructed on the board game, in terms of air pollution, water pollution, etc..

We carried out several experiments with the system in a public elementary school. The
experiments showed that our system is effective for enhancing interactions, activating
discussions, and raises learner engagement as it increases the game sense [Kafai95] and
authenticity of a problem [Norman96].

System Configuration

Overview

The system is comprised of three components: a board game, scenario cards, and a
computer simulation.

   ·  Board game: The board game is composed of a checkerboard, game pieces, and
      geographic objects (Figure 1). There are three kinds of pieces: ''houses",
      ''factories", and ''trees." Geographic objects include "mountains", "rivers," and
      other similar elements of nature. Learners first discussed where to arrange these
      geographical objects on the board in order to construct a town resembling their
      own.
   ·  Scenario cards: Scenario cards give learners a certain direction or contextual
      message regarding their learning situation. Figure 2 shows an example of these
      cards with messages such as "You cannot build a house next to a factory," "You
      should be careful of the increase in air pollution in your town." Before putting a
      game piece on a board, a learner must draw a card. Based on its written message,
      a learner confirms the current status of the town through the board and a computer
      simulation, and talks about his/her next action with other learners. The cards,
      therefore, enhance learners' reflections and promote their paying attention to the
      board, computer simulation, and other learners.
   ·  Computer simulation: Figure 3 shows an example of the results of a computer
      simulation. When a learner completes his/her action, a computer simulation
      updates the status of a town. In the upper left of the image, the status of town's air,
      water and soil pollution are anthropomorphically visualized, as this makes it
      easier for learners to relate to the simulation. When a serious environmental
      problem happens, the simulation not only changes its visualization (i.e., changes
      the expressions of each object in the figure), but also shows a textual message,
      such as "the air is heavily polluted" in the center of the image.

Currently the computer simulation is not linked to the board game, and the experimenters
had to input the actions of the learners manually (for example, the location of a placed
piece and the cards drawn).

   Figure 1: A Board Game that Supports the Learning of Urban and Environmental
                                     Problems

Usage of the System

Learners first set up a board by arranging geographic objects. Then, one learner draws a
card and puts a piece on the board by following the direction of the card. Each learner
does the same in turn. After each learner completes his/her move, the computer
simulation calculates and visualizes the current status of the town.
                     Figure 2: An Example of Scenario Cards

After reviewing the simulation, the next learner considers what move to play next. For
example, if air pollution is a problem, the learner may change his/her initial idea and
place a "forest" piece. Finally, when the design of the town is complete or time has run
out, the computer simulation diagnoses the design of the town and points out planning
problems.

Figure 3: An Example of a Computer Simulation which Visualizes the Status of the Town
                              Being Constructed
Experiments and Evaluations

Overview

The experiments were carried out in a Japanese public elementary school located in
Yokohama city in Kanagawa prefecture. Thirty fifth-grade pupils who had studied
environmental problems in school were divided into six groups of five. Due to the time
limit of one school period, we carried out the experiments over three days. Each
experiment lasted twenty minutes.

Before starting the experiments, brief instructions, such as the usage and rules of the
system, were given to the children. Two video recorders were used to record the
experiments. One was placed in a fixed position to record the motions and interactions of
the children around a board, while the other was used to record the expressions and
actions of each children making a move, such as placing a piece on the board. A post-
experiment interview of each group was also carried out.

Evaluation

The children did not interact very frequently in the early phase of each experiment. We
believe that this is because there were few pieces on a board at these times so pieces
could be placed relatively freely. As an experiment went on, however, interactions among
the children became remarkable. Every learner read aloud what was written on a scenario
card that he/she had drawn (although we did not ask them to do so). In this manner, the
message or direction of the card was shared with the other children, who then discussed
which piece should be used next. Some children even offered advice of where to place a
piece. Collaboration and conflict among the children occurred regularly during these
moments.

The children also externalized their ideas at the same time. Every time a piece was
placed, all the children paid attention to the computer simulation. The results of the
simulation (improvement or deterioration of the town's status) excited the children and
led them to further externalize their own ideas.

In our current system, the number of different pieces and rules are not large. However,
some groups tried to extend the system by creating new rules, such as "there must be
vacant land near houses or factories," or by proposing new pieces, such as " a park."

Throughout the experiments, we were able to confirm that a board game can enhance
interactions among learners and is an effective medium for collaboration and conflict.
The integration of a board game and a computer simulation was also successful in that
both were used smoothly by the children. During post-experiment interviews it was
determined that the contents and usage of the system was not difficult, and was enjoyable
(most of the children stated that they would like to play the game again).

Several issues, however, were not made clear with these experiments. In one group, there
was one leader type pupil who had strong control over the other players. Interactions
among the children in this group were not so obvious as that in the other groups. In future
research we would like to clarify the influence of individual personalities on a group.

Another important issue is related to distributed cognition [Norman93]. In another group,
one child watched the computer simulations and always informed others of the results. In
our experiments, the tasks given to the children were not so complex: each child should
have been able to understand, judge, and decide what to do by him/herself. The relation
between task complexity and distributed cognition will be investigated in the next
experiment. Finally, the extensibility or evolutionary design of the system is critical
[Fischer98]. It should support learners' addition or modification of artifacts based on their
needs in their learning processes. Such systems seem to raise learners' engagement and
promote further externalization, interactions and collaboration.

Conclusions

Using the experience of our previous system for supporting group learning, a new system
that integrates a board game and a computer simulation was proposed in this paper.
Several experiments were carried out in a public elementary school in which it was
shown that the system could enhance interactions among learners and could promote
collaboration and conflict during their learning processes.

Recently many systems that support learning focus on the utilization of multi-media
technologies. However, the learners in most of these systems are just passive receivers of
information and are not active participants of the learning situation[Fischer98b]. The
system we proposed in this paper enables learners to interact with real objects, represent
their own ideas, share them with other learners and confirm these ideas through a
computer simulation. This allows learners to be active participants, and raises their
engagement in the learning process. We think that the system and its evaluations show
one of the critical issues regarding the use of multi-media technology in learning support
systems: how to raise learners' motivation, and the importance of interacting with real
and virtual worlds.

Acknowledgments

The authors greatly appreciate Professor Ernesto G. Arias and Gerhard Fischer of the
Center for Life Long Learning \& Design, University of Colorado, for their kind help.

Bibliography

Arias. E, Eden, H. and Fischer, G. (1994). Enhancing Communication, Facilitating
Shared Understanding, and Creating Better Artifacts by Integrating Physical and
Computational Media for Design. In Proc. of Designing Interactive Systems (DIS'97), pp.
1-12.
Fischer, G. (1998). Domain-Oriented Design Environments: Supporting Individual and
Social Creativity. In Proc. of 4th International Conference on Computational Models of
Creative Design.

Fischer, G. (1998). Beyond 'Couch Potatoes': From Consumers to Designers. In Proc. of
Asia- Pacific Computer and Human Interaction (APCHI'98), pp.2-9.

Kafai, Y. (1995). Minds in Play: Computer Game Design as a Context for Children's
Learning. Laurence Erlbaum Associates.

Koschmann T.(Ed.) (1996). CSCL : Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm,
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Kusunoki, F. and Hori, F. (1997). How to Make Their Opinions Open: Scaffolding
School Pupils in Collaborative Learning. In Proc. of Artificial Intelligence in Education -
Knowledge and Media in Learning Systems (AI-ED'97), pp. 618-620.

Kusunoki, F. (1998). Making an Interactive Environment of the Pupil, by the Pupil, for
the Pupil In Proc. of World Multiconference on Systems, Cybernetics and Informatics
(SCI'98), pp. 386- 391.

Norman, D.A. (1993). Things That Make Us Smart. Addison Wisley.

Norman, D.A. and Spohrer, J.C.(1996). Learner-Centered Education. Communications of
the ACM, Vol. 39, No. 4, pp. 24-27.

Authors' addresses

Fusako Kusunoki(kusunoki@tamabi.ac.jp)
Tama Art University, Department of Information Design; 2-1723 Yarimizu Hachioji-city;
Tokyo 192-0394 Japan. Tel. +81-426-76-2935. Fax. +81-426
Masanori Sugimoto(sugi@rd.nacsis.ac.jp)
University of Tokyo, Information Technology Center; University Library 7-3-1 Hongo
Bunkyo-ku; Tokyo 113-0033 Japan. Tel. +81-3-5841-2738.
Hiromichi Hashizume(has@rd.nacsis.ac.jp)
National Center for Science Information Systems, Research and Development
Department; 3-29- 1 Otsuka Bunkyo-ku; Tokyo 112-8640 Japan. Tel. +81-3-3942-6918.
Fax. +81-3-5391-7064.
