Revealing Common Ground: Augmentation on the
Edges of Interpretive Communities
Rick Borovoy, Fred Martin, Mitchel Resnick

MIT Media Laboratory

      Abstract: At the center of an intellectual community, members draw upon
      their knowledge of shared assumptions to have nuanced discussions about
      complex ideas. Newcomers to the conversation, who are on the edge of
      this "interpretive community," do not partake in the common ground
      necessary to join these discussions and can find themselves in a trapped
      state. We are designing a new kind of computationally-generated
      augmentation that jumpstarts the search for meaningful common ground ñ
      both for people trying to join an established interpretive community, and
      for people trying to form a new one. This paper discusses the application
      of this type of augmentation, called the µ -cue, to both face-to-face and
      on-line communities.

      Keywords: community settings, groupware, handheld devices, shared
      knowledge

Introduction

We have designed, built, and done proof-of-concept testing on two types of
computationally-augmented name tags ñ called "GroupWear" ñ that provide
augmentation on the edges of co-present interpretive communities, such as academic
conferences. We were drawn to the idea of supporting the search for common ground in
conference settings for three reasons: first, anyone who has ever attended a conference
knows the need is acute; second, we found it paradoxical that researchers like ourselves
spend a lot of time working in such collaborative settings, but not much time working on
them; and third, one of the main goals of our own laboratory is ñ in addition to building
new types of technology ñ to create new communities of sponsors and researchers. We
were intrigued with bridging these goals, and creating a new technology that could help
build community in face-to-face settings.

Although various aspects of the design and testing of the GroupWear technologies have
been written about elsewhere (e.g., Borovoy et al., 1996, 1998), this paper introduces a
new organizing concept for a particular kind of augmentation that establishes mutual
knowledge ñ the "µ -cue" (where the Greek letter mu sounds like the first syllable in
"mutual", and mutual knowledge is synonymous with common ground). It then
repositions these technologies, as well as a host of pre-existing examples, as µ -cue
instances. This paper also introduces some initial work on applying µ -cues to on-line
communities.
For each of the three technologies we present, the µ -cue becomes the basis for
articulating our design rational for both past and future work. Although defining the µ -
cue this late in the design process might sound more like a design rationalization, we
believe the it nicely distills a large number of previously articulated design goals into a
single, parsimonious concept.

The µ -cue

When two cars pull up to an intersection posted with "4 Way" stop signs (see Figure 1),
their drivers immediately share a set of assumptions that that allow them to make
appropriate sense of each otherís actions. For example, from Driver Aís perspective:

   ·  Driver A knows Driver B has a stop sign. Therefore, if Driver B drives through
      the intersection without stopping, Driver A can confidently interpret this as an
      unlawful act, and respond appropriately (e.g. by honking, gesturing, etc.).
   ·  Driver A knows Driver B knows Driver A has a stop sign. Therefore, if Driver A
      is inclined to ignore her stop sign, she can be confident Driver B will interpret it
      as an unlawful act, and she will be able to interpret his response accordingly.

                                Figure 1. 4 Way Stop Sign

In the above example, the two drivers have formed an ad-hoc "interpretive community" ñ
the literary theorist Stanley Fishís term for a community that shares enough of the same
knowledge, beliefs, and practices to be able to negotiate the meaning of a particular text
(Fish, 1980). In the Cultural Studies tradition, a text can be a novel, a film, an utterance,
or, in this case, a street intersection and the activity within it. Ordinarily, interpretive
communities are thought to grow slowly and incrementally over long periods of time.
However, the small "4 Way" sign-within-a-sign plays an important role in creating a
"quantum leap" toward an interpretive community: by establishing the fact that "everyone
has a stop sign" as common ground for the drivers, much of the meaning of intersection
activity can then be shared.

We are very interested in how a small cue like a "4 Way" sign can help jumpstart an
interpretive community. The "4 Way" sign works by transforming an existing pattern of
common knowledge into mutual knowledge, where common knowledge is knowledge
that is shared, but not known to be shared (our definition), and mutual knowledge is
"knowledge that is shared, and known to be shared" (Krauss & Fussell, 1990).
Specifically, the "4 Way" sign transforms a situation where everyone at an intersection
knows he or she must stop ñ a pattern of common knowledge ñ to a situation where
everyone knows everyone must stop, and everyone knows everyone knows everyone
must stop ñ mutual knowledge. This last clause, while sounding ridiculous, is crucial. If
we stop at "everyone knows everyone must stop", then each person might still think that
while he or she knows that everyone has to stop, the other people do not know it (for
more of this type of analysis, see Clark and Carlson, 1982).

We define a µ -cue as an artifact that augments the edges of an interpretive community
by transforming an existing pattern of common knowledge into mutual knowledge. Edges
of interpretive communities occur both when a newly forming community struggles to
establish some common ground (such as when four drivers pull up to an intersection),
and when a newcomer attempts to acquire enough of the mutual knowledge of an
established community to begin to make appropriate sense of its discourse. We define µ -
cues in terms of community edges because in the center of these communities, members
have already established a large body of mutual knowledge; it is on the outskirts that
initiates need help in their search for common ground.

The importance of µ -cues can be gauged by their many instantiations in everyday life. In
addition to "4 Way" stop signs, consider:

   ·  Laughter: A member of a group makes an obscure reference to an old Monty
      Python (a now-defunct English comedy troupe) skit, and several people laugh.
      These people simultaneously discover that knowledge they may have thought was
      idiosyncratic is shared by some of the other group members, giving them a
      pleasant feeling of community.
   ·  Dry Cleaning Tags: "Weíre sorry, but after repeated attempts, we were unable to
      remove this stainÖ" These embedded notes establish the presence and status of a
      clothing stain as mutual knowledge. Without them, the customer would not know
      whether to interpret the lingering stain as evidence of an oversight, a lack of
      effort, or of an indelible mark.
   ·  Email Headers: The "To:" and "Cc:" fields at the top of an email message
      establish its contents as mutual knowledge among its recipients. Users take these
      µ -cues for granted, but they are a very powerful feature: one can imagine early
      designers of email systems seeing no need to provide such information. These
      cues are powerful because they establish shared knowledge that users can draw on
      to craft their own messages and to interpret the messages of others (Brown &
      Duguid, 1996).

In the following sections, we explore the design of three technologies for augmenting
community dialogue in terms of the three critical features of a µ -cue: that it operates on
the edge of an interpretive community, that it uncovers a meaningful pattern of common
knowledge, and that it establishes this pattern as mutual knowledge.
The Thinking Tag as µ -cue object

We built two hundred "Thinking Tag" computationally-augmented name tags (see Figure
2b) for the Tenth Anniversary celebration of the MIT Media Lab in 1995 (for more
details about this experiment, see Borovoy et al., 1996). Like a normal Media Lab
gathering, guests were given name tags when they entered. With the Thinking Tag, guests
could then "program" their name tags with their answers to five multiple-choice opinion
questions, such as "How would you like to spend your fifteen minutes of fame?", with
answers "a) Story on front page of New York Times", "b) Appearance on Oprah", or "c)
Home page linked to main page of Yahoo." Participants programmed their tags by
interacting with five different "bucket kiosks," one for each question (see Figure 2a).
Each kiosk was comprised of a placard that displayed the question and three buckets,
each of which was labeled with one possible answer. Participants chose their desired
answer by dunking their tag in the corresponding bucket. Now, when two guests met up,
their Thinking Tags flashed differently depending on how much they had in common.
The tags flashed one green light for every question the two people answered the same
way, and one red light for every question they disagreed on.

               Figure 2a and 2b. Bucket Kiosk and Thinking Tags

Operates on the edge of an interpretive community

Communities have two kinds of edges: the temporal edge at which a community is just
starting to form, and the "spatial" edge where someone on the outside of an established
community is trying to get in. Our first attempt at a µ -cue producing tool focused on the
temporal edge that two strangers stand on when they meet face-to-face in a conference-
type setting. We reasoned that ñ like strangers intersecting at a "4 Way" stop ñ two
strangers intersecting at a large conference might also benefit from µ -cues to help them
transform common knowledge into mutual knowledge.
Uncovers a meaningful pattern of common knowledge

We focused on membersí answers to opinion-type questions as the basis for extracting
patterns of common knowledge. Fish is very specific about the role of shared belief in
creating interpretive communities (1980), suggesting that revealing relevant common
beliefs between two people might help them better understand each other. The questions
in the Media Lab Thinking Tag event were chosen very carefully after considerable
debate and community involvement to insure not only their relevance but also their
evocativeness. If the guests did not have strong feelings about any of the questions, then
the tags would not really be uncovering patterns of preexisting beliefs, and the µ -cues
would lack meaning.

Thinking Tags are capable of not only displaying knowledge about the individuals in a
conversation, but also knowledge about their relationship (Borovoy et al., 1998b). The
reason this is more powerful is similar to why Tom Erickson explains that the World
Wide Web is powerful: it enables someone to get important information about someone
else without having to "accrue a social debt to them" (Erickson, 1996). Ordinarily, there
is a substantial cost in terms of time and effort to establishing some meaningful common
ground with someone through traditional approaches, such as awkward "Where are you
from? Do you knowÖ" conversations. This cost reflects the "chicken and egg" nature of
the "Mutual Knowledge Problem" (Krauss & Fussell, 1990) ñ it is hard to find it when
you donít have some already, and you donít have any unless you find it. By reducing this
cost, we hoped the tags might help people have more meaningful conversations, both in
terms of quantity and quality.

Establishes mutual knowledge

There is a potential problem with computationally augmented name tags supporting
mutual knowledge. Ordinary name tags establish mutual knowledge because the wearer
knows what is on his or her own tag, and knows that the viewer will also know it. When
the content of the tag is being generated dynamically, however, the wearer no longer
knows exactly what information he or she is displaying. This could result in the
uncomfortable situation where a viewer reacts to the contents of a wearerís tag, and the
wearer does not know how to make sense of the reaction. For the Thinking Tags, we
solved this problem by designing an augmentation scheme that could show the same
contents on both guestsí tags. That way, two guests conversing could look at each othersí
tags, and immediately know the contents of their own.

We observed that guests wanted to test to make sure their tags were displaying the same
content as their conversation partners, especially early on in the event. Fortunately, it was
easy for them to peer down on their own flashing Thinking Tag and verify that it matched
their friendís. In this way, the Thinking Tag type of wearable computer is well suited to
building mutual knowledge. This is much less true for the style of wearable computer
with a "private" display that just the wearer can see (e.g., Starner et al, 1996). Anyone
who has ever held a conversation with someone wearing this type of computer knows
how difficult it is to establish a sense of common ground without knowing what
information the other person is viewing. While these wearables have many powerful uses,
helping community members establish mutual knowledge is not one of them.

One might ask whether we really needed technology to do this activity. Could the same
mutual knowledge be created if people simply wrote their answers to their opinion
questions on their name tags and then looked at the tags of others to discover what they
had in common? The problem is that a guest would have no way of immediately knowing
whether his or her conversation partner had done the comparison, even if the guest
witnessed the partner looking at the guestís tag. While "physical copresence" can
establish the contents of a name tag as mutual knowledge (Krauss and Fussell, 1990), it
can not similarly establish the result of an analysis of the contents. In order to make this
mutual knowledge, the analysis must be part of the contents.

Meme Tags and Community Mirrors as µ -cue objects

In 1997, two years after the debut of the Thinking Tags, we introduced the Meme Tags at
another Media Lab conference (for more detailed explication of the Meme Tags, see
Borovoy et al., 1998a). A meme (rhymes with team) is a culturally transmitted gene ñ an
idea that survives and replicates if it is useful and dies out if it is not (Dawkins, 1989).
We built four hundred Meme Tags for the members of the Things That Think and Digital
Life consortia, two groups of about fifty companies each that were meeting
simultaneously. Guest were able to add memes ñ short pieces of text (sixty-four
characters) expressing their opinions, predictions, favorite aphorisms and witticisms ñ
into their tags. Examples of memes were: "If brute force isnít working, youíre not using
enough of it" or "Microsoft should be broken up." When two people met, their tags
communicated, and each tag offered its viewer a meme that the owner subscribed to and
that the viewer had not yet seen (see Figure 3a). If the viewer liked the meme, she could
hit her tagís green button, and the meme would be copied to her tag.

             Figures 3a and 3b. Meme Tags and a Community Mirror

Centrally located in the public spaces were the Community Mirrors: large-screen
projection monitors that displayed real-time visualizations of memetic dynamics within
the community (see Figure 3b). For example, one visualization showed the top ten
memes for a particular sub-group, such as students, faculty, sponsors, or staff. Another
visualization showed the members of the community with the most "influence," in terms
of number of times people accepted a meme from them in conversation.
Each guest on average authored two memes, and accepted five memes from their peers.
Several sponsors made impassioned pleas to keep their Meme Tags for use as a prop to
explain the activity to their colleagues back home.

Operates on the edge of an interpretive community

We designed the Meme Tags and Community Mirrors to support an interpretive
community with a few hundred copresent members, in contrast to the Thinking Tagsí
"community of two." The launching of Digital Life ñ a new consortium of researchers
and sponsors interested in "the interconnection between bits, people and things in an
online world," ñ created a temporal edge. These people needed help with the hard work
of building an interpretive community around an evolving research agenda.
Simultaneously, Things That Think, an established consortium, was welcoming several
new members that needed help getting up to speed on this community's mutual
knowledge. This created a spatial edge.

Uncovers meaningful patterns of common knowledge

As with the Thinking Tags, we focused on transforming patterns of common opinion into
mutual knowledge, with two important differences. As mentioned previously, we wanted
the patterns revealed in the Meme Tag activity to be about the entirety of the community.
Also, we hoped that people would have a larger commitment to the opinions that
constituted these patterns if they could author the ideas being exchanged themselves.

Informal observation suggested that the Community Mirrors were meaningful. Many
participants were seen lingering in front of them, discussing the contents among
themselves. One faculty member reported a conversation between himself and a sponsor,
where the sponsor kept looking over at the Community Mirror out of the corner of his
eye. Suddenly, when the faculty member was in the middle of a sentence, the sponsor
whirled around and took a picture of the display. He then explained that a meme he had
created was on "the top ten most popular memes" list, and that he wanted to document
this. Having now run the activity once, we have a much better sense of what
visualizations could support the formation of an interpretive community. These are
detailed in the following paragraphs.

The activity data shows that different sub-groups at the event had different memetic
"taste". For example, members of Digital Life were more likely to subscribe to memes
that emphasized humanism over technology (e.g. "People createÖ not computers" and
"The future will be decided by what we do, not what we make") than their Things That
Think counterparts. Using a Community Mirror to establish the widely shared nature of
these beliefs as mutual knowledge could help members create an interpretive community.
For example, Digital Life members would know that in their nascent community, they
could discuss potentially troublesome social implications of particular technologies
without being heard as technophobic. A new Things That Think member who wanted to
express the same concerns to his established community would know to phrase them
more carefully.
We noticed an interesting pattern of group behavior in one of the Community Mirrors
used at the meme tag even that suggested a whole different type of µ -cue. The
visualization showed a directed graph of how a meme spread through the community,
where the nodes represented "carriers" and were color coded by affiliation (e.g. faculty,
student, sponsor, staff). In many of these graphs, one could observe long streaks where a
meme stayed within one affiliation (e.g. a sponsor passed to another sponsor who passed
it to another sponsor, etc.) Further analysis after the event presented clear evidence of
insularity by affiliation. For example, students were found to be almost twice as likely to
talk to another student as they would have been if they mixed randomly (see Figure 4).
While each of these students may have been aware of their own somewhat insular
behavior, they may not have been aware that it was part of a larger trend. Therefore, a µ -
cue that transformed this pattern of common knowledge about peopleís behavior into
mutual knowledge in real time could have a powerful impact on behavior: students would
now be able to interpret their own behavior in terms of this larger trend, and would know
that others could do the same.

                             Figure 4. Insularity by Affiliation

A word about privacy: In order to address privacy concerns, it is crucial that tools like
Meme Tags and Community Mirrors only be used in communities that are have a strong
desire to have patterns regarding their personal tastes and behaviors transformed into
mutual knowledge. Although we purposefully kept unaggregated personal data off of the
Community Mirrors, there is no question that visualizations of such things as sub-group
insularity are a kind of surveillance. We believe this is both acceptable and desirable, as
long as the surveilant is the community itself. Therefore, the real-time, mutually-known
nature of the Community Mirrors is crucial, to avoid any hint of the Foucauldean gaze
where one group maintains power over another by knowing things about them they do
not know about themselves (1977).

Establishes mutual knowledge

The Meme Tags violated a design principle that we felt was very important for the
Thinking Tags: each tag in an exchange should show the same content, so each person
would immediately know what the other person was looking at. For the Meme Tags
activity, it was important for each person in an exchange to be able to offer a meme that
was new to the other person, making it impossible to have symmetrical content. Of
course, in the Meme Tag activity, the mutual knowledge-producing µ -cues had moved
off of the tags and onto the large-screen Community Mirrors. Therefore, the content
symmetry issue was less significant. Also, participants could still flip their own tag up to
read (upside down) what meme was being displayed. In the next generation Meme Tag,
we plan to put in a sensor that will automatically invert the text when the tag is flipped up
to be read by its wearer.

We used the principle of physical copresence to establish the contents of the Community
Mirrors as mutual knowledge, articulated by Krauss and Fussell: "If you and your friend
were physically copresent at some event (and mutually know this), you could assume that
the salient aspects of that event were also part of your common ground" (1990).
Therefore, the challenge became to insure the Community Mirrorsí salience. We did this
by making the displays large (about ten feet diagonal), by centrally locating them in the
main common spaces, and by making them call some attention to themselves via fast-
changing, brightly colored visualizations.

µ -Cues in an on-line community

In an effort to push the application of µ -cues beyond face-to-face gatherings, we have
begun to explore their effectiveness in augmenting on-line communities. Our first
experiments involved the Foresight Exchange (www.ideosphere.com): an established
community of several hundred people who place bets on the outcomes of various
member-proposed predictions (e.g. "George W. Bush wins 2000 election" and "Cancer
Cured by 2010"). Because this community requires its members to be explicit and
systematic about their opinions (in the form of bets made on a standardized set of
predictions), it is an ideal test-bed for the computation and deployment of µ -cues. (For
more details about this play-money futures market, see Hanson, 1990)

Operates on the edge of an interpretive community

From the outside looking in, an on-line community can seem especially impenetrable. As
a newcomer, one must try to make sense of scores of plain-text messages without the aid
of many of the social cues that make face-to-face gatherings "readable." (Donath, 1998) µ
-Cues have the potential to soften that hard edge and help outsiders break in to the
community of interpretation. With them, a new member can quickly discover the
common ground that connects her to the group, and the group to itself.

Uncovers meaningful patterns of common knowledge

There is opportunity in the on-line world to tap into rich, pre-existing databases to
compute useful and stimulating µ -cues. Using the Foresight Exchange (FX) data, we
have explored three different patterns of common opinion.
Measure of common interest

Newcomers to FX can display a an archive of messages posted to one of several relevant
email discussion lists. However, when one doesn't know any of the authors, this list can
seem very flat and uninformative. Therefore, we have "colorized" the authors' names on
this list: the brighter the shade of green that the author's name is written in, the more
predictions on which the viewer and the author both have a bet. It is our experience that
this simple augmentation gives one a sense of affinity with particular authors as one scans
down this list, similar to the sense of affinity one has with wearers of the original
Thinking Tags whose lights are flashing green.

Shared minority beliefs

Information Theory suggests that not all shared opinions have the same importance
(Shannon, 1948). The significance of two community members sharing an opinion varies
depending on the percentage of the entire community that shares this opinion. For
example, two strangers who discover they both believe the earth is flat will feel they have
more in common than two who discover they both believe the earth is round. Therefore,
when a user of our software reads a message on an FX discussion list, he automatically
finds out about the opinion that he and the author share that is shared by the fewest
number of other community members (of course, they may not share any opinions). We
hope this can help new users experience the strong sense of common ground we have all
felt upon meeting someone else who shares our disdain for a movie or book that everyone
else has raved about.

Surprising and predictable beliefs

Applying Information Theory in another way, we have searched out opinions that are
predictive of other opinions in the FX community. For example, on FX, one's belief that
"alien abductions will be proven true" is a pretty good predictor of one's belief that
"existence of UFOs will be verified". If a member is then discussing her opinion on the
existence of UFOs in a message, this belief can then be flagged as "surprising" or
"predictable", depending on her opinion on whether alien abductions will be proven true.
[Implementation note: when FX users discuss a particular prediction, they usually use its
official code word, which is easily recognizable by our parser]. This augmentation is
designed to help viewers assess an author's credibility by using the common sense
intuition "the more predictable an opinion is, the less credible it is". It is this same
intuition that led Americans to pay little attention to Vice President Gore when he
opposed President Clinton's impeachment, but great attention to Bob Dole, a prominent
member of the opposition party, when he also opposed it.

Prior research

While others have done work on computationally-augmented badges, these badges have
typically been used to communicate with a personís environment ñ to help track peopleís
whereabouts in a building, or to automatically forward phone calls to a userís location,
for example (e.g., Want et al., 1992). Surprisingly, no one else has used this technology
in a name-tag-like fashion to augment face-to-face interaction. Perhaps this is because
name tags, though ubiquitous, are taken for granted: one can find "dog tag" in Websterís
Collegiate Dictionary, but not "name tag" or "nametag" (1979).

There has been research on the traditional mechanisms that people use to establish mutual
knowledge (Krauss & Fussell, 1990), such as: mutual copresence at an event, inference
by category membership (e.g. "all plumbers know how to use a plunger"), and
"interactional dynamics" including verbal exchanges as well as non-verbal vocalizations
and head nods. The first two of these are of limited use in starting a meaningful
conversation, since they can not easily produce mutual knowledge that is specific to a
pair of individuals. The third requires significant interaction to establish mutual
knowledge, whereas the function of µ -cues is to establish some meaningful mutual
knowledge in advance of a sustained interaction.

Another well-known method for establishing mutual knowledge is to ensure the same
knowledge is taught to everyone in a community. This is the approach that E. D. Hirsh
advocates in his campaign for "Cultural Literacy" (1988). Many nascent communities
create such activities to give their participants a "shared experience" in an effort to create
common ground (e.g., the keynote address). However, we believe people will have
deeper connections to the knowledge and beliefs that they brought ñ and that brought
them ñ to the community. Therefore, the µ -cueís focus on existing common knowledge
will likely establish more meaningful mutual knowledge.

In the CSCL community, there has been extensive research on how children construct
shared meanings through conversation (e.g., Pea, 1996; Roschelle, 1996), and how
communities of children can participate in knowledge-building discourse (e.g.,
Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996). Much of this collaborative work takes place toward the
center of an interpretive community, however, where a structured setting has already
established a lot of common ground. At a minimum, the community members probably
know each other, know a lot of about what each other knows, and have a shared sense of
purpose. To the extent this is not true, we believe the learning tools used in this research
could benefit from the addition of µ -cue-type augmentation.

Finally, research on collaborative filtering focuses on algorithms to predict people's
preferences by extrapolating from the preferences of similar people in their on-line
community (e.g. Shardanand & Maes, 1995). Our on-line work on µ -cues is not about
making predictions, however. Instead, we use similar algorithms to report on the
predictability of community members' opinions, in an effort to provide an interpretive
context for those opinions.

Conclusion and future directions

Based on the success of our "proof of concept" work on µ -cue technology, we are
pushing ahead on two fronts. We are currently seeking out a small, academic conference
where we can do a more formal Meme Tag experiment. To do this, we would like to team
up with researchers with the appropriate sociological and anthropological backgrounds
necessary to undertake such a study. Our goal is to tightly weave the tags into the
conference's intellectual program, in an effort to improve on one of the major weaknesses
of the first trial: namely, that people demonstrated very little connection to the memes in
their tags. We are also aiming to do more user testing of the on-line µ -cue work, both
with the Foresight Exchange community, and with other communities that have similarly
accessible opinion data (e.g. political discussion sites with polling data).

Bibliography

Borovoy, R., Martin, F., Vemuri, S., Resnick, M., Silverman, B., & Hancock, C. (1998a).
Meme tags and community mirrors: Moving from conferences to collaboration. In
Proceedings of the ACM 1998 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (p.
159). New York: Association for Computing Machinery.

Borovoy, R., Martin, F., Resnick, M., and Silverman, B. (1998b). GroupWear: Nametags
that tell about relationships. In Proceedings of the CHI 98 summary conference: Human
factors in computing systems (p. 329). New York: Association for Computing Machinery.

Borovoy, R., McDonald, M., Martin, F., & Resnick, M. (1996) Things that blink:
Computationally augmented name tags. IBM Systems Journal, 35, 3 & 4.

Brown, J. S. & P. Duguid (1996). The social life of documents. First Monday, 1(1).

Clark, H. H. & Carlson, T. B. (1982). Speech acts and hearersí beliefs. In N.V. Smith
(Ed.), Mutual knowledge (pp. 1-36). London: Academic Press.

Dawkins, R. (1989). The selfish gene, New Edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Donath, J. (1998). Identity and deception in the virtual community. In M. Smith and P.
Kollock (Eds.), Communities in Cyberspace. London: Routledge.

Fish, S. (1980). Is there a text in this class?: The authority of interpretive communities.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and punish. New York: Penguin.

Erickson, T. (1996). The world wide web as social hypertext. In "Viewpoints,"
Communications of the ACM, 39, 1.

Hanson, R. (1990). Could gambling save science: Encouraging an honest consensus.
Eighth International Conference on Risk and Gambling, London.

Hirsch, E.D. (1988). Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know. New
York: Vintage Books.

Krauss, R. & Fussell, S. (1990). Mutual knowledge and communicative effectiveness. In
J. Galegher, R. E. Kraut, & C. Egido (Eds.), Intellectual teamwork: Social and
technological foundations for cooperative work (pp. 111-145). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

Pea, R. D. (1996). Seeing what we build together: Distributed multimedia learning
environments for transformative communications. In Koschmann, T. (Ed.), CSCL:
Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 171-186). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

Roschelle, J. (1996). Learning by collaborating: convergent conceptual change. In
Koschmann, T. (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 209-
248). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge-building
communities. In Koschmann, T. (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging
paradigm (pp. 249-268). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Shannon, C. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical
Journal, 27, 379-423 and 623-656.

Shardanand, U. & Maes, P. (1995). Social information filtering: Algorithms for
automating "word of mouth." In Conference Proceedings on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (p. 210). New York: Association for Computing Machinery.

Starner, T., Mann, S., Rhodes, B., Levine, J., Healey, J., Kirsch, D., Picard, R., and
Pentland, A., (1996). Augmented reality through wearable computing. Presence,
Teleoperators and Virtual Environment, 6, 4, 386-398.

Want, R., Hopper, A., Falcao, V., & Gibbons, J. (1992). The active badge location
system. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 10, 1, 91-102.

Websterís new collegiate dictionary. (1979). Springfield, MA: G. & C. Merriam
Company.

Authorsí addresses

Richard Borovoy (borovoy@media.mit.edu)
MIT Media Laboratory; 20 Ames Street; Room E15-120B; Cambridge, MA 02139. Tel.
(617) 253-4191
Fred Martin (fredm@media.mit.edu)
MIT Media Laboratory; 20 Ames Street; Room E15-020F; Cambridge, MA 02139. Tel.
(617) 253-5108
Mitchel Resnick (mres@media.mit.edu)
MIT Media Laboratory; 20 Ames Street; Room E15-020A; Cambridge, MA 02139. Tel.
(617) 253-9783
