Vicarious Learning from Educational Dialogue
Keith Stenning, Jean McKendree, John Lee, Richard Cox

University of Edinburgh, Human Communication Research Centre

Finbar Dineen, Terry Mayes

Glasgow Caledonian University, Centre for Learning and Teaching Innovation

      Abstract: The Vicarious Learner project is investigating the role of
      dialogue in learning and, more specifically, how learners benefit from
      opportunities to 'overhear' other learners. We describe evidence of such
      learning by students using "vicarious learning resources" in a computer-
      supported learning environment. We argue that education dialogue has
      properties that are different from "everyday" dialogue. We see educational
      dialogues in particular as being about the complex alignment of concepts
      where the participants know that an initial misalignment is fairly certain.
      We focus on the distinction between exposition and derivation in
      discourse and discuss how this might describe what happens in learning
      dialogues.

      Keywords: dialogue, vicarious learning, overhearers, conceptual
      alignment

Learning from Overhearing

Dialogue is clearly an important aspect of a rich learning experience, of the sort one
hopes to provide in higher education for example. We have argued elsewhere
(McKendree et al 1998) that dialogue is central to the learner's "enculturation" into the
patterns of language and thought, discussion and criticism, that are characteristic of an
academic discipline; we have noted also that, on a more detailed and local level, dialogue
is often the most effective way for a learner to overcome, for example, a particular
impasse during problem-solving, or to resolve a difficult conceptual issue. We have
proposed, further, that learning can occur not only through participation in dialogue, but
also through observing others participating in it. We call this vicarious learning, and we
believe that in some manifestations it is very common, as when silent students in a
tutorial group learn from discussions between the tutor and others or when "lurkers" on a
discussion list benefit from reading contributions of others. We are working to
understand this process more clearly, and to investigate the ways in which we can take
advantage of it to create databases of re-usable dialogues as a helpful resource for
distance learners and others.

In several experimental laboratory studies and university courses, we have developed and
refined our understanding of how to design, capture, store, index, retrieve and re-use
educational discussions. This new type of learning resource holds out promise both for
isolated or distance learners and for students who might need greater exposure to
language 'put to hard conceptual labour' than they are likely to get in traditional
educational encounters in the classroom and lecture hall.

Our research on vicarious learning has found benefits that are both cognitive, resulting in
an increase in knowledge and understanding in the particular curriculum area, and social.
One social effect is that exposure to peer discussion creates positive feelings of being part
of a learning community. Perhaps more importantly for our goals, we also find
that students rapidly begin to model the language and structure of the discussions to
which they were exposed. We think that this introduction into 'specialised arenas of
language use' is precisely the type of result that we would want to foster, as well as
promoting learning of new domain knowledge.

We are particularly interested in how to better incorporate dialogue into Computer-
Supported Cooperative Learning systems. We think it is important to keep in mind that in
some cases actual opportunities to engage in dialogue may be restricted. Resources can
be scarce. For instance, in the UK, local calls are charged by the minute, so people may
not be able to chat for hours each week, but may prefer to log into a chat area only
for very specific, focused discussions that they feel are productive. Another problem we
have encountered is that a course may have only a few students. Coordinating times for
participants in several time zones can be a limiting factor on the amount of synchronous
discussion possible.

Thus, we think that one possibility is to make recordings of various types of discussions
available to students as 'reusable vicarious learning resources'. These could be included
on a CD or could be downloaded and viewed off-line as well as being held in a central
server as is the customary model. First, however, we need to establish that such
resources are indeed of any use to learners and to present our theory about why
such "overhearing" of dialogue might be beneficial.

Results from experiment

Our initial question was, "Do vicarious learning resources promote learning?" If the
resources do not seem to increase understanding over the usual textbook or multimedia
expository materials, then it is hardly worth the effort of capturing and storing such
resources. So, an initial study compared primary expositions - text and worksheets - to
versions annotated with dialogue. A second study looked at a wider variety of media
and focused more specifically on the language aspects of vicarious learning and how
overhearers acquire the language of a new domain.

Formal Grammar Experiment

In our course on Human Communication, students are faced with the problem of learning
formal techniques for analysing English sentences. They typically find this quite difficult.
There were exercises in constructing syntax-trees depicting the grammar of sentences,
and other kinds of formal diagrams, and the students experienced many problems in
completing these. We developed a computer-based tool to assist the students in creating
and editing these diagrams - a typical piece of instructional courseware. We were now
able to experiment with different kinds of vicarious material that might further support
the students' learning.

Using this system, we looked at the difference between expert monologue and student-
tutor dialogue as learning materials (Cox et al., in press). In the one case, a tutor
constructed a diagram while explaining the activity for the benefit of students; this was
captured as a movie of the manipulation of the computer tool, along with a transcript of
the tutor's commentary. In another case, a novice student constructed the diagram,
with assistance from the tutor where needed - which was often. These materials were
presented to the students also as animated diagrams accompanied by transcripts of the
recorded speech. We observed that although there was no clear difference between
students given the dialogues and those given the "direct instruction" tutorial monologues,
both of these produced significantly better results than conditions where students were
given only animations of the diagrams or only "primary text" materials. So it does seem
that these dialogic materials can increase students' understanding when attached to more
traditional instructional material.

Computers in Teaching and Learning Experiment

Another experiment looked at learning effects, but in particular we focused the analysis
on the impact of vicarious resources on the students' acquisition of language and
discussion skills reflected in the vicarious learning resources. Dineen developed a set of
Task-Directed Discussions (TDDs) that focus dialogue between a tutor and student or
between peers on problematic or complex concepts in a domain (Lee et al., 1998). This
results in more pointed, shorter, and deeper discussions for reuse than a typical small
group discussion or free-form Internet session. We videotaped over 30 hours of
discussions among students, and between students and an expert, using the TDDs. From
primary instructional materials and integrated clips taken from these videos, we created
an architecture that allows a multimedia database of video and audio clips, text
transcriptions, and annotated graphics to be integrated with primary expository teaching
material, all delivered via the Web. Using this system, an experiment was run to
investigate the efficacy of 'vicarious learning' resources in a controlled laboratory setting.

The experimental system used a portion of an on-line Masters level course in Computers
in Teaching and Learning that had been taught twice before. A self-contained section on
Models of Learning with Technology was extracted. In addition, there were a set of
"vicarious learning" resources integrated into the on-line readings.

Thirty-six students were divided into two groups based on their pretest scores on a
knowledge test of the domain and attitude questionnaires. This resulted in two groups
who did not differ significantly on knowledge, stated media preferences, or attitude
toward discussion. One group saw the Web-based primary learning material only (Notes
group); the other saw the same material with the additional vicarious learning resources
(Vicarious group).
On the final day of the experiment, after three days of studying the material, the students
were divided into groups of either two or three (the same across groups) and participated
in a 40 minute, on-line, synchronous discussion of the material using Internet Relay Chat.
They were simply told to discuss the course content to clear up anything they did not
understand. They then took a final knowledge posttest.

In this paper, we are concentrating primarily on the discussion content. (Results are
presented in more detail in Lee et al, 1999.) Our initial analyses indicate a number of
interesting differences between the groups reflected in the way they engage in discussion.

We found significant differences in the amount of discussion generated, averaging 834
words for the Notes group and 1075 words for the Vicarious group, (Mann-Whitney
U=9.0, p<.04). More importantly, when scored by a blind rater for the relevance of each
statement, the Vicarious students stayed on topic significantly more than the Notes group
(82% vs 68%).

Looking more closely at the patterns of interaction, we examined the instances where the
discussion strayed from the content of the course to unrelated topics. This generally
occurred either because no one could think of more questions or topics to discuss, or
because no one knew the answer to the current question. We counted the number of typed
utterances between the initial one that was judged to be off-topic and the one where the
group was judged to be again on topic. We found that the Vicarious group
had significantly shorter stretches of off-topic utterances than the Notes group as judged
by the rank order of number of utterances (Mann-Whitney U = 139, p<.0001). The
Vicarious group had a large number of instances in which only one or two utterances are
off-topic, ie. a single person interjects an irrelevant comment which is ignored by the
other participants or there is perhaps one acknowledging response before the group
resumes discussion of the course topics. In the Notes group, while this
happens occasionally, there were far more long stretches of irrelevant banter.

What is perhaps most interesting to us is that when the students engage in discussions
themselves, we find that those who had seen the vicarious resources were modelling the
tasks and language used in them. For instance, in Vicarious groups, when the discussants
ran out of things to say on a topic, they sometimes suggested trying one of the discussion
games they had seen in the resources, as in the following excerpt:

      <Discussant1> OK, perhaps we could just pick a concept and try and
      describe it to another person.

      <Discussant2> well you can go first then

      <Discussant3> accretion?

      <Discussant2> adding of new knowledge to existing schema, most
      common form of learning
      <Discussant1> Accretion is the second stage in the learning process, after
      structuring, and it involves adding bits of knowledge into a schema

      <Discussant3> ah, I see.

The students in the Notes group, when the discussion hit a lull, tended to talk about many
unrelated topics: World Cup football, television, holidays, and Elvis.

Further exploratory analysis of the discussions showed significantly more occurrences of
several educationally relevant discourse features for the group exposed to vicarious
materials. This group:

     showed more critical assessment of their own or another person's contribution to
      discussion;
     exhibited more use of justification - providing proof or examples to ground a
      statement;
     more often explicitly derived new information from known facts;
     had more tendency to signal recall or exposition of another person's argument or
      reasoning.

This is further valuable evidence of the power of watching dialogues to influence
positively the subsequent behaviour of students in discussions. These effects are all likely
to have beneficial educational consequences in the longer run. If vicarious learning is, on
our current evidence, effective in promoting this "social modelling" type of learning
than traditional expository teaching methods, it may encourage valuable practices that
promote learning skills across domains.

What is unique about educational dialogue?

While these results are promising in themselves, we think it is important to indicate why
we believe that important effects result from such vicarious encounters and to have some
theory about what aspects of educational dialogue make it particularly amenable to
capture and reuse for overhearers in contrast to typical 'everyday' conversations. Many of
the best learning dialogues involve the making explicit of inferences which would
normally remain unspoken. Assumptions are made by the participants which often turn
out not to be shared, not to be part of the common ground needed for understanding
(Clark, 1996). A process has to occur that results in these assumptions being aligned.
Often, though not necessarily, this means that the student has to be brought more into line
with the tutor; but we find that this occurs most effectively not through the student
simply being told (accepting an exposition) as much as being led through the reasoning
involved. By working through a more or less logical process of derivation, the authority
of the tutor is largely abrogated in favour of the more abstract authority of reasoning
norms that can be explicitly discussed and agreed, the procedure can be observed. The
student thus learns, not only about the subject matter, but also about the process
of argumentation. The development of the common ground being thus relatively out in
the open, derivational dialogues are well suited to vicarious following of the process by
overhearers.

It is likely that in many cases of vicarious learning, dialogues are also in other respects
specifically developed in such a way as to facilitate the overhearer's construction of a
common understanding. Our hypothesis in the Vicarious Learning project is that, by
capturing such learning discourse, new learners listening in may be included in a more
diverse conversation; the alternative is that much grounding may remain unexplored and
available only to the expert. This facilitation of a common ground often happens
in tutorial sessions, where the tutor may, for the benefit of the others, be more explicit
than would be strictly necessary for the student being directly addressed. It certainly
happens in other homely examples such as radio discussion and interview programmes,
for example with politicians, where the presenter will (if sometimes in a relatively heavy-
handed manner) interrupt to demand expansion of abbreviations, to elicit repetition
and clarification, or even to interpolate information which the speaker is taking for
granted but which might not be shared by all of the audience. In cases like these, the
dialogue participants are well aware that there are or will be overhearers, and they take
this into account. The very fact that this happens, of course, acts on the one hand as
evidence that overhearers are known to have effective interpretative strategies, but on the
other as evidence that these strategies require specific assistance from the dialogue
participants.

In a brief example from a classroom, Clark (1996, p.298) states that the classroom is a
closed situation in which the teacher has the greater 'goods' to transfer and there is
generally no more negotiation needed. It is true that his examples are ones in which that
might be the case, requesting a student to sit down or to answer a simple factual
question. However, in the more complex situations that we would consider examples
of more effective learning dialogues, there is a great deal of negotiation and the unequal
equity that assigns power to the teacher is not nearly as obvious.

Many language models such as Clark's tend to focus on common ground essentially as
the naming and identifying of discourse objects, often ones that could be picked out by
ostension. It does not as clearly address building and organising a dialogue aimed at, in
our case, the particular goal of bringing almost guaranteed misalignment of
abstract conceptual knowledge into better alignment. The fundamental abstract concepts
of most fields are exactly those where ostension is of little use (see Stenning 1999). It is
true that Clark's models are not attempting to account necessarily for learning dialogues
and many examples are from more mundane exchanges in shops and on street corners.
However, Clark (1996) and Schober and Clark (1989) at least imply that the model
should apply to such dialogues and that only direct participants in a discourse are able to
establish such alignment to a desirable degree.

Clark's model seems to agree with Sperber and Wilson's (1986) claim from 'relevance
theory' that the first interpretation is the one speakers are most likely to 'latch into',
whereas in educational conversations this first reading is very likely to be wrong or at
least incomplete and the students are well aware of that. (Note, though, that Clark rejects
other aspects of Sperber and Wilson.) Clark's model does not deal with conversations in
which participants know that a conceptual misalignment in 'common ground' is just about
guaranteed. In these circumstances, we want the students to challenge a speaker in ways
that might be unacceptable in another context. Such dialogues may provide a very good
means for indirect participants, overhearers, to vicariously establish not only the
common ground, but to challenge their own understanding through comparison with the
example dialogues.

Implications of exposition versus derivation

How can we characterise what is special about educational communication, especially the
type of educational dialogue where conceptual learning is the goal? We start from a
distinction between exposition and derivation (Stenning 1978). An expository
relation between one sentence and the next in a discourse is one in which the second
sentence provides new information to be added to that provided by the first. This
information is normally to be accepted on the authority of the speaker (in educational
dialogue this is often the teacher) and it is assumed that the hearer does not already know
this information. In logical terms, it is the presentation of a new assumption. This kind of
transition is typical of a narrative or descriptive discourse. When we are telling a story,
we generally don't expect the listener to already know what happens next.

In contrast, when one sentence is derived from previous one(s), it adds no new
information, and its assertion is founded not on the authority of the speaker, but because
it is merely a new expression of what is already shared by both participants. For example,
the exchange "X is a prime number greater than 2. X is odd." exhibits a derivational
relation. By definition, it provides information the hearer already has, if they share an
understanding of the concepts. In a purely expository discourse, such a transition is
aberrant because it is unnecessary to spell out the common ground and could even be
condescending to do so (as Grice (1975) observes in his Maxim of Quantity which states
that a speaker should say only as much as is necessary to be informative).

In educational dialogue about conceptual issues, doing explicit derivation is one way of
providing information about conceptual alignment. To take a rather contrived case of
conceptual learning, the following dialogue might arise between an academic (A, perhaps
a rather obtuse communicator?) and someone only partially acquainted with the rather
arcane employment relations in a university department (L). Perhaps the partial
foreignness of the UK jargon helps illustrate the uninitiated student's epistemic position:

      A: John's a member of staff, not a student.

      L: He has tenure!

      A: No, he's not faculty.

      L: He's a computer officer or a secretary?
      A: No, he's academic-related.

      L: They're librarians, aren't they?

      A: No he's contract research staff, so he's not faculty but he's an untenured
      academic-related member of staff.

In each case, L makes what she assumes to be a derivation from an assertion of A's. Since
in this situation A is the expert and L is novice, and A also has the particular knowledge
of John, its clear to A that these are derivations by L, and its possible for A to correct the
misunderstanding which the derivation exhibits. Whereas valid derivation provides no
'object-level' information (if it did, the derivation would be invalid), but does provide
meta-level information about conceptual relations. The fact that the derivation is valid
is part of what defines what we mean by the concepts involved. Derivations may be
highly informative about concepts, but only at the metalinguistic level - they can tell us
things about what our words mean.

Doing explicit derivation is often useful in educational dialogue, because it provides
information about conceptual interpretation. Learning new concepts is usually a matter of
modifying the interpretations of old words. The teacher modelling derivation 'out loud'
can be useful for the student by revealing the intended conceptual relations; the student's
attempt at derivation is highly informative to the teacher about the
students' misconceptions. However, doing derivation 'out loud' is only informative if we
realise that derivation is what it is. In the following dialogue there is confusion about
what is exposition and what is derivation:

      A: Your friend is a member of staff, not a student.

      L: Does he have tenure?

      A: Only if he's faculty.

      L: He's a computer officer or a secretary?

      A: He's academic-related.

      L: They're librarians, aren't they?

      A: Not necessarily. If he's contract research staff, he's not faculty but he's
      an untenured academic-related member of staff.

Here A knows the concepts but not who is being talked about, and L knows the identity
of the individual but not fully the concepts. A may think that L knows the concepts and
that L is merely trying to ascertain the facts about his friend, whereas L is really trying
to learn what the conceptual relations are (perhaps as well as the facts, or maybe not)? At
the second utterance, L may be asking whether A is asking whether the friend has tenure
(ie. asking about whether staff implies tenure) - a derivation from information about
known relationships. A, however, interprets it as a question about the friend - a request
for expositional information. The confusion continues.

This rather trivial example of conceptual confusion seems to us illustrative of a common
problem in educational communication about concepts. Derivation is a powerful way of
providing information about concepts, but derivation is an aberrant discourse relation in
common expository discourse, and it can be unclear whether a particular assertion is a
derivation or an exposition. We can provide some clues but we can't expect to be
universally understood. Connectives like 'so', for example can help to mark derivation,
but in domains where the concepts are abstract and not easily interdefinable, or related
to earlier conceptual interpretations of the same words in complex ways distinguishing
derivation from exposition is a major task, both for teacher and for student. `So' also
marks other relations in exposition. Students may not be used to the idea that
uttering apparently vacuous truths can be a useful method for achieving conceptual
alignment. Students may not even realise that conceptual alignment is what is at stake.

We believe it is also very likely that much of the dialogue in computer supported
cooperative learning systems will also involve a need for this negotiation of acceptable
mutual understanding, whether the dialogue is between the human and a computer, or
between two humans mediated by technology. It is also important to keep in mind that
complex understanding will evolve and may require revisiting of concepts at various
points. Thus, we feel that traditional language models are too limited to guide what may
be the most crucial aspects of design of effective cooperative learning systems, both in
the characterisation of common ground as primarily a 'one-shot' problem of naming and
identification, and also in its claim, at least in Schober and Clark (1989), that only
direct participants can learn effectively from discourse.

Understanding the difference in kind between the informativeness of exposition and of
derivation, opens up the possibility of deepening the concept of agency in
communication. Derivation internalises agency. Once we are aware that derivation can
re-represent what we know, and that it rests on conceptual authority rather than teacher's
authority, we can truly become active in our learning. Frustratingly for our teachers, at
least some students can do it while they lurk.

We want to re-emphasise that we do not see vicarious learning as a replacement for direct
participation, but in these days of growing numbers and dwindling resources, especially
in universities, as well as increasing delivery of Internet courses for industrial training
and remote students, we view vicarious learning resources as providing useful
additional learning materials, affective support through increasing the feeling of sharing
in a learning community, and a means of more effective immersion into the language and
practice of students' chosen areas.
Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the UK ESRC Cognitive Engineering programme and
UK EPSRC Multimedia and Networking Applications programme. HCRC is
an Interdisciplinary Research Centre funded by ESRC. Other members of the project
were Jonathan Kilgour and Richard Tobin.

Bibliography

Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge: University Press.

Cox, R., McKendree, J., Tobin, R., Lee, J. & Mayes. T. (In press) Vicarious learning
from dialogue and discourse: A controlled comparison, Instructional Science.

Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and Conversation. In P. Cole and J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax
and Semantics III: Speech Acts, New York: Academic Press, 41-58.

Lee, J., Dineen, F., McKendree, J. and Mayes, T. (1999). Vicarious Learning: cognitive
and linguistic effects of observing peer discussions. Paper presented at AERA '99.

Lee, J., Dineen, F. and McKendree, J. (1998). Supporting student discussions: it isn't just
talk, Education and Information Technologies, 3, 217-229.

Technology, Journal of IFIP TC3 Working Group, Kluwer Academic Publishers.

McKendree, J., Stenning, K., Mayes, T., Lee J., and Cox, R. (1998). Why Observing a
Dialogue may Benefit Learning: The Vicarious Learner. Journal of Computer Assisted
Learning, 14 (2), 110-119.

Schober, M.F. and Clark, H.H. (1989). Understanding by addressees and observers.
Cognitive Psychology, 21, 11-232.

Sperber, D. and Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Stenning, K. (1978) Anaphora as an approach to pragmatics, in Halle, M., Bresnan, J. and
Miller, G.A. (Eds.), Linguistic Theory and Psychological Reality, MIT Press, 162-200

Stenning, K. (1999) Representation and conceptualisation in educational communication.
In van Someren, M., Reimann, P., Boshuizen, E.& de Jong, T. (eds.) Learning with
multiple representations. Kluwer Academic Press, 321-334
Authors' addresses

John Lee (mailto:john@cogsci.ed.ac.uk), Jean McKendree (mailto:j.mckendree@ed.ac.uk),
Keith Stenning (mailto:k.stenning@ed.ac.uk), Richard Cox (mailto:rcox@cogsci.ed.ac.uk)
University of Edinburgh, HCRC; 2 Buccleuch Place; Edinburgh EH8 9LW; Scotland. Tel.
(131) 650-4446. Fax (131) 650-4587.
Terry Mayes (mailto:jtma@gcal.ac.uk); Finbar Dineen (mailto:f.g.dineen@gcal.ac.uk)
Glasgow Caledonian University, Centre for Learning and Teaching Innovation; 3rd Floor, St
Andrew House, 141 West Nile Street; Glasgow G1 2RN. Tel. (141) 331-1271.
