The Challenges for Computer Supported Collaborative
Learning in Elementary and Secondary Level: Finnish
Perspectives
Lasse Lipponen
Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki
       Abstract: Computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) offers promising innovations and
       tools for restructuring teaching-learning processes to prepare students for the emerging knowledge
       society. However, sufficient and reliable data have not been available concerning how the
       practices of CSCL fit in different school cultures, and how teachers with varying pedagogical and
       domain expertise and students with varying skills, attitudes and learning experiences are able to
       function with different network learning environments. This paper discusses the challenges of
       CSCL on the basis of intensive case studies conducted in Finnish elementary and secondary
       schools. The results of these studies indicate that in order to promote educational change and
       facilitate practices of collaboration at school with the new information and communication
       technology and CSCL, serious challenges have to be overcome. The analysis revealed challenges
       that can be categorized according to three dimensions: pedagogical, technical, and organizational.
       Focus of the article is on pedagogical challenges.
       Keywords: best practices, computer-mediated communication, shared knowledge

Introduction
According to many reports, rapid social and economic changes are taking place as western society
approaches the 21st Century. Educational institutions are forced to find new pedagogical and cognitive
models and practices to cope with the challenges of an emerging knowledge society. In this development
computers will play an important role. Computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL), especially,
offers promising innovations and tools for restructuring teaching-learning processes to prepare students for
the future. Recent research on CSCL has indicated several positive effects: enhanced individual learning
outcomes; and higher group performance, especially with regard to knowledge construction (for a review
see Lehtinen, Hakkarainen, Lipponen, Rahikainen, & Muukkonen,1999).
In advanced pedagogical practices, the use of CSCL becomes an integrated part of the whole learning
environment and the culture of learning. As such, technology is used for building up social structures that
encourage learning, for supporting reflective discourse and for helping students and teachers build
knowledge and deepen their understanding of different subject domains. Building knowledge involves
dealing with knowledge objects --ideas and theories, for example--in an intentional manner, constructing a
deeper, coherent, expert-like discourse, or portion of it.
Despite positive results and visions of computer supported collaborative learning, we should also take into
consideration the challenges of collaboration. For example, social psychological research has revealed
challenges of group work such as free-rider effect (individual member or members of team off-loads
cognitive responsibilities to the other members of the group, Kerr & Bruun 1983; Salomon 1993), status
sensitivity (high ability members may dominate the group work, Dembo & McAuliffe, 1987) and sucker
effect (to avoid the free-rider effect an active member of the group may expend less cognitive effort on
team work, Kerr, 1983). Everyone who has participated in teamwork is familiar with these difficulties of
collaboration. Collaboration is not always favorable and teams do not always function as best they can
(Salomon, 1997; Salomon & Globerson, 1987). There is no reason to believe that collaborative learning in
schools is free from these difficulties.
Although a few well-developed pedagogical models for CSCL do exist (see Koschman, 1996) little
attention, thus far, has been focused on analyzing the challenges of CSCL in authentic school
environments. Thus, few data are available concerning how various pedagogical and cognitive practices
and networked learning environments fit in differing school cultures, and how teachers given their
pedagogical and domain expertise and students' varying skills, attitudes and learning experience are able to
function within network learning environments. In other words, what are lacking are investigations of the
wider application of CSCL in normal classrooms and schools. The aim of the article is to discuss some of
these challenges of CSCL within a Finnish context .
The paper is based on analysis of a series of intensive case studies within a Finnish research project
concerning the educational use of CSCL in elementary and secondary level (see Appendixes A and B). The
case studies are part of a larger project that aims to develop and implement pedagogical practices and
models of CSCL, to support students' participation in practices of progressive inquiry through CSCL, and
to analyze the cognitive, social and motivational effects of CSCL in Finnish schools. The substudies have
the goal of determining how new information and communication technology can best be used at the
various school levels in order to facilitate students' skills of knowledge acquisition and production, and
social construction of knowledge; as well, a goal is to enhance task-related motivation and encourage the
metacognitive activities needed in an information society. An important part of the overall research project
is to carry out intervention studies of CSCL in normal school environments and analyze data from
naturalistic contexts students are engaged in CSCL.
Methods used in the case studies
The case studies were conducted in two elementary classes (9-12- year-old students) in the city of Helsinki
and in one secondary (13-year-old students) class in city of Oulu during years 1995-1998. The
technological infrastructure of the study was provided by the Computer Supported Intentional Learning
Environments (CSILE) developed by Scardamalia and Bereiter (1991). CSILE is a networked learning
environment for fostering higher-level processes of inquiry and collaboration in elementary-level education
(see Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994). CSILE provides students a shared space for working with knowledge.
The system is used to organize students learning projects in such domains of knowledge as mathematics,
physics, biology, and history.
The classes participating in the study worked with CSILE in their study projects. During the years 1995-
1998 they performed several projects focused on topics on biology, chemistry, physics, environmental
studies, and geography (see Appendix A) and produced, in all, almost 4000 CSILE notes. CSILE was used
in order to facilitate a research-like process of collaborative inquiry in which generation of the students'
own research questions, intuitive theories and search for explanatory scientific knowledge played an
important role.
The intensive CSILE project lasted 4 to 6 weeks, so each class conducted approximately four CSILE
projects during the school year. The first year (95-96) was an exception; during that year, several projects
were performed simultaneously. The teachers initiated the projects, and there was only a minimal amount
of direct intervention from the researchers. In the beginning of the CSILE project, students and teachers
were generally without experience in intensive, pedagogical- development projects. Moreover, they were
not familiar with principles of CSCL and did not appear to fully recognize the cognitive value of
collaborative learning. It should also be noted that in Finland in elementary level the same teacher works
with the same students for four years. For example, Teacher A presented in the Appendix A, worked with
the same students during years 95-98.
Classroom situations are complex phenomena where numerous factors and processes occur in relation to
the other factors (Salomon, 1996). For that reason, we used a multi-method approach in our case studies
including self-report questionnaires of students' motivational orientation, videotaped lessons, teacher and
student interviews, and a qualitative content analysis of students' written productions from the CSILE
database (see Appendix B).
The pedagogical challenges for CSCL
In the process of identifying the pedagogical challenges of computer supported collaborative learning based
on our empirical research, the following questions were within the focus of our interest: What is the role of
the teacher in CSCL? Are the CSCL environments beneficial to all students? Are students able to
communicate productively by writing in networked learning environments? What kind of communication
patterns emerge in CSILE work? How actively do individual students participate in CSCL? How is CSCL
integrated in the classroom work?
The analysis of our intensive case studies showed that in order to successfully use CSCL in natural settings
several challenges have to be met, challenges which can be divided into at least three categories: technical,
organizational, and pedagogical. By "technical challenges" we mean teachers and students' expertise in ICT
(information and communication technology) and access to ICT. "Organizational challenges" refers to the
issue of how to obtain whole-school organization support for educational change with CSCL. The
pedagogical challenges are given in detail in the following section.
Teacher's contribution to collaborative learning processes
In computer supported collaborative learning, the traditional role of the teacher as information deliverer is
changed to a role of facilitator and co-learner. This means facilitating collaboration between students,
encouraging them to monitor their understanding (without directly giving them information),
communicating with them and carefully examining knowledge produced by the students. The last two
appear to be extremely important in the case of networked learning environments such as CSILE.
The teachers of the Finnish CSILE classrooms did not participate very actively in the students' process of
computer supported collaborative learning. This was evidenced especially in their contributions to the
students' CSILE mediated discourse. During the projects, they provided only a few comments on students'
notes and did not systematically contribute on the students' collaborative learning process or comment on
the students' knowledge productions (Hakkarainen, Lipponen & Järvelä, in press; Lipponen &
Hakkarainen, 1997). In interviews, they told investigators that they do not have enough time to do CSILE
work because the normal schoolwork takes most of their time. It seemed that students were left, in effect, to
conduct unguided discovery learning. Yet without actively participating in students' collaborative learning,
the teacher can neither help the students to advance their learning process, nor recognize significant
contributions, nor generalize emerging progressive practices of collaborative learning. It follows that in
order to succeed the teachers may need a great deal of pedagogical and epistemological support from
researchers in the form of project designs, and good examples. Besides theoretical knowledge about CSCL
they need practical knowledge of good approaches.
However, there was one exception: In one project, Energy, Teacher B was very active. While students
produced 127 CSILE notes during the project, she contributed to the discourse by producing 30 notes of
substantial he pedagogical and cognitive value. Her comments were supportive; she requested students to
do some more research; she did not produce direct answers nor direct guidance, but instead the objects of
her comments were students' intuitive conceptions, as she tried to guide them in monitoring the progress of
their understanding. (Example comments: What do you mean when you write that energy is power? Could
you explicate this issue? Good note. But is energy really matter? If it is, what kind of matter do you
mean?). Yet her comments did not appear to have any effect on students' work for students did not respond
to her comments. This interesting issue is still under study (Lipponen, Hakkarainen, Muukkonen, &
Rahikainen, 1999). The challenge for teachers is how they are to establish a supportive environment that
allows students to gradually assume responsibility for high-level practices of collaboration and carry out
productive knowledge construction processes.
Motivational aspects of CSCL
The general claim of CSCL has been that the networked learning environments provide a common, and
mostly optimal, experience for all students. Our studies indicated that a detailed exploration concerning the
characteristics of an individual student's ways to cope and perform in new learning environments is needed
to explain and understand the cognitive advantages and challenges of computer-supported collaborative
learning (Rahikainen, Hakkarainen, Lipponen, & Lehtinen, 1999).
Individual and cultural aspects of the learning process are in close interaction in the context of CSCL. One
might, for example, have expected learning-oriented or high-achieving students to process and produce
conceptually more sophisticated knowledge than performance-oriented and avoidance-oriented students in
CSCL. However, regardless of their motivational orientation or school achievements, Finnish CSILE
students tended to produce the same kind of descriptive, empirical, and factual knowledge (Järvelä,
Hakkarainen, Lipponen, Niemivirta, & Lehtinen, 1997; Hakkarainen, Lipponen, Järvelä & Niemivirta, in
press). "High motivation" measured in traditional terms did not seem to strongly promote the type of
inquiry-based on collaborative activities under examination.
Making thinking visible
Writing can be seen as the most important tool of thinking in our present society (Bereiter & Scardamalia,
1987; Olson, 1994). It has a crucial significance in explication and articulation of one's conceptions. Thus
the externalization of ideas by writing, making thinking visible, should help students to reflect on their own
and others' ideas and share their expertise. Therefore, the networked environments of CSCL are designed to
encourage students to use writing as the main medium of collaborative learning and between-student
communication.
Yet such goals are based on certain presuppositions, and it is relevant to determine whether they are met. If
one examines notes posted by Finnish students to CSILE's database, one notices that these usually consist of
only a few sentences. A question arises whether these young children (aged 9 to 12) are capable of
expressing their ideas or making their thinking visible by writing. Is writing cognitively too demanding for
the young children in question? How does the culture of writing affect the nature of these Finnish students'
writing (Lipponen et al., 1999). Students are not usually required to write extensively at school. The
audience of writing is almost always the teacher, and the function of writing with which they are most
familiar is to demonstrate that one has understood assigned texts and acquired desired knowledge. Students
are not encouraged to use writing for articulating their ideas in an extended way: Extensive thinking is not
facilitated through writing assignments; such assignments do not usually require production of more than
one or two paragraphs. Presumably as a consequence of such practices regarding writing at school, students
are generally not able, through writing to build knowledge creatively in CSILE notes they produce.
The nature of computer mediated discourse is different from the face-to-face communication. In written
communication the referential relations should be explicated and the context created; in contrast these are
usually known by participants or are easily checked in face-to-face communication. However, examination
of our CSILE students' communication indicated that in many cases the students did not explicate such
referential relations. In this respect, their written activity resembled oral discourse (Lipponen &
Hakkarainen, 1997; Lipponen & Hakkarainen, 1998).
These considerations do not necessarily lead to a bleak outlook. It is possible that, to some degree, students
noninvolvement with writing arises from their distaste of standard classroom practice and their exposure to
computer environments which demand only non-writing activities. To the extent that the student attitudes
and skills mentioned above are effects of the present pedagogical and technical systems, they perhaps can be
changed with exposure to new teaching methods and new technological environments.
Patterns of communication
Computer supported learning environments offer a new medium for a classroom discourse that is not always
controlled and guided directly by the teacher. This might facilitate peer interaction and offer participants
possibilities to negotiate shared ideas in problem-solving situations. Yet the patterns observed closely
reflected school children's common practices of classroom interaction: The most common pattern of
communication between the CSILE students was a question-answer exchange in which a factual question
(what, who, how many) was presented and a factual answer provided (Example: How much energy does a
man need in a day? About three meals.) In addition, disagreement between students led to a quick
interruption of interaction mediated by the network. As a consequence, the average depth of inquiry was no
more than a few steps.
It appears that the purpose of the fact-oriented discourse was to pose a simple question and to find the right
answer quickly. This might be related partly to the issue of taking cognitive risks. It is much easier to find
an answer to a factual questions than it is to answer questions seeking understanding (Lipponen &
Hakkarainen, 1997; Lipponen, Hakkarainen, & Muukkonen, 1999). On the other hand, it is possible that
through the observation and imitation of fellow students' processes of knowledge construction, joint norms
of inquiry and practices of communication may emerge. These joint norms of discourse might guide
students to conduct a certain type of discourse and in a particular way.
These findings provide evidence for the position that, according to the context of nation and school culture,
collaboration does not always lead to shared, progressive articulation of partially developed ideas. Rather
the common pattern of interaction was one in which differing opinions and interpretations expressed in
discussion often seemed to cause cognitive conflicts that an agent tried to solve internally before going back
to the social plane. Such a pattern seems to be more closely related to the Piagetian (socio-cognitive
conflict) theoretical framework and differs, at least on the surface, from that of the Vygotsky and the neo-
Vygotskians (intersubjective construction) (Hakkarainen, Järvelä, Lehtinen & Lipponen, 1998; Lehtinen,
Hakkarainen, Järvelä, Lipponen,& Ilomäki, 1997). Yet, in parallel with the above arguments about learning
practices, the preference for non-social resolution may, at least in part be the effect of present arrangements
and hence subject to influence by fundamental changes in pedagogy and educational organization.
Patterns of participation
Many studies show that boys find computers more attractive, and that they also feel more positively towards
computer use than girls. Girls seem to have less motivation to work with computers. This may due to gender
differences in computer experiences, girls having such experiences less both at home and in school. In
addition, boys tend to see computers as more useful (Durndell, 1991; Scott, Cole & Engel, 1992).
Our studies likewise show that computer supported collaborative learning within the CSILE network has
been particularly motivating for Finnish male students who have traditionally been having a lot of
difficulties in adapting to externally regulated traditional school learning (Hakkarainen et al, in press;
Lipponen & Hakkarainen, 1997). In every CSILE project of ours, boys have been more active, i.e., posting
more notes to the CSILE database than do the girls (this does not say anything about the quality of
knowledge produced). An good illustration of this is the data collected from a four-week course on
"Energy" that consisted of CSILE students' (11-12-year-old students) computer mediated discourse. During
the energy-project, students (female, n = 13 and male, n =14), posted 141 notes to CSILE database from
which girls posted 41 notes (relative proportion of female students notes was 29,5 %) and boys posted 100
notes (relative proportion of male students' notes was 70,5 %). Moreover, in one of our studies (Lipponen &
Hakkarainen, 1998) two below-average students, both males, who represent avoidance orientation as their
socio-emotional coping strategy and who were very passive in traditional classroom discussions participated
very actively in CSILE work.
In every one of our CSILE projects the participation activity of students was uneven; there were several
projects, for example the Energy project conducted by teacher A, where six students (N = 27) did not
produce any CSILE notes. As opposed to this, in one project four male students (N = 26) tried to finish their
other assignments in the beginning of the school week in order to get the rest of the week for working with
CSILE. Each of these four students produced over 100 notes (N = 1159) to the database.
The uneven activity of participation is the case, of course, in traditional classroom learning and classroom
discussion too. But the argument and the promise of CSCL and networked learning environments have been
that they will democratize the participation and activity of students. Perhaps we should admit that CSCL
only gives possibilities for equal participation. Whether these possibilities are ever realized depends on
context and educators' practice. Furthermore, the gender differences and the activity of low-achievers might
reflect a shift in which CSCL is motivating and "favoring" different students than does traditional
schoolwork.
Conclusions
The aim of the article was to analyze the educational use of CSCL, in particular the CSILE set-up, based on
several Finnish case studies at the elementary and secondary level. The case studies were conducted in two
Finnish schools and in three classes. Therefore, the results do not necessarily yield directly comparative data
for differing cultures of using CSCL in countries other than Finland. However, it is also possible that these
challenges are, to some degree, universal and every project seriously concerned with promoting educational
change through CSCL will have to find ways of meeting these challenges. The analysis indicates that in
order to use CSCL in normal schools several challenges have to be met, especially pedagogical ones.
In conclusion, it may be useful to discuss the pedagogical challenges of CSCL by distinguishing between
first-order and second- order effects of educational technology. Our studies would appear to indicate that the
introduction of computers itself affects the nature of the whole learning environment. These effects, which
we call "first-order" effects of educational technology, refer to learning of skills of using information
technology, developing skills of basic knowledge acquisition, generally increased motivation, and accessing
extended sources of information. First order effects also involve changes in structures of classroom
activities and changed division of cognitive labor between the teacher and the students. Our evidence clearly
indicates that the structure of classroom activity changed after the introduction of CSILE. Students were
working in a more self-regulated way; they were doing tasks more on their own and directing their own
projects instead of following detailed assignments of the teachers.
It seems that the first-order effects are normal consequences of engagement with computer supported
collaborative learning. However, they do not, as such, facilitate social construction of knowledge and
advancement of the students' deeper, principled and conceptual understanding, which depends critically on
the appropriate supportive activities of teachers, especially their involvement in new roles. Thus a very
critical aspect of facilitating pedagogically meaningful use of ICT and practices of CSCL is training of
teachers. It may be that in the beginning of our research project we did not provide enough support for he
teachers. Recently we have radically increased the amount of training and support given to our teachers. The
first-order effects, of course, may be pedagogically very valuable achievements and represent a significant
improvement over traditional practices of learning and instruction.
Even if the Finnish CSILE student in our studies to date did not achieve higher-level processes of
collaboration, the practices of learning and instruction have been considerably changed. However, bringing
computers into the classroom does not automatically lead to what we call second-order effects of
educational technology. The second-order effects involve engaging students in a sustained question- and
explanation-driven inquiry, true knowledge building, and progressive discourse analogous to scientific
practice. The second-order effects may lead to a profound change in the students' conceptions of what
learning and knowledge are all about, and they need strong pedagogical support from the teacher. The
second-order effects appear, further, to require deep change in teachers' conceptions of knowledge and in
the pedagogical practices of school generally. This appears to be very difficult to achieve. Although the
scientific community has considered the principles of CSCL highly promising for the development of future
learning environments, practicing teachers are either unacquainted or not convinced of their value. For
example in recent large survey studies (Hakkarainen, Muukkonen, Lipponen, Ilomäki, Rahikainen, &
Lehtinen, 1999) Finnish teachers didn't regard collaborative learning as an important application of
computers. This result is partly due to the novelty of the CSCL ideas in schools but it also indicates that the
theoretical and practical principles of CSCL are still too recently articulated to be widely recognized and
applied in practical educational reforms.
Computer supported collaborative learning should be an integrated part of the whole learning environment.
Yet a phenomenon we call "The problem of two curricula" appears to be very common in classes that are
implementing or using new technology. The two curricula seem to co-exist side by side, often unnoticed.
The first curriculum followed in our classrooms was the traditional information-transmission curriculum
focused on making sure that each student "carried out the assigned tasks". The teacher assumed
responsibility for the higher-level cognitive activities such as generating questions and explaining and took
charge of metacognitive activities like planning, monitoring and evaluating. In the second curriculum,
which we call "collaborative inquiry with computer networking and support", students were encouraged to
take more responsibility for their own and their fellow students' learning. If these two curricula are not
integrated or supportive of each other, it is very difficult to achieve the pedagogical goals of either of them
or to bring about the second-order effects of educational technology. In addition, if we admit that
curriculum very strongly guides what teachers and students are doing in the classrooms, then we might ask,
what is the role of technology or collaborative work in the curriculum? How much space and time is given
for students to do computer supported collaborative work and how is it organized? The time that is used to
work with CSCL is closely related at least to the problem of two curricula and on the other hand to the
technical challenges of CSCL such as location and access of computers.
In order to facilitate CSCL in elementary-level education, a substantial change in pedagogical practices and
in the wider culture of schooling is needed. Nevertheless, the culture of school learning cannot be expected
to change immediately but presupposes a long process of exploring and testing different cognitive and
pedagogical practices, such process necessarily involving educational personnel. The change also demands
the educational policy to seek and foster these changes. The challenges for CSCL arise from the fact that we
are, simultaneously, trying to promote educational use of the new information and communication
technology and implement new pedagogical and cognitive practices of learning and instruction. Although
the new technology and pedagogical ideas support each other, the change demands the utmost of both
teachers and students.
Bibliography
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987) The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Dembo, M H. & McAuliffe, T. J. (1987). Effects of perceived ability and grade status on social interaction
and influence in cooperative works. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 415-423.
Durndell, A. (1991). The persistence of the gender gap in computing. Computers and Education, 16, 283-
287.
Hakkarainen, K., Järvelä, S., Lipponen, L. & Lehtinen, E. (1998). Culture of collaboration in computer-
supported learning: Finnish perspectives. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 9, 271-287.
Hakkarainen, K., & Lipponen, L., (1998). Epistemology of inquiry and computer supported collaborative
learning. A paper presented at the American Educational Research Association (AERA) Annual Meeting,
San Diego, April 13 to 17, 1998.
Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L. & Järvelä, S. (in press) Epistemology of inquiry and computer-supported
collaborative learning. In T. Koschmann & N. Miyake, (Eds.) New Perspectives on Computer-supported
Collaborative Learning.
Hakkarainen,K., Lipponen, L., Järvelä, S. & Niemivirta, M. (in press). The interaction of motivational
orientation and knowledge-seeking inquiry in computer supported collaborative learning. Journal of
Educational Computing Research.
Hakkarainen, K., Muukkonen, H., Lipponen, L., Ilomäki, L., Rahikainen, M., & Lehtinen, E. (1999)
Teachers' Skills and Practices of Using ICT and Their Pedagogical Thinking. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Järvelä, S., Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., Niemivirta, M., & Lehtinen, E. (1997). The interaction of
students' motivational orientation and cognitive processes in CSILE-based learning projects. A paper
presented at the symposium under the title: Computer-support for collaborative learning: advancements and
challenges. The 7th Conference for Research on Learning and Instruction, August 26-30, 1997, Athens,
Greece.
Järvelä, S.,Hakkarainen, K., Lehtinen, E. & Lipponen, L.(in press) Creating Computer Supported
Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Culture in Finnish Schools: Research Perspectives on Sociocognitive
Effects. Journal of Continuing Engineering Education and Life-Long Learning.
Kerr, N. L. (1983). Motivation losses in small groups: A social dilemma analysis. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 45, 819-828.
Kerr, N. L. & Bruun, S E. (1983). Dispensability of member effort and group motivation losses: free rider
effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44, 78-94.
Koschmann, T. (1996). CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. NJ: Erlbaum.
Lehtinen, E., Hakkarainen, K., Järvelä, S., Lipponen, L. & Ilomäki, L. (1997). Culture of inquiry in
computer-supported learning. A poster presented at the invited symposium under the title "Constructivist
Learning Technologies", The 7th Conference for Research on Learning and Instruction, August 26-30,
1997, Athens, Greece.
Lehtinen, E., Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M. & Muukkonen, H. (1999). Computer
supported collaborative learning: A review of research and development. The J.H.G.I Giesbers Reports on
Education, 10. Department of Educational Sciences University of Nijmegen.
Lipponen, L. & Hakkarainen, K. (1997). Developing culture of inquiry in computer-supported collaborative
learning. In R. Hall, N. Miyake, & N. Enyedy (Ed.) Hall, R., Miyake, N., and Enyedy, N. (1997)
Proceedings of CSCL '97: The Second International Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative
Learning. December 10-14, 1997. University of Toronto/Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (OISE).
Mahweh, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates.
Lipponen, L & Hakkarainen, K. (1998). Knowledge construction in netwoked learning environment - The
CSILE-project (in Finnish). Helsingin kaupungin opetusviraston julkaisusarja A6:1998.
Lipponen, L., Hakkarainen, K., Muukkonen, H., & Rahikainen, M. (1999). Elementary students'
conceptions of energy. CSILE as a medium for progressive inquiry (in Finnish). Helsingin kaupungin
opetusviraston julkaisusarja A3:1999.
Lipponen, L., Hakkarainen, K. & Muukkonen, H. (1999). The nature and evolution of knowledge building
discourse. A paper to be presented at the symposium under the title: Towards knowledge building
practices. The 8th Conference for Research on Learning and Instruction, August 24-28, 1999, Göteborg,
Sweden.
Olson, D. (1994). The world on paper: The conceptual and cognitive implications of writing and reading.
Cambridge; Cambridge University Press.
Rahikainen, M., Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L. & Lehtinen, E. (1999). Collaborative learning with and
without computers: A motivational analyses in primary school biology lessons. A poster to be presented in
the 8th Conference for Research on Learning and Instruction, August 24-28, 1999, Göteborg, Sweden.
Salomon, G. & Globerson, T. (1987). When teams do not function the way they ought to. International
Journal of Educational Research, 13, 89-100.
Salomon, G. (1996). Studying novel learning environments as patterns of change. In S. Vosniadou, E. De
Corte, R. Glaser, & H. Mandl (Ed.) International perspectives on the psychological foundations of
technology-based learning environments (pp. 363-377). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Salomon, G. (1997). Novel constructivist learning environments and novel technologies: Some issues to be
concerned with. An invited key note address presented at the 8th conferences of the European Association
for Research on Learning and Instruction, Athens, August 1997.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building: A
challenge for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1, 37-68.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3, 265-283.
Scott, T., Cole, M., & Engel, M. (1992). Computers and education: A cultural constructivist perspective.
Review of Research in Education, 18, 191-251.
Author's address
Lasse Lipponen (lasse.lipponen@helsinki.fi)
Lasse Lipponen (lasse.lipponen@helsinki.fi)

University of Helsinki, Department of Psychology, P. O. Box 13, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland. Tel. +358-9-
19123772. Fax. +358-9-19123443.
Appendix A. Students' CSILE projects during years 95-98

School    Students'     Students'      Topics of students projects                     Teacher
year      grade         age (years)
95-96     3             9-10           My Home Town Helsinki, Finland and their        A
                                       own suburb, Dinosaurs, Solar System, Our
                                       school, Health education, Traffic, Maps and
                                       map marks, Reproduction of plants

96-97     4             10-11          Scandinavian countries, Natural Phenomena       A
                                       (exploring phenomena such as thunder or rain,
                                       Environmental studies, Biological processes
                                       connected with human survival

97-98     5             11-12          Energy, History, Democracy                      A

98        6             12-13          Good habits                                     A
autumn
97-98     3             9-10           Energy, Maps and environment                    B

98        4             10-11          Biological adaptation: How a mammal adapts      B
autumn                                 to environment?
96-97     7             13-14          Water as a chemical environment                 C
Appendix B. Research topics, methods and publications of CSILE case studies

 Research topics        Methods                         Publication
 Interaction between    Videodata and CSILE             Järvelä, Hakkarainen, Lipponen, Niemivirta,
 motivational and       database analysis, self         & Lehtinen, (1997).
 cognitive processes    report questionnaire of         Hakkarainen, Lipponen, Järvelä, &
                        motivational orientation,       Niemivirta, (in press).
                        interviews

 Communication          Videodata and database          Lehtinen, Hakkarainen, Järvelä, Lipponen, &
 patterns               analysis                        Ilomäki, (1997).

 Comparison of          Database analysis               Lipponen, & Hakkarainen, (1997).
 Canadian and                                           Lipponen, & Hakkarainen, (1998).
 Finnish students'                                      Hakkarainen, & Lipponen, (1998).
 knowledge-seeking                                      Hakkarainen, Lipponen, & Järvelä, (in press)
 practices

 Communication          Videodata and database          Hakkarainen, Järvelä, Lipponen, & Lehtinen,
 patterns               analysis                        (1998).
 Science teaching       Videodata and database         Lipponen, Hakkarainen, Muukkonen, &
 and CSCL               analysis                       Rahikainen, (1999).

 Practices of           Database analysis               Lipponen, Hakkarainen, & Muukkonen,
 knowledge building                                     (1999).
 Motivational           Videodata and database          Rahikainen, Hakkarainen, Lipponen, &
 aspects of CSCL        analysis, self report           Lehtinen, (1999).
                        questionnaire of
                        motivational orientation,
                        literacy tests, interviews
 Aspects of             Theoretical articles            Järvelä, Hakkarainen, Lehtinen, & Lipponen,
 Collaboration                                          (in press)
                                                        Lehtinen, Hakkarainen, Lipponen,
                                                        Rahikainen, & Muukkonen (1999).
