376                                     Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 1999

Designing the Virtual Campus as a Virtual World
Mary Lou Maher
Department of Architectural and Design Science, University of Sydney
    Abstract. Virtual Worlds are networked environments that look like the physical world, and create a sense of
    place for the person communicating, navigating, and doing things in the virtual world. Virtual worlds have
    traditionally been developed as games, in fact, most virtual worlds today are games. A virtual campus has
    been developed in the Architecture Faculty at the University of Sydney that is based on some of the concepts
    of virtual worlds. The virtual campus is a place on the internet where students can go to take courses, meet
    with academic staff, and communicate with other students. The development of the virtual campus has been
    influenced by research in design science and is based on the conceptual metaphor of architectural design. The
    design of the virtual campus is considered at three levels: the implementation level, the representation level,
    and the interface level. Identifying these levels provides a basis for the design of virtual worlds for
    professional and educational environments. The consideration of the representation level results in a
    consistent use of a conceptual metaphor so that a person in the virtual campus can make use of the facilities
    in an intuitive manner.

    Keywords: virtual campus, design, virtual worlds, architecture, design computing

1. Overview of The Virtual Campus
The Virtual Campus in the Faculty of Architecture at the University of Sydney was established in 1997
(Maher, Skow, and Cicognani, 1999). The Virtual Campus provides a comprehensive facility for internet
learning for professional students, and local and overseas students. In some of the courses taught in The
Virtual Campus, the students do not need to travel to the physical campus to attend lectures, seminars, or
access learning materials. The Virtual Campus is used to:
1. augment traditional lecture-based teaching with online learning materials and communication
2. support project work that follows an intensive face-to-face learningprogram
3. provide distance learning with all interactivity and materials availableonline

These functions can be provided by a combination of Web-based learning materials with email and an
electronic bulletin board. We have decided to provide an environment for a learning community rather than
to limit the Virtual Campus to multimedia presentations of learning materials. In order to do that we have
designed and constructed a Virtual Campus that has a similar function to the physical campus in providing a
place to meet people, talk about projects, and bump into people unexpectedly.

In addition to the online materials giving access to materials at any time, lectures and seminars can take place
in the Virtual Campus. At first, it looks as if the computer-mediated teaching is equivalent to traditional
teaching. Our experience in the Virtual Campus shows that teaching and learning in a computer- mediated
environment is sufficiently different, that the selection of face-to-face or computer-mediation need not be
made on the basis of distance and location only. In some cases, we choose to hold a seminar in the Virtual
Campus even when all the students are present in the physical campus.

We have experience in two types of online learning scenarios and their equivalent in traditional teaching:
the virtual lecture and the virtual seminar. Experts in education methodologies have mixed views towards
the efficiency of the lecture as an educational medium. However, an excellent lecture can be inspiring and
it remains one of the most emulated models in online learning. The virtual seminar, in contrast to a lecture,
is an online meeting to discuss a specific topic where the discussion is moderated. The major difference in
the lecture and the seminar is the expected roles of the lecturer/moderator and the students. In a lecture,
students are expected to listen, take notes, and occasionally ask questions. In a seminar, students are
expected to come prepared to discuss a particular topic and may contribute to the discussion as much as the
moderator.

The usual expectation is that virtual lectures in online learning are delivered either through the means of
videoconferencing technologies or as recorded video materials. Due to the requirement for high bandwidth
and specialised equipment we do not provide video taped lectures in the Virtual Campus. We focussed our
377                                        Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 1999

efforts on developing a virtual lecture model that does not require expensive hardware and software
environments. The development of an effective lecture under such limitations is a challenging task. For the
Virtual Campus, we audio tape a lecture to the students in the physical lecture theatre. After the lecture we
split the audio recording into segments, in a way that the content of each segment is related to a
corresponding slide. We link the audio content to each slide and make this visual/audio material available
as individual slides online. The virtual lecture is available to students that actually attended the physical
lecture and to distance students that did not attend the lecture. We have found that this online material is
visited as much by the local students as it is by the distance students. This indicates that the virtual lecture
serves as a resource that is different and complementary to other online materials.

A virtual seminar can be held both in synchronous and asynchronous mode. Asynchronous seminars are
realised through computer-mediated bulletin boards. Synchronous seminars occur at a specific time in a
classroom in the Virtual Campus. The classroom is equipped with a slide projector so the moderator can
show slides to guide the discussion. There is also a shared whiteboard that the moderator and the students
can write on. All discussion is "typed" in a chat-like environment. These online seminars show a
remarkable difference to their physical counterpart. Usually discussions have an initial "cold" period, when
participants are arriving, looking at the slides on the screen, and having social conversations. However,
once started, discussions can break into several simultaneous streams and can move off the central topic.
The role of the moderator is to prevent distractions and keep the focus of the discussion. Moderators make
sure that all students have equal opportunities to participate in the discussion. Students also act as
moderators in some circumstances by calling on other students to comment. In general, we have found that
more students participate in virtual seminars than in face-to-face seminars and the focus on the instructor as
moderator is not as pronounced.

The Virtual Campus makes extensive use of online learning materials, schedules, student tracking, online
assessment, etc. What makes the Virtual Campus special is that it also provides a place, integrated with
access to the online materials, in which students can attend lectures or seminars, or meet casually.
2. Designing The Virtual Campus
The design of The Virtual Campus is originally based on the virtual world concept. Virtual Worlds are
networked environments that look like the physical world, and create a sense of place for the person
navigating and doing things in the virtual world. Virtual worlds have traditionally been developed as games,
in fact, most virtual worlds today are games. Our experience so far is that people are familiar with the idea
of virtual worlds if they play computer games, otherwise, they are not familiar with the approach we have
taken to design our Virtual Campus.

The design of The Virtual Campus is also influenced by the similarity between the physical world and the
possibilities for leveraging this similarity in the virtual campus. The experiences of others using text-based
virtual worlds for education highlights the benefits of the consistent use of the conceptual metaphor of
building design. We were influenced by Diversity University1 where the analogy with the physical campus
not only provides a basis for the design of a physical campus, but also opens up possibilities. In addition to
the provision of places to access teachers, students, and learning materials, the physical campus as buildings
and rooms provides ideas about social environments, access to personal office space, the intended function
and use of furniture and equipment, etc.

Finally, the design of The Virtual  Campus    is influenced by recent research      in design science    on   the
representation of designs according to their function, behaviour, and structure. The concept of a design
prototype, as introduced in Gero (1990) has been used extensively in the development of knowledge-based
design systems. These developments have led to an explicit representation of the functions and behaviours
of buildings and their components. Some of these functions can translate into the Virtual Campus and new
functions can emerge.

We present the design of the Virtual Campus at three levels: the implementation level, the representation
level, and the interface level. At the implementation level we look at the decisions made to select an
implementation environment and technology. At the representation level we look at the basis for identifying
the virtual components of the Virtual Campus that have a physical counterpart. At the interface
378                                          Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 1999

level we look at how we structured the way in which the student interacts with the places, materials, and
other people in the Virtual Campus.
2.1 The implementation level
The Virtual Campus is implemented as an object-oriented database, based on the LambdaMOO core (see
Benedikt and Ciskowski, 1995). The database is accessed visually through dynamically created Web pages
as well as through a telnet connection for simple interaction and advanced programming. External tools are
maintained as stand alone tools, loosely integrated with the Virtual Campus. The major external tool in the
current implementation of The Virtual Campus is WebCT2 courseware.

The object-oriented database provides the basis for all aspects of the Virtual Campus:
÷   the implementation of the infrastructure of the places such as classrooms and offices,
÷   the implementation of the things in the place such as slide projectors, seminar recorders and people,
    and
÷   the implementation of the administration of the place such as the objects for information about
    registration of people and programming changes,
÷   the implementation of the interaction with other environments such as the web browser and WebCT.
Figure 1 illustrates the basic hierarchy of the database.3 The root object defines the basic characteristics of
all objects in the Virtual Campus. The first level of object types includes: person, room, exit, thing, and
administration. A generic person is the basis for creating students and academic staff in the Virtual
Campus. By creating a reactive object for each person, a student can customise his object representation to
personalise himself and to have it behave as the individual wants. A generic room is the basis for the
representation of classrooms, offices, elevators, etc. The exit is an object for connecting rooms that allow
people and things to leave and enter. A generic thing is the object from which the object instances of
furniture, whiteboards, slide projectors, notes, etc. derive their basic properties and verbs. The actions that
can be performed on a thing include take, get, put, erase, etc. The administrative objects are there for
programming purposes and generally are not relevant to the students.

                    Figure 1. Object hierarchy in the Virtual Campus database
The object-oriented implementation environment is available to the people in the Virtual Campus for basic
navigation and creation of new objects. It is also available as a programming environment if the person
wants to customise the tools available to himself in the Virtual Campus.
2.2 The representation level
The representation of the Virtual Campus is based on the conceptual metaphor of architectural, or more
specifically, building design. The infrastructure of the Virtual Campus is comprised of rooms and things.
The room is a generic term for any kind of self contained space, so a room could also be interpreted as a
hallway or an elevator, as well as a classroom. The initial development of the Virtual Campus as a text-
based virtual world was based on the study of the use of language in design (Cicognani, 1998a and b). The
continued development of the representation of the Virtual Campus is based on the extension of the
conceptual metaphor of virtual architecture.

In developing a representation of the virtual room, we start with a prototype representation of physical
room and adapt it. A design prototype, according to Gero (1990), includes a categorisation of parameters
and knowledge about a class of design objects according to function, behaviour, and structure. A design
prototype in the Virtual Campus includes the properties that characterise the features of a specific room and
the verbs that describe what can be with the room. The features of the virtual room are defined by
comparing the similarities between the function and structure of a physical room with the counterpart in a
virtual room. This idea is illustrated in Figure 2 for a simplified prototype of a room. The two
representations comprise several similar functional properties, but differ in the amount, type content and
detail of structure properties. The behaviour of a room in the Virtual Campus can be quite different from
379                                    Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 1999

what is assumed in the building design metaphor. The virtual room exhibits not only the usual passive
behavior of information container, but can interact with its inhabitants, for example, by responding to
questions or automatically removing items that do not belong in the room.

             Figure 2. A simplified prototype representation of physical and virtual rooms

The object representation of a room in the Virtual Campus is modeled after a generic container. Thinking
about a room as a container, the list of contents is an important aspect for the functions of a room. The
contents of a room may include people, furniture, and equipment. The following basic functions of a room
are described according to their effect on the contents.
÷   Communication ­ all contents of a room that are people receive communication from other people in
    the room (similar to physical proximity and auditory privacy in a physical room).
÷   Security ­ all contents of a room can be locked to the room so that others cannot take them (similar to
    the equivalent security possible in a physical room).
÷   Storage ­ the contents of a room that are not people effectively allow a person to store objects in the
    room.
÷   Visual privacy ­ the people in the room can only see the activities in that room, activities in other
    rooms are not shown.
The elaboration of the representation of the object and places in the Virtual Campus are based on the
features of their counterpart in the physical world. The following concepts are used in the Virtual Campus:
÷   Classroom ­ a place for lectures, seminars, and access to slides, notes, and bulletin boards.
÷   Conference room ­ a place for larger groups to attend and discuss presentations.
÷   Office ­ a personal working place for individuals.
÷   Meeting room - a place for small meetings and discussions with presentation and recording equipment.
÷   Studio - a place for designing and working on projects.
÷   Whiteboard ­ a surface for brainstorming and saving important comments in meetings.
÷   Slide projector ­ a piece of equipment that holds a slide carousel and presents slides to everyone in the
    room.
2.3 The interface level
The interface to the Virtual Campus is based on a combination of icons and hyperlinks in a web window
and commands in a telnet window. These two types of clients, the web browser and the telnet window, are
standard and therefore accessible to anyone. The interface is shown in Figure 3 for the classroom for the
Hypermedia course. The components of the interface are marked as red numbers.

1.  The display area. This a multifunction window used to display the point-and-click interface to the
    room. In this window you can navigate between rooms, inspect objects, read notes, etc, by clicking on
380                                           Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 1999

    the links. Different rooms have different objects, depending on their function, for example you usually
    find whiteboards and bookshelves in classrooms. This window is also used to display some of the
    tools, for example the slide projector screen, or as a display for other tools, for example, the who tool.

2.  The icon area. This window contains icons that allow you to access a number of tools in the Virtual
    Campus. If you click on one of the icons, the display area will switch to display that tool. The icons
    shown, from top to bottom are: the room view, the slide projector, the whiteboard, the book, the who
    tool, the mail tool, and the help manual.

3.  The text area. This is basically a telnet client providing a chat-like window with a command driven
    interface to the object-oriented database of the Virtual Campus. Here you see text feedback from your
    actions, text descriptions of the behaviour of other people and objects, and the conversation taking
    place in this room.

4.  The text entry area. This is where you can enter commands, and talk to other people.

                             Figure 3. The interface to the Virtual Campus
381                                         Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 1999

Each room in the Virtual Campus is linked to a broad range of course materials and tools in the WebCT
environment. The course materials can be accessed through the "book" icon. Though WebCT is a stand-
alone tool, implemented separately to the Virtual Campus, information about the student and the course are
passed between the applications. This link preserves the continuity between the virtual learning space and
the online learning materials. Figure 4 shows the corresponding course materials interface for the
Hypermedia course. The various components of the course materials and tools shown are:
÷   Information pages: these are web pages which provide information about the use of the campus and the
    objectives, unit value, and assessment.
÷   Calendar: the calendar is used to post public notices about lectures, seminars, meetings, and for
    individuals to post private notices for organising their own time. Notices can have links to reading
    material.
÷   Bulletin Board: a tool for carrying on discussions and questions about the course material.
÷   Course Content: a nested graph of course notes and reading material.
÷   Submissions: a tool for uploading student files for assessment.
÷   Online Quizes: a tools for completing and grading quizzes
÷   Student Tools: a separate page of tools to assist the student in tracking their own performance and
    keeping track of where they are in the course content.
Other tools include glossaries, an index, a search tool, etc. The use of consistent icons style for all courses
simplifies navigation within course materials.

                       Figure 4. The interface to the course materials in WebCT
The interface for the Virtual Campus is changed as new tools are added, but the access to the Campus is
through the standard Web browser. There is a capability to view the room as a VRML file, where the 3D
model is stored in the object-oriented database. This aspect of the interface has not been fully developed.
382                                       Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 1999

3. Conclusions
The Virtual Campus described in this paper focuses on providing a place for students to learn and develop
as part of a learning community. The design of the Virtual Campus combines aspects of virtual worlds and
the sense of place they create with the flexible learning tools available to present and manage learning
materials. The design of the virtual campus is presented in three levels: the implementation level, the
representation level, and the interface level. The use of an underlying object oriented database for the
implementation level has facilitated the incremental growth of the Virtual Campus. The consideration of
the representation level and the conceptual metaphor of building design, provides an intuitive environment
with the ability to expand to aspects of the physical campus not usually found in a virtual campus. The
interface level directly addresses the functionality of the Virtual Campus to its users, the students and
teachers.
Acknowledgements
The design, development and implementation of the Virtual Campus has been supported by a University of
Sydney Postgraduate Research Award and by a Strategic Development Grant from the College of Science
and Technology at the University of Sydney. The author acknowledges the extensive discussions and
assistance from Anna Cicognani, whose PhD thesis and original implementation of studioMOO made this
development possible; Simeon Simoff, who helped clarify the ideas presented here and investigated the
potential of WebCT as a complementary course environment for design education, Alex Stuart, who
implemented the current interface, and Doug Scoular, who helped in making the first steps in setting up the
Virtual Campus.
Notes
1. http://www.du.org
2. http://www.webct.com
3. The hierarchy in Figure 1 is not accurate but it is illustrative of the different types of objects.
References
Benedikt, C. and Ciskowski, D. (1995). MUDS: Exploring Virtual Worlds on the Internet, Brady
Publishing, Indiana.
Cicognani, A. (1998a). A Linguistic Characterisation of Design in Text-Based Virtual
Worlds, Architecture and Design Science, Sydney, University of Sydney.
Cicognani, A. (1998b). On the Linguistic Nature of Cyberspace and Virtual Communities, Virtual Reality:
Research, Development and Application 3(1): 25-33.
Gero, J. S. (1990). Design Prototypes: a Knowledge Representation Schema for Design, AI Magazine,
11(4): 26-36.
Maher, M.L., Skow, B., and Cicognani, A. (1999) Designing the Virtual Campus, Design Studies.
Author's Address

Mary Lou Maher (mary@arch.usyd.edu.au)

Department of Architectural and Design Science, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia, fax: +612 9351 3031
