Meta-Communication Widgets for Knowledge Building in
Distance Education
Robert S. McLean
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education /University of Toronto

   Abstract: "Knowledge Building" is a theory of learning, which emphasizes the
   collaborative construction of knowledge by a group of learners. Students develop their
   understanding through sustained inquiry that pursues collective goals of understanding; it
   is driven by student questions and explanations, in self-directed small groups. Although it
   can be practiced without computer support, computer software such as Knowledge
   ForumTM is designed to support such collaborative learning. "Widgets" are software user
   interface elements that display information and allow the user to manipulate the
   information display or to accomplish some task. This paper suggests specific classes of
   widgets that might help learners better attain knowledge building objectives, by
   distinguishing between the substance of knowledge building and the "meta-
   communication" which surrounds its development. Widgets designed according to
   knowledge building principles may help facilitate and articulate this meta-
   communication component of knowledge building. This is particularly so in distance
   learning, where the meta-communication usually cannot occur outside the system, as it
   could in a face to face environment.

   Keywords: knowledge building, widgets, meta-communication, object-oriented design

Introduction

Current Web documents often feature small embedded forms that allow users to do something ­
provide feedback, purchase something, rate an article, search a search engine ­ all in the context
of the content of the Web page. This paper proposes that this kind of interaction may be a useful
extension of knowledge building learning environments. Further, we attempt to make explicit the
learning principles underlying our design (Koschmann, in press), by examining the principles of
knowledge building and then proposing user interface elements ("widgets") which are consistent
with that design.

The goal is to separate and enhance the "meta-communication" between learners when they are
talking about the learning process, as distinguished from their articulation of the "substantive"
learning, itself. The hope is to increase the focus on the substantive knowledge and
understanding being developed, by providing a separate channel for the support communication,
and to do it in an easy, focussed, and context-aware manner. This may be particularly useful
when the opportunity for face-to-face meta-communication is missing, as in much distance
learning.

Additionally, the "widgets" are computational entities, which can enhance the communication
beyond the simple transmission of textual content. They can serve as agents, performing
notification, reminding, calendar management, prioritization, agenda management, referral, and
other processes consistent with enhanced knowledge building.
Knowledge Building Systems and Principles

"Knowledge Building" systems, such as Knowledge ForumTM (Learning in Motion, 1998), are
networked computer software systems designed to help a community of learners develop their
knowledge through sustained collaborative pursuit of collective goals of understanding. Learners
do this by contributing to a communal database which reflects the knowledge of the group
members and which is an intellectual object open to collective scrutiny and elaboration by the
group of learners.

Knowledge Building, as a concept and practice (Scardamalia and Bereiter, 1991, 1994, 1996),
can be characterized by these principles:

·  Knowledge Building is an activity of the whole learning community.

·  It involves sustained, in depth inquiry, focusing on specific problems.

·  Inquiry is self-directed, usually in small groups, and driven by student questions.

·  There are collective goals of understanding .

·  Discourse is taken seriously, and it focuses on explaining and articulating individual
   understanding.

·  Articulation of individual understanding is publicly available to the group.

·  Continual improvement of ideas is achieved by revisiting them for collaborative, iterative
   refinement.

·  The teacher is a facilitator, an expert learner, and not the source of all knowledge.
Although Knowledge Building could be practiced in ordinary classrooms without special
computer assistance, it is best supported by networked computer software which supports these
principles. For instance, Knowledge Forum serves as the communal database where student
inquiry takes place and their ideas are articulated and refined. Such software provides knowledge
building affordances that encourage and manage the development of understanding.

Human interaction is particularly crucial to knowledge building. When knowledge building
software is used in the face to face classroom, students and teacher interact directly to manage
the learning experience. Much of that interaction is communication about the process of
knowledge building: how to do research, tips about what to explore next, who to get help from,
how to plan, which sub-goals might be more productive, who is working on similar aspects of
the problem, suggestions of ideas to revisit or recast, deadlines, work plans, timelines, and many
more aspects of getting the job done. Much of this communication has little substantive content,
but is crucial because it serves to organize and facilitate the knowledge building process.

However, in distance education environments based on computer conferencing or email, all
communication flows through the same medium, where substantive and other types of
communication are intermixed. As a result, the substantive knowledge production is often
diluted by the other communication activity.
In this paper, we advocate the separation of communication in knowledge building environments
into two streams, depending on whether it is substantive or not. The latter is the "meta-
communication" of the knowledge building process. By "meta-communication" we mean all
communication between the members of the learning community, which is not communication
of the substantive understanding itself.

We propose that separating the meta-communication from the substantive communication may
be useful in two ways. 1) In the design of collaborative learning systems, the separation may
offer a design perspective that is more faithful to the principles of knowledge building. 2) In
actual collaborative software, the separation can provide learners the affordances which help
make evident and reinforce good knowledge building practices.

Thus, the aim is to provide a more effective means of communication of the substantive
understanding by separating out the various communication acts that are not substantive. The
non-substantive communication may be central to developing the substantive understanding,
such as planning, management, evaluation and team building, or it may be incidental, such as
general encouragement and group chit-chat, but it may be usefully separated from the substance
of the learning.

Some knowledge building software does attempt such separation, although the facilities may be
limited. For instance, in the Collaboratory Notebook of CoVis (O'Neill and Gomez, 1994),
students provide substantive information by creating "notebook pages", while each page
distinguished by its "type" (question, conjecture, plan). These in turn, automatically
communicate the intent of the page, and thereby imply or control the types of information that
other students can provide in response. O'Neill and Gomez suggest that this mechanism would
further the students' research strategy, with more emphasis "directly on facilitating a learning
dialog between collaborators than on an individual's thinking." (p. 419 ) The "type" of page
designation applies to the whole page and is external to it, whereas the widgets envisioned here
will be within a page and context-aware.

In Knowledge Forum, students are encouraged to articulate their understandings in the notes they
write in the database, and to use "scaffolds" and "supports" to perform a meta-communication
function. These serve a dual purpose of helping organize the writer's expression of their thoughts
and the process of their development, and also communicating to others the intent of the
information in the note.

For instance, a standard scaffold oriented to theory building has:
Theory  Building
          My  theory
          I  need    to  understand
          New    information
          This    theory   cannot  explain
          A  better    theory
          Putting     our  knowledge     together
These scaffolds and supports serve an implied meta-communication function in some cases,
particularly when the relationship of the scaffold user to the original author of the base idea is
taken into consideration. For instance, a build-on note that gives "New information" in response
to a note which has an "I need to understand" support, has shown implied meta-communication
between the two notes' authors.
In Knowledge Forum, these supports can be inserted into the note text at any point and thereby
mark the subsection of a note and represent a particular category or intent of that portion of the
note. Thus, a scaffold can serve as a writer's compositional aid, an explicit part of the
articulation of an idea, an implicit request to the reader, or perhaps some other meta-
communication purpose.

Multiple Knowledge Forum supports may be used anywhere in a note, to communicate
something about the process of knowledge building or ­ implicitly ­ to solicit an action by other
learners. Thus, they serve meta-communicative purposes, even to oneself, but are limited to
human interpretation of the textual notation.

Knowledge Building Widgets

We propose a class of meta-communicative entities that are modeled on the use of scaffolds, but
which provide much more capability because they go beyond textual labeling to harness the
computing capabilities underlying a computer based knowledge building system.

We use the term "widgets" for these entities. In the human-computer interaction literature,
"widgets" are software interface elements which display information to the user and (often)
allow the user to manipulate the interface either to alter information display or to accomplish
some task. Examples include windows, scroll bars, menus and buttons. Widgets have been used
in real-time educational groupware to provide awareness of the presence and activities of other
learners (Gutwin, Stark and Greenberg., 1995).

Widgets are usually provided in the user interface as built-in software features, separate from the
document content. However, here we extend the idea to provide entities that the user can insert
into the substantive document (note) and which then effectively become part of a specialized
user interface, specific to that note. These widgets, like the scaffolds in Knowledge Forum, may
appear anywhere in a note and by their placement, imply a connection to the note content with
which they are associated. They could appear as a small icon with a distinctive design to
indicate the widget's function, much like the annotation icons in some word processors.

Moreover, it is important to note that these widgets would initiate and control a computer-based
process. These widgets can be thought of as agents, containing information and carrying out
activities to advance the knowledge building process for the individual and the learning
community. We will discuss widget agency below. Additionally, the widgets can, together,
represent knowledge building facilities that surpass the impact of any one of them, through their
cumulative ability to record, notify, summarize, and ­ perhaps ­ work together.

The idea and practice of adding such widgets within documents is now commonplace on Web
pages, where icons and forms can be included at any point. When activated, they cause some
effect, such as allowing the reader to email the author, provide evaluative feedback, purchase a
product, define a term, etc. Although this use is commonplace on the Web, the point here is to
suggest a principled set of knowledge building widgets for use in the distance education
environment, and demonstrate how the associated computer-based process can serve those
knowledge-building principles.

The widgets proposed here also seem to implement aspects of elaborate hypertext systems
(Nelson, 1999; Berners-Lee, 1999), although our emphasis is less on connection to other
documents, and more on the processing power of the computer and the knowledge building
theory base of the present task. Also, our widgets' behavior and the idea of widgets as agents are
reminiscent of the types of agents that can be created in a MOO or the methods and general
characteristics of objects in the Object Oriented programming paradigm (Fowler, 1997).

Goals of meta-communication in Knowledge Building

Widgets should embody Knowledge Building principles. One of the prime ideas of knowledge
building is that student understanding and ideas are articulated and progressively refined by the
interaction of the community of learners. For this to occur, ideas need to be revisited frequently
by many different members of the community, for purposes of refinement and elaboration.
Members of the community need to take on this task on a frequent and continual basis; the
software affordances should encourage and support this revisitation, iteration and refinement of
ideas. Knowledge building widgets should encourage these behaviors.

Knowledge Building is a group collaborative activity of learners, contributing "value-added" to
each other's learning. The importance of high quality learner cognitive involvement is crucial.
For instance, higher cognitive operations (describing, analyzing, and synthesizing) are more
useful in knowledge building than are simple mechanical and rote operations (copying, telling).
Thus, when a fellow learner suggests a resource and gives their assessment of it, it is more
valuable in this context than the output of a Web search engine. Learners providing support for
an assertion is more important than the assertion itself. Widgets might help gather and organize
that support.

We propose meta-communication widgets which facilitate and support human behaviors that
contribute to knowledge building. We envision widgets which, once installed in a note, will
automatically interact with other learners, external databases and data sources, and
communication systems. But the overall goal is to support communication between learners,
communication that increases their knowledge building effectiveness by focusing on the task,
revisiting ideas, encouraging collaborative involvement, and making explicit effective
knowledge building strategies and activities.

These widgets should offer principled but "low cost" ways to participate in knowledge building.
The meta-communication should be explicit, often simple and stylized, consisting of selecting an
appropriate widget from a palette and inserting it into the substantive note at the appropriate
place. Some widgets can ask for additional information, through the use of pull-down menu,
radio-button or text box components. Other students who come across a widget already placed in
the substantive note can click on it and interact with the resulting display of information or
information input elements. Thus the "cost" or effort of contributing in this way is much less
than having to create a whole note. While it is expected that all members will make substantive
contributions, the meta-communication widgets may encourage those who might otherwise be
inclined to "lurk" to enter the active knowledge building process, and thus broaden participation.

Agency of Knowledge Building Widgets

The proposed widgets are computationally active annotations on the substantive content of the
ideas being developed by the individual and the learning community. They can harness the
computer and network power in a number of useful ways:
·  Alert colleague learners and/or the teacher/facilitator, bringing to their attention the note, a
   portion of it, an assertion, a place where they could contribute.

·  Provide feedback or evaluation, show one's presence in a note.

·  Solicit feedback, agreement, prioritization, and organization.

·  Plan, sequence, optimize, remind.

·  Display alternatives: histories, expression, approach.

·  Associate instances, counterexamples, data sources and evidence, including normal academic
   citations, but also active searching mechanisms within and outside of the current database.

·  Motivate by comment, data, temporal considerations, or external events.

·  Summarize and track the knowledge building activity.

·  Provide an attention-directing facility by producing an individual "update page,"
   summarizing what's new.

All of these can be initiated by the note author or by a reader, but use computation and the
involvement and action of other learners to accomplish their ends.

Example Knowledge Building Widgets

The following is a list of possible examples, illustrating classes of Knowledge Building Widgets
and suggesting how they might harness computer power and other learners' activities to achieve
knowledge building principles.

Scaffolds: Scaffolds and supports are already features of Knowledge Forum, though they are
currently inert text which is valuable only if discovered (or found in a search) and used by a
human learner. Marrying the current concept with computing potential suggests that there may
be a class of scaffold or support widgets that could perform ancillary services. For instance, an "I
need to understand" scaffold might issue a request for help to a colleague or mentor, or record
the need on a common list of pending issues. Such a scaffold could also automatically record
suggestions made by visitors (or, more pessimistically, record the transient presence of visitors
with nothing to offer to meet this need).

Comments: These annotations on the substantive text can be of several types, from a range of
sources and serve many purposes. Although basically textual, the computing capability of
widgets makes additional functionality possible. At a minimum, a comment widget could
provide feedback to the commentor that the note author has seen or reacted to the comment. This
could be in the form of explicit alerts or silent logs of one's effect on the learning process. Class-
wide logs could also be kept and used appropriately to guide the knowledge building and for
formative and summative assessment.

There might be several variants of comment widgets, each contributing to knowledge building:

Elaborative comments might include extensions of the target ideas for possible inclusion, or
indication of the intent (or exclusion of other interpretations)
Evaluative comments could come from the teacher or from learning colleagues. An appropriate
set of widgets could make evaluative feedback more specific by pinpointing the instance within
the note that prompted the evaluation. Widgets could automatically participate in the preparation
of an evaluation portfolio, by recording the evaluator's comments and explicit characteristics of
the target substantive text. The evaluations of the widget could be structured, scaled, or rubric-
based, possibly automatically adjusting to the structure, scale, or rubric that is appropriate to the
target item.

Feedback comments can close the loop and provide a structured way to provide comment (by
author and/or third parties) about the feedback, itself. In a knowledge building community, such
comment has its own knowledge building value.

Suggestion solicitation: This is perhaps a more focused version of "I need to understand"
scaffolding, but is a generic way of enlisting help from the knowledge building community. It
would require the author to specify what sorts of suggestions are solicited. The widget then sits
in the document, and may be used by anyone who reads the note. Each suggestion is
accumulated, and the author is notified of the suggestions according to some specified criteria.
When the author uses a suggestion, the suggestor might get some sort of credit or reward, or at
least, notification. The processes associated with this widget should encourage revisiting notes,
weighing colleagues' ideas, revision, and community involvement.

Suggestion: The suggestion widget, on the other hand, can be used spontaneously by a reader.
Its processes also include notification of the note author as appropriate, as well as possible
feedback and/or reward to the suggestor.

Brainstorming: The suggestion class of widgets might also be structured to encourage and
organize idea generation.

Coaching: A coaching widget would provide stylized and distinguished way to offer advice on
knowledge building processes. Although other widgets could be used for this purpose, the
coaching widget might have special facilities such as templates for making coaching suggestions
politely (which would be recognized as having a coaching intent), standard sorts of ground-rule
reminders that could be sent, and lists of desirable behaviors that should be encouraged. Inserted
into a note by a reader or the teacher, they would automatically indicate the content to which
they applied. The widget could have logging capabilities to be used appropriately as part of
formative and summative evaluation.

Knowledge building significance: This widget could be used to indicate the author's own
assessment of how a particular note item holds special significance for collaborative knowledge
building. While it could be used to convey one's best knowledge building examples to the
teacher (say, for evaluation, because that is a course requirement), it could also be used for its
own value in understanding and encouraging knowledge building practices. The widget could
contribute to a common list of candidates for "knowledge building act of the week" or for review
or presentation (e.g., at an open house) or perhaps serve as a measure or catalog of the
knowledge building achievements of the learning community. It could automatically contribute
to the learner's ongoing portfolio and would aid reflection on knowledge building that has been
accomplished.
Resource: This can serve in the manner of the current bibliographic citations, or it can be a
suggestion of a resource. It behaves like a suggestion in the latter case. It also is an active
process, allowing direct hyperlink access to the resource (when possible), creating a community
wide list of resources (including the context in which used/suggested and who used/suggested it
and when). The list should be useful for further knowledge building, cross-note reference and
referral, and evaluation purposes.

Vote, rating or tally: Some aspects of knowledge building may be matters of preference or
opinion. A vote widget solicits and manages the voting process for a question specified by the
author. It could publicize the vote, say on a central list of voting opportunities, with direct
reference to the context of the vote (possibly requiring access to the original note). A rating
widget similarly displays colleagues' responses. Either widget should encourage revisiting notes.
The widget would record the votes or ratings and display them in the note context when
appropriate. It could also impose limits, such as one vote per member, time limits, prerequisites
for voting (e.g., having accessed some other resource); it could also notify the author or voters of
the results when the voting is over. The opportunity to vote and the results could be automatic
inputs to the content of the individually generated daily update page.

Quiz or challenge: A widget might allow a note author to challenge readers to take a quiz or
other challenge which would require them to test or articulate their knowledge of a particular
point. This widget might be uniquely useful in two ways: 1) the challenge or quiz could be
motivating, both to the author and to the reader, and 2) the offered answers may indicate
misconceptions, alternative interpretations, poorly articulated ideas, etc. A challenge might
require that the reader find other notes with related ideas, and the widget might keep both a score
and a record of the offered ideas, the latter to be used for further knowledge building by bringing
strands of ideas together and showing their relationships.

List of instances: This could start out being a clarification of examples that the author intends in
a generalized assertion, but it could develop into a community-developed list of exemplars and
counter-exemplars. Again, the widget manages collection, organization, notification and display
of these instances.

Referrals to others: This widget can serve as an alert agent, possibly suggesting other
community members who should be notified of something (the "somethings" might already be
covered elsewhere in this list). Referrals may be by the author or by any reader, to a third party,
as in "Chris should comment on this assertion". Again collection, notification, credit, and
follow-up can be handled automatically.

Elaboration: This widget would manage the plans for elaborating an idea: goals, conditions,
responsibilities, ... (obviously, such a widget would be useful here).

Work list, Responsibility list: Widgets could manage what needs to be done and who is going
to do it. A wide range of functionality is possible here, including notification, management of the
work and deadlines, inclusion on the participants' to do list, giving credit, and entries in the
evaluation trail.

Goals and milestones: This is a planning tool. One would use the widget to state the goal and
how it will be reached; the steps might be distributed to individual to-do lists and the deadlines
managed automatically. Readers would have the ability to post potential alternative goals or
steps.

Timeline: A timeline widget might be an organizational tool (see Goal and milestones) or a
factual statement that would automatically integrate onto a community timeline, and allow for
notification of discrepancies and possibly interesting coincident events.

History: Here one could find out what has happened with this note or this idea, including not
just its content, but who's interacted with it and how; it could also manage accountability for
changes made. Agent actions could also be detailed or summarized here.

Deadline: This time management widget can also contribute to a common list of deadlines,
possibly managing their priority.

Checklist: A widget could manage a list of requisite events or components and automatically
participate in an alert system.

To-do: A simple widget for noting things to do, it automatically integrates itself onto the
individual's (and perhaps others') to-do list.

Prerequisite manager, follow-up manager: This agent notes that follow-up is required and
looks after orchestrating it.

Data (base) access: Such a widget supplies or manages data. It could connect to external
databases or sources of data, for whatever purpose (e.g., to provide timely instances related to
the knowledge building substance).

Behavioral Characteristics of Widgets

The proposed widgets manage active software processes and agents. They contain information
and have behavior with the following characteristics:

·  They exist in a specific place and scope within a note. Thus, they refer to a specific segment
   of text or drawing. They know what they refer to and provide access to it, and can provide its
   characteristics to other widgets, agents or data capture mechanism.

·  They can provide specific and tailorable functionality to their owners and to visitors to the
   note, by presenting a user interface for getting comments, voting, rating, accessing data,
   displaying data, etc.

·  They may have autonomous behaviors based on events, conditions, or times.

·  They can store data which they will display or summarize when invoked (voting results,
   comment lists, timelines)

·  They can communicate with members of the knowledge building community by means
   within the knowledge building system, or by external email.

·  They can cooperate with other portions of the knowledge building system to construct and
   manage documents that facilitate the knowledge building process (to do lists, alerts, activity
   summaries, and evaluation summaries).
Can Meta-Communication Widgets Work?

We have proposed that knowledge building communication should be viewed as two separate
classes of activity: 1) substantive content and 2) meta-communication that is used to conduct the
knowledge building. We propose that the separation be represented by use of widgets to perform
the meta-communication function; these widgets would be inserted into the substantive
knowledge objects being built, and would provide computationally rich assistance to the
knowledge building process.

The success of this proposal hinges on at least three conditions: Can such widgets be designed
and implemented? Can the separation of process and product be successfully represented,
taught, and used by learners? Does the separation and its representation provide more useful
knowledge building, particularly in environments that do not provide a separate opportunity to
manage the learning process?

The examples suggested above seem to imply feasible designs, and their implementation is
easily within the capabilities of Web forms, CGI scripts, database-backed Web sites, and other
current Web technologies and possibly Java applets, although the mechanism for exact
placement within a text will be awkward with current HTML. Thus there seems to be no doubt
about implementation in the Web environment. In the proprietary network-based learning
software environment, implementation is equally possible, through it may be more difficult
depending on the implementation technologies available.

The principal feasibility questions would seem to be centered on how to represent and teach the
idea of meta-cognitive widgets to users of knowledge building systems. This involves design
effort for the widget representation (their icons), their affordances, the visible effects they have,
and the types of results that they produce. User training and motivation may be the biggest
challenge, since it takes extra effort to learn new systems of representation and to understand
when they are to be used (cf., the Belvedere system, Suthers, 1998).

Widget agency is also a design challenge. The proposed examples include many which initiate
automatic events such as notification, logging, summarization, etc. These will lead to workflow
design challenges which will require design sensitivity and tradeoffs to avoid introducing
additional levels of information overload or perceptions of onerous requirements "to satisfy the
system."

Once a prototype system is developed that can be used, observations and research can be
undertaken to determine if this is useful.

Conclusion

We have proposed extensions to a knowledge building learning environment, attempting to make
explicit the learning principles underlying our design (Koschmann, in press). The proposal
separates out much of the non-substantive communication in a knowledge building environment,
thereby hoping to increase the focus on the substantive knowledge and understanding being
developed. The separated communication has been termed "meta-communication". Because
much meta-communication makes an important contribution to the knowledge building, we
propose that it be represented within the substantive documents through the use of knowledge-
building "widgets", displayed as icons, which are computationally rich and aware of the portion
of the substantive communication to which they apply. Additionally, we have tried to illustrate
how the computational capabilities of the widgets can be used to enhance the knowledge
building capabilities according to underlying principles. The use of these widgets is predicted to
provide additional types of opportunities for participation in knowledge building, in part by
offering a lower "cost" of entry into active contribution for those who might otherwise be
"lurkers".

Bibliography

Berners-Lee, T. (1999). World Wide Web Design Issues. Collection available at:
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/

Fowler, M. (1997). UML Distilled. Applying the Standard Object Modeling Language. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.

Gutwin, C., Stark, G., and Greenberg, S. (1995). Support for Workspace Awareness in
Educational Groupware. CSCL'95. Available: http://www-
cscl95.indiana.edu/cscl95/gutwin.html

Koschmann, T. (in press) Tools of Termlessness. To appear in O'Shea, T. (Ed) Virtual Learning
Environments. Available: http://edaff.siumed.edu/tk/articles/UNESCO.pdf

Learning in Motion. (1998). Knowledge Forum -A second generation CSILE product. Available:
http://www.motion.com/lim/kf/KF1.html

Nelson, T. (1999). Homepage of Ted Nelson. Available: http://www.sfc.keio.ac.jp/~ted/

O'Neill, D.K., and Gomez, L. M. (1994) The Collaboratory Notebook: a networked knowledge-
building environment for project learning. In T. Ottmann & I. Tomek (Eds.), Educational
Multimedia and Hypermedia, 1994: Proceedings of Ed-Media '94 (pp. 416-423).
Charlottesville, VA: Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education.

Scardamalia, M. and Bereiter, C. (1991) Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge
building: A challenge for the design of new knowledge media. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
1(1), 37-68.

Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3 (3), 265-283.

Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge-building communities.
In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Suthers, D. (1998) Representations for Scaffolding Collaborative Inquiry on Ill-Structured
Problems. Available:http://advlearn.lrdc.pitt.edu/advlearn/papers/aera98/AERA98.html

Author's address
Robert S. McLean (mailto:RMcLean@oise.utoronto.ca)
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education/University of Toronto, 252 Bloor St. W., Toronto, ON,
M5S 1V6, Canada. Tel. 416-923-6641 ext. 2254.
