Enriching Learning Contexts to Support Communities
of Practice
Yongwu Miao, Jutta Maria Fleschutz, Peter Zentel

GMD - German National Research Center for Information Technology, Integrated
Publication and Information Systems Institute (IPSI)

      Abstract: The theory of situated learning emphasizes the importance of
      authentic learning contexts and the central role of social interaction. In the
      light of this theory and based on our previous experience, we propose an
      approach for the development of context-based virtual learning
      environments. These are virtual worlds, which the learners themselves
      can create and modify. They therefore provide a customized learning
      context in which all learning processes and communications between
      learners can be situated. The characteristics of our approach are: the use of
      perceptual metaphors, the flexible combination of these metaphors within
      the learning environment, and the support for awareness of the context and
      the social interaction within it. Collaborative hypermedia technology is
      used to construct and to represent places and information in the
      environment and then to navigate within it. The prototype system provides
      rich and flexible learning contexts and supports various forms of social
      interaction for communities of practice.

      Keywords: multi-user virtual environment, situated learning, groupware,
      communities of practice

Introduction

According to Lave and Wenger [Lave91], learning is "a function of activity, context and
culture in which it occurs". Learning is difficult or even impossible in an anonymous,
abstract situation. Therefore, an environment is needed which is as authentic as possible.
It should provide authentic learning material that deals with real-life problems, and it
should support both collaboration and lively interaction with people as well as objects in
the environment. In this paper, we describe how to realize this approach in a collaborative
virtual learning environment.

Designing a collaborative virtual learning environment is usually a process of abstraction,
which models only the essential elements of conventional learning. Details in the context
of collaborative learning are either ignored intentionally or because of the limitations of
technology. The problem is that situated learning is difficult to implement in those virtual
learning environments, which do not provide a flexible variety of contexts and which do
not support very many forms of social interaction. For example, document-based systems
primarily serve as a repository for documents and control the access to documents.
People are not explicitly modeled in such systems, and social interaction can only be
performed indirectly by manipulating documents. In most room-based learning systems,
relationships between people, rooms, tools, and documents are modeled rigidly, and
social interaction is usually bound to rooms. To go beyond these restrictions, we argue
that it is important to enable end-users to model and customize their learning
environment. Furthermore, they should be able to consult an expert, currently staying in
the same room or in another room, and to form and develop communities of practice
(CoP) as described in [Wenger98]. With our design approach towards a context-based
learning environment, we aim to provide rich and flexible learning contexts and thus to
support various forms of social interaction for CoPs.

This paper is organized as follows: The first section describes the motivation for this
research. The second and main part of this paper gives a description of our approach,
defining the basic concepts of our context-based virtual learning environment, describing
awareness aspects and how we propose to support social interaction. Finally, we compare
our approach to related work and present our conclusions and future work.

Motivation

The motivation for this research comes from our considerations of pedagogical theories
and our previous experience in developing and using a collaborative virtual learning
environment (VITAL).

Theoretical Background

In the constructivism approach [Jonassen93] learners are active constructors of
knowledge. In other words no strict curriculum guides students through the learning
issues, rather the environment as a whole stimulates them to construct knowledge for
themselves. Constructivism emphasizes the importance of the context in which students
work and the importance of collaborative learning.

The theory of situated learning formulated by Lave and Wenger [Lave91] considers
social interaction to be central for learning. Collaboration can lead to an elaboration of
strategies that can afterwards be discussed, which, in turn, can enhance generalizing facts
as knowledge, grounded in students' situated understanding. Wenger uses Communities
of Practice (CoP) to describe the impact of social learning [Wenger98]. Members of a
CoP are bound by shared practice, which means that they are engaged in a collective
process of learning. They are fundamentally self-organized, even when external
constraints influence the group. A CoP is determined by the value it provides to its
members, not by a given schedule. It spans dynamic structures and hierarchies. A CoP is
a dynamic group, which can be within an organization, across division units within an
organization, or across organizations. People can simultaneously belong to different CoPs
in the same way as they belong to other types of groups.

Experience with VITAL

A room-based system called VITAL [Pfister98a] has been developed and tested in our
group for two years. VITAL is a virtual learning environment which supports co-located
and distributed collaborative learning of small groups. In VITAL, a virtual room consists
of a shared hypermedia whiteboard, a library, and communication tools such as audio
tool and group chat tool. The room metaphor is used to organize collaboration, to
structure information, to represent group structure and inter-group relationships, to
control access to information objects in a room, and to provide awareness about the
presence of people in a room.

The room metaphor, as applied in VITAL, gives a relatively fixed predefined context for
the learners to work in. Our experience with VITAL showed that the use of the room
metaphor as described above is not flexible enough to support situated learning. The
simple and rigid room structure and the internal structure of rooms limit the forms of
social interaction which are possible. We recommend that in order to support situated
learning settings, information structure and room structure should not be so tightly
coupled. Unlike in VITAL, group structure should not exactly map to the room structure,
and the structure of the group should be able to change dynamically.

Approach

In order to support CoPs and to overcome the limitations of VITAL, we have decided to
de-couple the fixed relationships between room metaphor and other metaphors in VITAL.
Our new approach treats the entity classes place, people, document, and tool equally.
These elements can then be flexibly combined to form different contexts to support
various types of collaborative learning activity. Collaborative hypermedia technology is
used to represent and construct the learning context and to navigate in the learning
environment. The use of collaborative hypermedia technology has two aspects. Firstly in
terms of navigational pathways between places and secondly in terms of the navigation of
information.

Basic Concepts of the Context-Based Virtual Learning Environment

The basic concepts of the proposed context-based virtual learning environment are:

People

People denote an actor or a group of actors. An actor has attributes (such as name,
picture, expertise, learning interests, etc.) which identify and characterize the user of the
system. A group is a set of entities, which may be actors or other groups (i.e. sub-
groups). The structure of a group is represented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG).
Examples of such groups might be the members of a division of an organization, or
people working on a project, which could well cross real-world organizational boundaries
or groups.

Place

A place is a computational space in which objects can exist and move. We distinguish
three kinds of relationships between places: structural, proximate, and connected
relationships. Structural relationship means that a place is a component of another place.
Proximate relationship means that two or more places have the same parent in the
hierarchical structure and are connected by a publicly accessible place (e.g., a corridor).
Connected relationship means that people can navigate directly from one place to
another; this could be either to an immediately neighboring location or a shortcut to a
more distant location.

Document

A document is a logical unit of information that will be handled (e.g., stored, moved, or
destroyed) as a whole (e.g., a book, or a position paper). It has attributes such as title,
keywords, type, owner, creation time, current users, and current place. A document
consists of a set of pages connected by links. Each page contains a collection of
information items. An information item can be described using different media such as
text, image, graphics, tables, etc. There are three different kinds of links: structural links,
internal reference links, and external reference links. Structural links traverse the
branching structure of the document. Internal reference links are used as shortcuts to
navigate within one document without having to follow the structure of the document.
External reference links are used to navigate to other documents.

Tool

A tool helps the end-user to deal with documents, to interact with other people, to
navigate from one place to another, etc. General-purpose tools are: whiteboard,
bookshelf, computer, message box, telephone, calendar, bell, desk, suitcase, garbage can,
hypermedia document editor, door, etc. Some tools, such as course registration tool,
document search engine, learning net editor, experimental instruments, are domain-
specific tools.

Relationship

Various relationships exist among entity classes, e.g.,

     ·   people, documents, and tools are related to places,
     ·   documents are attached to tools,
     ·   people use tools to interact with other people, to manipulate documents, to
         navigate, and to search resources.

A context is defined as a set of places, actors, documents, tools, and their
relationships. A context specifies an environment where necessary resources are
provided and maintained for performing certain kinds of activities. The nature of the
context is dynamic and evolves over time. To support CoPs, our virtual learning
environment enables end-users to define elements (e.g., people, places, and documents)
and their structures and to combine the elements in a flexible way by using collaborative
hypermedia tools. The virtual learning environment supports numerous possibilities to
create new constellations, to span new structures and hierarchies within and between
contexts on demand. Special areas of the environment, which contain domain-specific
tools and corresponding learning materials, can be configured to support specific situated
contexts (e.g., project-based learning, language learning). For example, a room (the most
simple place, which can exist in the environment) can be created for a certain purpose; in
the room necessary tools and relevant documents are arranged, and the room is assigned
to people. End-users can group multiple rooms together as a building for a specific
purpose. Thus, the proximity of locations increases the probabilities of co-presence of
people, who are interested in similar topics, who have a common learning goal, who
work on similar projects, or who are experts of special related topics, etc. Increasing
probabilities of co-presence of people in the same place at the same time in turn also
increases the likelihood of social interaction.

Awareness of Context

To enable people to interact with their learning environment, people must be aware of the
context and its current internal structure.

       Figure 1: Example learning environment from an actorís point of view
Our environment enables people to be aware of

   ·  co-actors (position, movements, expertise, etc.),
   ·  the place (current activities, historical information, scheduled events, etc.),
   ·  documents (title, author/s, user/s, etc.),
   ·  tools (availability, state (in use or not), users, etc.)

by observing the window or by clicking corresponding icons.

An example for this awareness of context is given in the upper window of figure 1: Six
people are working in the room "car driving". They can all observe who is working in
which sub-group (indicated by small pictures on the whiteboards), who is reading which
document (see the tabs in the bottom left-hand corner of the upper window), and that a
document has been taken from the bookshelf which is not in use at the moment. Some
tools are in use (e.g., the bookshelf and two whiteboards), others are available, but not in
use (e.g., computer and phone). By clicking on the icon of a co-actor or a document, the
user obtains more detailed information in a pop-up window.

Flexible searching for suitable resources is enabled by a combination of various
navigation steps through document and place structure. For instance, our example user
reads the hypermedia document "Car Driving in the USA" (see figure 1, lower right
window). He then wants to get more detailed information on the topic, and so he looks
for the author of the document and finds out that the author is currently staying in the
exercise room. He can then click on the corresponding door icon to move to that room in
order to enhance his knowledge, using the additional resources provided there.

Social Interaction

As Wenger [Wenger98] points out, members of a community are informally bound by
what they do together and what they learned through their mutual engagement in these
activities. Social interaction occurs in all stages of development of CoPs. We focus on the
provision of an integrated support for communication, collaboration, and coordination.

Communication

Using an audio tool and a group chat tool installed in each place, an actor can hear other
people who are in the same place and talk to them. There are a number of ways to initiate
a private conversation with somebody in the same place; for example an actor simply has
to draw an arrow from his or her picture to the picture of the chosen conversation partner.
A communication connection for both is then established, and a link labeled "talk"
connects the two pictures. Unlike strictly room-based systems, our learning environment
supports communication between people who are located in different virtual places. By
using a telephone metaphor, the system can help to establish conversation channels
between partners in different rooms directly. Asynchronous communication in the same
place is supported by the use of a bulletin board metaphor. Asynchronous communication
between different virtual places is supported by the use of a message box metaphor.
Collaboration

The collaborative construction of knowledge can be realized asynchronously or
synchronously. For supporting synchronous collaboration, we use a whiteboard metaphor
to establish a synchronous session for all users in the same room. Documents dragged
onto the whiteboard can be edited collaboratively by using a hypermedia document
editor. Any change to the hypermedia document will be propagated to other usersí
windows, and all users move through the hypermedia document together. As they do this,
they share the same view of the document; specifically, all users share one scrollbar and
change pages simultaneously. This is a pure WYSIWIS (What You See Is What I See)
collaboration mode [Stefik86]. Furthermore, if people in the same place want to split into
two or more sub-groups such that each sub-group works on different documents in a pure
WYSIWIS collaboration mode, then they can simply create a whiteboard for each sub-
group and drag the corresponding documents onto the whiteboard. If all sub-groups want
to work on the same document, but on different positions of the document, they can
create a whiteboard for each sub-group and drag a reference copy of the document onto
their whiteboards. In this case, people in the same sub-group work in a pure WYSIWIS
collaboration mode and people in different sub-groups work in a relaxed WYSIWIS
collaboration mode [Stefik86], but they all work on the same document. For example in
figure 1, two sub-groups work on the same document, "Traffic Rules", on different
whiteboards (i.e. as a whole they work in relaxed WYSIWIS collaboration mode), but
each sub-group works in strict WYSIWIS collaboration mode (as shown for sub-group 1
in the lower left window of figure 1).

Our environment also supports collaboration among people who are located in different
virtual places. Computers and network are used as perceptual metaphors to establish a
session for people in different places [Miao99]. Users working in different virtual rooms
can share the same information without leaving their current virtual rooms by connecting
their virtual computers and dragging documents onto the computer icon. A participant
can leave the session by closing the shared window. Even when all participants have left,
the session is still active. When someone joins the session later, s/he finds the working
context unchanged and can work continually. Thus, asynchronous collaboration is
supported as well.

Coordination

When social interaction takes place in the real world, people normally use social
protocols to coordinate their actions. In a virtual collaborative learning environment,
weak communication channels complicate the coordination of using social protocols. Our
context-based virtual learning environment supports coordination of group interaction in
two aspects: Firstly, we enable people to use social protocols intuitively by using
metaphors of entities existing in a real-world learning environment. As a consequence,
users of the system can intuitively use their experience and skills of coordination.
Secondly, learning protocols are used to control and guide social interaction and the
social construction of shared knowledge. To perform group activity effectively, a group
can use predefined protocols to control and guide its interaction. Example learning
protocols are described in [Pfister98b, Wessner99].
Related Work

Currently, there are three categories of virtual learning environments: document-based,
conferencing-based, and room-based systems. In the following, we look briefly at each of
these systems and compare them to our approach of a context-based virtual learning
environment.

Document-based learning systems primarily serve as a repository for documents and
control the access to documents. The users of this kind of systems can interact only
indirectly with each other by navigating through the information space, and by viewing
and manipulating information items in the shared database (e.g., CSILE
[Scardamalia94]). Unlike context-based systems, these systems do not attempt to provide
a very sophisticated context, but one which is based mainly on a document structure and
supports limited social interaction.

Conferencing-based systems support real-time learning activities. They support typical
class and seminar style activities such as discussion and lecture. For example, the
learning systems based on Microsoft NetMeeting [Summers99] are developed by
adopting this approach. Unlike context-based systems, these systems provide limited
persistence of documents and do not support asynchronous activities.

Room-based systems are often based on a number of virtual rooms, which often include
a fixed set of embedded tools such as whiteboard and audio/video tools. Users in the
same room can view and edit information items in a shared workspace simultaneously,
and they can talk to others and see others in the same room (e.g., VITAL [Pfister98a]).
Context-based systems derived from our former experience with room-based systems, but
both types of systems differ in several aspects: Firstly, in room-based systems, the
organization of people, and the structure of documents (if any) rely upon the structure of
rooms, and tools belong to certain rooms. In context-based systems, the organization of
people and documents is dynamic and flexible, rather than being fixed in a particular
place, some tools can belong to actors and be carried around. Secondly, in room-based
systems, the room structure and the internal structure of a room are rigid. In context-
based systems, the place structure and the internal structure of a place can be reorganized
and customized to establish a set of rich, dynamic, purpose-specific environments for
situated learning. Thirdly, in room-based systems, social interaction is limited within the
scope of certain rooms. In context-based systems, a context may be formed beyond the
boundaries of certain places. Thus, social interaction can be carried out across places.

Conclusion and Future Work

Based on the theory of situated learning and our practical experience, we developed an
approach to build context-based learning environments. To support the formation and
development of CoPs in a virtual learning environment, the designers have to respect
several criteria which we described in this paper: Firstly, the flexible combination of
people, places, tools, and documents supports rich contexts for situated learning.
Secondly, a virtual learning environment must provide integrated support for
communication, collaboration, and coordination in order to nurture CoPs. In addition,
collaborative hypermedia technology is used to construct places and information in the
environment and then to navigate within it.

The first version of the prototype has been developed and tested in our group. In the near
future, our efforts will focus on completing the implementation of all features and on
evaluating the usability of the system. The evaluation will focus on the target group of
adult learners. First evaluations will be made with students, and later on we plan to use
the system to support adults engaged in continuous learning programs. In addition, tools
for acquiring and applying domain-specific knowledge (such as experimental instruments
for science learning) are very important for supporting the idea of a context-based
learning environment. Another example would be a learning environment which supports
language learning and needs the implementation of tools like a cooperative vocabulary
trainer or a dictionary.

Bibliography

[Summers99] Summers, Bob, Official Microsoft® NetMeetingTMBook,
http://mspress.microsoft.com/prod/books/1546.htm

[Jonassen93] Jonassen, D.H., Beissner, K., and Yacci, M. (1993). Structural knowledge:
Techniques for representing, conveying, and acquiring structural knowledge. Mahwah:
Erlbaum.

[Lave91] Lave, J., and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral
Participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

[Miao99] Miao, Y., Pfister, H. R., and Wessner, M. Combining the Metaphors of an
Institute and of Networked Computers for Building Collaborative Learning
Environments. Poster published in Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM SIGCSE/SIGCUE
ITiCSE 99, pp. 188, Cracow, Poland, June 27- July 1, 1999.

[Pfister98a] Pfister, H. R., Schuckmann, C., Beck-Wilson, J., and Wessner, M. (1998).
The metaphor of virtual rooms in the cooperative learning environment CLear. Streitz,
N., Konomi, S., and Burkhardt, H.J. (Eds.), Cooperative Buildings. Integrating
Information, Organization and Architecture. pp. 107-113. Berlin: Springer.

[Pfister98b] Pfister, H. R., Wessner, M., Beck-Wilson, J., Miao, Y., and Steinmetz, R.
(1998). Rooms, protocols, and nets: metaphors for computer-supported cooperative
learning of distributed groups. Proceedings of the Third International Conference on the
Learning Sciences (ICLS-98), pp. 242-248, Dec. 16-19, 1998. Georgia Tech, Atlanta.

[Scardamalia94] Scardamalia, et al. (1994). The CSILE project: Trying to bring the
classroom into World 3. Mcgilly, K. (Ed.). Classroom Lessons: Integrating Cognitive
Theory and Classroom Practice. Cambridge: MIT Press.
[Stefik86] Stefik, M., et al. (1986). WYSIWIS Revised: Early Experiences with
Multiuser Interfaces. Proceedings of the Conference on Computer-supported Cooperative
Work (CSCWí86), pp. 276-290, Dec. 3-5, 1986.

[Wenger98] Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning as a Social System,
The Systems Thinker, Vol. 9, No. 5, June/July 1998. Pegasus Communications Inc.,
Waltham, MA, USA.

[Wessner99] Wessner, M., Pfister, H. R., and Miao, Y., (1999) Using Learning Protocols
to Structure Computer-Supported Cooperative Learning. Proceedings of the ED-
MEDIA'99, pp. 471-476, Seattle, Washington, June 19-24, 1999.

Acknowledgements

We want to thank all our colleagues at the CONCERT department at GMD-IPSI for their
help in developing the concept and implementing the system. Special thanks go to our
colleague Shirley Holst for the great job sheís done revising the paper.

Authors' addresses

Yongwu Miao (miao@darmstadt.gmd.de)
Jutta Maria Fleschutz (fleschutz@darmstadt.gmd.de)
Peter Zentel (zentel@darmstadt.gmd.de)
GMD - German National Research Center for Information Technology, Integrated
Publication and Information Systems Institute (IPSI); Dolivostr. 15; D-64293 Darmstadt;
Germany. Tel. +49 (0)6151 869 868. Fax +49 (0)6151 869 963.
