Evaluating CSCL Log Files by Social Network Analysis
Kari Nurmela, Erno Lehtinen and Tuire Palonen

University of Turku, Faculty of Education

Abstract

In this paper our aim is to present a methodology which can be used in analyzing the
interaction processes in a groupware environment. We demonstrate how the social
network analysis approach can be used as a method to evaluate the social level structures
and processes of a group studying in a CSCL environment. This approach tries to
highlight in particular the participatory aspects of collaborative learning processes, but it
can also serve as a starting point for more detailed analysis of knowledge building and
acquisition processes. The relations between learners and the structure between
documents written are the examples studied here.

There are some features that make log files especially important in CSCL systems. First,
log files can be used automatically, precisely and effectively for data collection. Second,
analyzing this information enables evaluative perspective to the collaborative action as a
whole. Third, this feedback can be made available immediately for the learning
community. As a contribution, we can assume that the network analysis of log files helps
us to understand the working processes in CSCL.

Introduction

Numerous studies on CSCL not only demonstrate promising improvement in individual
level learning but also in the quality of social interaction processes among the
community. However, practical experiences also raise questions about the shortages and
problems students have when participating in CSCL learning environments. In this paper
our aim is to present a methodology which can be used in analyzing the interaction
processes which take place in a groupware environment.

Sfard (1998) has made a division into two main metaphors of learning: the acquisition
metaphor and the participation metaphor. The questions concerning the learning
outcomes belong to the more traditional acquisition paradigm that interprets learning in
terms of the acquisition of something in an individual mind and knowledge in terms of
property and possession. The ideas of collaborative learning at least partly belong to the
emerging participation metaphor. This approach deals with learning as becoming a
participant and with knowledge as an aspect of practice, discourse and activity. We agree
with Sfard that both of the two metaphors of learning (acquisition and participation) are
needed.

Miyake (1986) and Hutchins (1995, 1991), among others, have argued that social
interaction (and interaction with the tools of technological culture) provides new
cognitive resources for human cognitive accomplishment. According to Miyake's
analysis, understanding emerges through a series of attempts to explain and understand
the processes and mechanisms being investigated. In a shared problem-solving process,
agents who have partial but different information about the problem in question appear to
improve their understanding through social interaction (see also Oatley, 1991; Brown &
Palincsar, 1989, Hakkarainen & Lipponen 1998; Wittenbaum & Stasser, 1996). In order
to explain one's view to one's peers, an individual student has to cognitively commit
himself or herself to some ideas, explicate his or her beliefs, as well as organize and
reorganize his or her knowledge (Hatano & Inagaki, 1992).

Computer supported collaborative learning, in which thought processes are externalized
in the form of public discourse, provides an agent with access to other participants'
processes of thought, thus supporting the development of the agent's metacognitive
skills. The cognitive value of externalization in social interaction is based on a process of
making internal processes of thought visible (Collins, Brown, & Holum, 1991; Lehtinen
& Rui, 1997; Lehtinen & Repo, 1996; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1989).

A CSCL environment can provide structures and activities that foster monitoring of one's
own and the other students' comprehension and reflect advancement of learning and
problem-solving processes (Brown & Campione, 1996). One way to do this is to use
automatic data collection. The computer records the detailed actions that occur within the
program used. The recording is often stored in log files that can be analyzed as part of
evaluation process. This analyzing can be made immediately available in a CSCL
environment thus helping to reflect the learning process. In addition to analyzing
acquisition, participatory analyzing should be used to reflect the learning processes too.

The approach of social network analysis is useful for studying relationships. Instead of
studying the behavior of analytically isolated individuals social analysts describe patterns
of relationships between actors, analyze the structure of these patterns, and seek to
uncover their effect on individual behavior. A useful tool for that is the representation of
social structure as a network: a set of nodes and the set of ties connecting these nodes.
(Wasserman & Faust, 1995; Scott, 1991.)

The analytic methods of social network analysts have focused on obtaining information
about linkages and pointing out the fundamental structural patterns. Because a
communication network is a social network - a patterned set of connections linking actors
to each other - the network approach is especially useful for CSCL studies.

Traditional evaluative measurements and analysis have certain limitations (for example
the statistical assumption that measurement error is independent across subjects) when
used to evaluate interventions that involve social action or co-operational learning.
Typically the studies concerning individuals overlook measures of social structural
factors. Social network techniques permit analysis at both a group and an individual
level, and integrate the data on interpersonal relations. (Haythornthwaite, Wellman &
Mantei, 1995.) So, network models may provide useful tools for the design and
evaluation of CSCL environments.
It is obvious that computer supported collaborative learning environments can facilitate
individual learning (Sfard's acquisition metaphor) as well as the development of social
systems in which each individual can serve the joint activities and benefit from the shared
resources of the group (Sfard's participation metaphor). In this study we demonstrate
how the social level structures and learning processes in a CSCL environment can be
evaluated with social network analysis. Here we focus especially on the participatory
aspects of collaborative learning processes.

Method

Participants

The participants of the experiment were eighteen university students, one tutor (a
doctorate student) and two supervisors (a professor of education and a professor of
psychology). To combine written communication with face-to-face communication the
students worked in pairs:

     teacher training students (two pairs: MiMe, HaSa)
     educational science student & teacher training student (one pair: AnLa)
     educational science students (two pairs: MiRi, MaSa)
     educational science student & psychology student (two pairs: MiEl, TeMi)
     psychology students (three pairs: ToNi, RiMi, AnSu)

Materials

The research focused on an educational psychology course (in particular the diagnosis
and training of reading strategies of learning disabled pupils) that took place in the
University of Turku, Finland, in spring 1999. The course started with a short introductory
lecture (4 hours) that was followed by 18 case based assignments. There was a strict
timetable that grouped the assignments in four periods that lasted about a week each. The
students then worked with the assignments until the conclusion lecture (4 hours). The
collaborative work took place in World Wide Web (WWW) based groupware called
WorkMates 4.

Like many other groupware programs, WorkMates 4 (WM) shares documents in the
World Wide Web (WWW). The program is being developed in the Educational
Technology Unit at the University of Turku. In addition to making new documents with
different access types, users can attach files and mark keywords. Comments and
questions can be added to the desired part of text. A feature unique to WM is the
possibility to add reference links to other documents in WM and mark them as either
"for" or "against" the proposal or statement.

All eighteen assignments were given in WorkMates and the students presented their
analyses of the cases in the form of socially shared documents in the system. The tutor
encouraged the addition of comments and references in documents. Student pairs were
also guided to make one document per assignment. The assignments were focused on
authentic case studies about different learning strategies and processes. Most of them
were based on video clips describing pupils' reading processes. The clips were digitally
compressed MPEG-1 files that created a large space requirement (about 500 megabytes),
and therefore the video clips were distributed to the students on CD-ROM. This way the
network connection was used only for document sharing which made it possible for the
students to work from their homes by using modems.

Data collection and preparation

In addition to the information in the documents, Workmates collects data on the users'
actions in a log file. This data collection is one of the only terms that are prerequisites for
Workmates usage. The data was used for observing document building and
communication structure. Tailored perl scripts were made to analyze the log file and the
documents.

The log file for this particular Workmates had more than six thousand actions recorded.
Besides the action type, the log files also contained user identification, possible target
identification (the target document for example) and the time in seconds. From 26
different action types logged only some seemed important to this research. We picked
"Finished making a new document", "Finished editing a document", "Reading a
document" and "Added a comment, question, link or keyword to a document" for more
detailed examination. These were considered the best actions to describe knowledge
building. Study of time usage will be a future complementary analysis.

The main part of the work was placed in over 200 documents, so they were also handled
by the scripts. The documents were searched for reference links between them. This
resulted in a weighted and directed graph where the documents were viewed as nodes and
the reference links as vertices. In a similar way the documents were searched for
comments and questions. The resultant graph was made of nodes symbolizing the work
pairs and the vertices indicated the network communication. These graphs were then
analyzed by social network analysis and multidimensional scaling (MDS).

Social network analysis

Social network analysis is focused on uncovering the patterning of people's interaction.
We chose these special tools as the methods in standard statistics were incapable of
handling relationships. Standard methods use individual attributes of actors, not
relationships among actors. Instead of only describing the structure with general terms,
we have gathered information of the ties in the network and looked at the tie structure.
Theoretically we have two distinct forms of social interaction: cohesion and structural
equivalence. (Scott, 1991; Wasserman & Faust, 1995.)

Here we concentrate on the concept of cohesion, which refers to the extent of direct
interaction among individuals in the learning environment. This means an attempt to
quantify the prominence of an individual actor embedded in a network. We have used the
analysis for three purposes: 1) to seek the central actors of the CSCL environment, 2) to
study the connections between actors and to scale them by MDS and, 3) to study the
structure of documents. All analyses are calculated using the Ucinet program (Borgatti,
Everett and Freeman 1996a).

Centrality is used to find the most visible, remarkable or impressive actors in the field.
There are several analyses that emphasize centrality in somewhat different perspectives.
We have used three of them: Freeman's degree and betweenness, and Stephenson's and
Zele's information measure. (Borgatti, Everett & Freeman 1996b, 82-89.) Freeman's
degree measures the network activity of individual actors. It is possible to use asymmetric
data (like received versus sent comments). Freeman's betweenness tells about actor's
possibility to control information. Stephenson's and Zele's information measure shows in
this case how far an actor is situated from the central actors of a graph. The path distance
between two actors is measured based on the number of lines between actors.

The basic idea behind MDS is that of using the concepts of space and distance to map
relational data. Contrary to the previous path distance, this distance is closer to the
physical one. It includes an attempt to convert chart measures into metric measures (Scott
1991, 151-156.). Thus a complex social structure can be presented only by some, in this
case with three dimensions. The quality of a MDS map can be measured by a value of
stress, where the greater value means a worse model. The value is, however, dependent
on data: the number of actors and the scale of measures.

The component analysis was used when the document structure of the CSCL
environment was studied.

Results

Describing learning activities

The four main document action types consisted of more than half of the logged actions in
total (Table 1.). From these types, document reading was clearly the largest (85 %). This
was influenced by the type of working process: the students were accomplishing the
recommendation to read each others' documents. There are, however, quite big
differences in the amount of document reading actions between the student pairs.

The numbers of documents created are pretty similar with all the work pairs. This is
connected to the amount of assignment documents. On the other hand, the amount of
editing is quite dissimilar: some students apparently worked more with document
building than others did. Likewise, in document reading, the amount here describes only
the number of actions. With time usage analysis we could have found out more about the
different learning strategies; for example several short periods of editing versus few more
intensive editing. The indicator for groupware communication was also quite different
between each student pair. There is no statistically significant correlation between the
measured action types and credit due to the small number of student pairs. The two
student pairs AnLa and HaSa do not follow the general trend that the activity in CSCL
environment results better credits.
Table 1. The selected action types from the WM log file and credits

                                                                   1.   Student  Finished  Finished  Reading a   Added       Credit
                                                                          pair    making   editing a  document comment,     (max 3)
                                                                                  a new    document             question
                                                                                 document                       or link to
                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                               document
MiMe                                                                                24        21        415       34           2.5
AnLa                                                                                20         4        480       39           2
MiRi                                                                                19        13        243       14        Not yet
                                                                                                                             passed
TeMi                                                                                21        27        426       10          2.25
MaSa                                                                                21        12        333       19          2.25
MiEl                                                                                22        17        458       49          2.75
ToNi                                                                                22        11        254       13          1.75
RiMi                                                                                20         0        210        9        Not yet
                                                                                                                             passed
HaSa                                                                                23         6        184       13          2.25
AnSu                                                                                 0         0         72        0       Suspended
                                                                                                                             course
Tutor                                                                                2         0        545       129

Supervisor 1 (psychology)                                                            0         0         16        0

Supervisor 2 (education)                                                            23        15        442       11

Total                                                                               217       126       4078      340

From all the students that were enrolled in this course, one pair (AnSu) did not take part
in assignments because of timetable problems. They were dropped from the student pair
list, likewise, supervisor 1, because their work did not have affect on the results.

Communication structure: comments between participators

The different measures for centrality (degree, betweenness and information) are
presented in Table 2. As we can see the received and sent comments are very
asymmetric. The students have more received comments than sent comments. This is
mainly because the tutor was very actively commenting their documents. We can also see
that students have participated in discussion with a different activity: some pairs (ToNi,
TeMi, MaSa, RiMi, MiRi) have written only a few comments while some have
commented on tens of documents (AnLa, MiEl). The number of sent messages tells how
active the student pair has been in commenting on the other's documents and the number
of received messages tells how many comments their own documents have collected all
together. The asymmetric values have been used only with degree measure. Two latter
analysis are calculated with symmetric values so that the received and given comments
are summed up. None of these measures show statistically significant correlation to the
course achievement of the student pairs.
Table 2. Centrality of the student pairs (comments, questions), calculated with students,
the tutor and the supervisor

 Student        Degree          Betweenness Information Credit
   pair                                                     (max
           Received   Sent                                   3)
           messages messages
MiMe         30            16       0.29           7.69      2.5
AnLa         25            33       0.41           7.92      2
MiRi         18            8        0.41           6.95     Not
                                                           passed
TeMi         31            7        0.41           7.47     2.25
MaSa         30            6        0.13           7.08     2.25
MiEl         43            33       0.41           8.16     2.75
ToNi         27            7        0.29           7.31     1.75
RiMi         26            3        0.13           7.08     Not
                                                           passed
HaSa         10            13       0.13           6.75     2.25
Tutor         1       114           9.41           8.49
Supervisor    0            1        0.00           1.07
2

The betweenness measures give the probability of how often a specific actor occurs on
the shortest information flow between some actors. Using this perspective the tutor gets a
special position while the student pairs are not so different from each other. The
information measure of Stephenson and Zele serves another view: there is one outsider
(supervisor 2) and all other participants are near each other. This measure does not give
any particular position for the tutor either. The information measure also gives a very
similar result as can be seen in Figure 1.

The MDS calculation resulted in coordinates in three dimensions with a good stress value
(0.04). These coordinates symbolizing the student pairs are then drawn in a VRML
(Virtual Reality Modeling Language) model that can easily be studied (Figure 1.). To
further visualize the CSCL communication we added the strongest links (cut point 3)
between the student pairs.
Figure 1. The participatory approach: Tutor, supervisor and student pairs, 3D MDS
model from two perspectives
red: class teacher education; yellow: educational science & class teacher education; blue:
educational science; green: educational science & psychology; pink: psychology, black:
the tutor & supervisor 2

The star-like shape of the chart shows that the structure of the communication is very
centralized. In the chart the tutor has all the students around her and the supervisor does
not seem to participate in CSCL communication.

As the tutor has such a central position we calculated the MDS coordinates (stress value
0.02) without the tutor and the supervisor. In this way we can take a closer consideration
on students' interrelationships (see Figure 2). In the result VRML model we can see one
pair (MiEl) located in the center.

Figure 2. The participatory approach: Student pairs, 3D MDS model from two
perspectives

Surprisingly we cannot find many communication links between the student pairs in the
same domain or discipline. It was assumed that discussions would have been easier
within the same disciplines that form more coherent knowledge cultures.

Knowledge building: links between documents

Of the more than 200 documents, only 34 were linked to at least one other document.
These 34 documents form altogether 11 components (subgroups of linked documents)
that consisted of 6 document pairs, 3 components of 3 documents, one component of 5
documents and one component of 8 documents (Figure 3). As nearly all components were
small (only 2 or three documents) and in the component of 5 documents the links were
made between the same student pair's documents we considered the most important
component as the one with 8 documents.

Figure 3. The linked documents with their identification number grouped by student pair
and assignment

Combining two perspectives: knowledge network

The component of eight documents was linked together by four student pairs. Only one
of these references was "against" while the rest were supportive "for" references. When
using only references as indicators, one document is emphasized in the cluster (document
83). This document, however, is referenced only by the documents made by one student
pair.

We combined reference information of the component to information about student pairs
that made comments or questions (Figure 4). The account of comments and questions
highlights document 55 in the component. This document had only one reference from
one document of the component, but four comments from separate student pairs. The
student pair that made this document also commented the reference document
emphasized earlier. It should also be noted that the tutor did not play an important role
here.
Figure 4. The biggest document component made of references, the comments and
commentaries to the documents

There can be many documents with great importance to the learning community that this
analysis does not emphasize (trivial examples are assignments and reference material).
While the technique used seems to be incapable of making sure of the role of these
documents, it can produce more information when revealing the structure of the work
done in the learning environment. To get a deeper evaluation of the CSCL environment,
the contents of the documents should also be studied. Here we focus only on the content
of the eight most strongly interrelated documents.

When examining the contents of the documents, some remarks can be made. The content
of the document that had the most comments and links (document 55) does not seem to
be very remarkable. It doesn't contain any theory, but it did contain small comments,
descriptions and interpretations as well as one new idea that had been overlooked by the
others. The document could not be considered mature or done from the theoretical
perspective. The link turned to refer to similarities between the documents, not
dissimilarities. The comments were more like encouragement ("Good point!", "We found
that too!") or elaborations of the idea. In addition, the comments were not real dialogues
between the student pairs.

Conclusions

According to our results, log files can facilitate the CSCL evaluation process in many
ways. First, it can be a rather quick way to select and organize even large amounts of
information. Second, the summaries of different operations tell about learning activities
as a whole. Thus the log files facilitate the evaluation process when the structure of a
learning community, a general view of the learning process or the subject of the most
central content are to be found.
Social network analysis is appropriate when studying structures and relationships. These
methods provide an approach that is not easily achieved by other tools. Some methods
could be particularly valuable when evaluating CSCL environments. There are useful
techniques to find the central actors or issues. These tools can be used to scale the
environment, for example in the basis of the frequencies of interaction between the
actors. Social network analysis could also focus on dynamics, where visualizations do
play an important role with colors, three-dimensional representation and animation.
Graphical figures are particularly useful, since they enable researchers to display, in a
compact way, the position of individual actors: how they are related to each other, and
what the overall structure looks like.

As a result of this special case we can assume that the network analysis of log files helps
us to understand the working processes in CSCL at least from the participation
perspective. The knowledge acquisition processes did not seem to get such a visible form
that we could argue for it in the same way. However, the acquisition approach should not
be fully replaced by the emerging participation approach. Apart from the description of
activities and discourse processes, we should also consider the knowledge acquisition in
CSCL environments. This means that better tools to follow the elaboration of documents
and interrelated groups of documents should be developed.

References

Borgatti, S., Everett, M. & Freeman, L. (1996a). UCINET IV Version 1.64. Natick, MA:
Analytic Technologies.

Borgatti, S., Everett, M. & Freeman, L. (1996b). UCINET IV Version 1.64 Reference
Manual. Natick, MA: Analytic Technologies.

Brown, A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1996) Psychological theory and the design of
innovative learning environments: On procedures, principles, and systems. In L.
Schauble. & R. Glaser (Eds.) Innovations in learning. New environments for education.
(pp. 289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Brown, A. L., & Palincsar, A. S. (1989) Guided, cooperative learning and individual
knowledge acquisition. In L. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in
Honor of Robert Glaser. (pp. 393-451) Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Collins, A., Brown, J.S. & Holum, A. (1991). Cognitive Apprenticeship: Making
Thinking Visible. American Educator, 6-11, 38-46.

Hakkarainen, K. & Lipponen, L. (1998, April). Epistemology of inquiry and computer-
supported collaborative learning. Paper presented April 13-17 1998, at the Annual
Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego.
Hatano, G. & Inagaki, K. (1992) Desituating cognition through the construction of
conceptual knowledge. In P. Light & G. Butterworth (Eds.) Context and cognition. Ways
of knowing and learning. (pp. 115-133). New York: Harvester.

Haythornthwaite, C., Wellman, B. & Mantei M. (1995). Work Relationships and Media
Use: A Social Network Analysis. In Group Decision and Negotiation, 4: 193-211.

Hutchins, E. (1991) The social organization of distributed cognition. In L. B. Resnick, J.
M. Levine & S. D. Teasley (Eds.). Perspectives on socially shared cognition. (pp. 283-
307). Washington, DC.: American Psychological Association.

Hutchins, E. (1995) Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Lehtinen, E. & Repo, S. (1996). Activity, social interaction and reflective abstraction:
Learning advanced mathematics in a computer environment. In S. Vosniadou, E. De
Corte, R. Glaser & H. Mandl (Eds.), International perspectives on the design of
technology supported learning environments (105-128). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.

Lehtinen, E. & Rui, E. (1996). Computer supported complex learning: An environment
for learning experimental method and statistical inference. Machine Mediated Learning 5
(3&4), 149-175.

Miyake, N. (1986). Constructive interaction and the iterative process of understanding.
Cognitive Science, 10, 151-177.

Oatley, K. (1991) Distributed cognition. In H. Eysenck, A. Ellis, E. Hunt, & P. Johnson-
Laird (eds.) The Blackwell dictionary of cognitive psychology. (pp. 102-107). Oxford:
Blackwell Reference.

Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1989). Schools as knowledge-building communities.
Paper presented at the Workshop on Development and Learning Environments,
University of Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 1989.

Scott, J. 1991. Social Network Analysis. A handbook. London: SAGE Publications.

Sfard, A. 1998. On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one.
Educational Researcher 27(2), 4-13.

Wasserman, S. & Faust, K. 1995. Social network analysis. Methods and applications.
Cambridge university press.

Wittenbaum, G.M. & Stasser, G. 1996. Management of information in small groups. In J.
L. Nye & A.M. Brower (Eds.) What's social about social cognition? Research on socially
shared cognitionin small groups. SAGE. Thousand Oaks. London. New Delhi. Pp. 3-28.
