Negotiating About Shared Knowledge in a Cooperative
Learning Environment
Hans-Rüdiger Pfister, Martin Wessner, Torsten Holmer, Ralf Steinmetz

GMD -- German National Research Center for Information Technology, Integrated
Publication and Information Systems Institute (IPSI)

      Abstract: A goal of cooperative learning is the construction of shared
      knowledge. Shared knowledge represents the common understanding of a
      group of individuals with respect to the content domain; the active
      construction of shared knowledge enhances acquisition and retention. Two
      requirements have to be met during the construction process: First, shared
      knowledge should be represented explicitely; second, the participants'
      multiple perspectives need to be integrated. We focus on the second
      aspect, called knowledge negotiation, by which the learners' common
      understanding is construed. However, common understanding comes in
      degrees. We provide a theoretical perspective for the negotiation process
      and propose a quantification of shared knowledge, called the degree of
      agreement (degreement). Finally, we discuss how a learning environment
      for distributed learners can support the process of cooperative knowledge
      construction.

      Keywords: cooperative learning, shared knowledge, multiple perspectives,
      degreement

Introduction

Cooperative learning, as opposed to individual learning, has many advantageous
properties (Koschman, 1996; Slavin, 1995). Nowadays, it is possible that, given access to
the Internet, anybody can cooperate with anybody anywhere; we call this kind of learning
"Distributed Computer Supported Cooperative Learning" (D-CSCL). In this paper, we
focus on self-organised learning. In guided learning, knowledge is distributed by a
knowing resource (teacher), it is represented in the form of well-prepared material
(books, scripts), and it is normally accepted as valid. However, in self-organised learning,
(a) there is no omniscient teacher, but participants with different degrees and areas of
expertise, (b) materials are not well-structured, and (c) acquisition proceeds mainly by
discussion. Imagine, e.g., a group of programmers learning cooperatively a new
programming language. Here, learning can be understood as exchange, (re)construction,
and negotiation of multiple perspectives, rather than as delivery of information. The goal
is to establish a sufficient amount of shared knowledge from the participants' multiple
perspectives.
Distributed and shared knowledge

The notion of distributed cognition has been advanced, among others, by Salomon
(1993). It refers to the observation that much of the "intelligence" needed to solve a
problem is not inside individual minds, but is distributed across different persons as well
as embodied in external artifacts. Situational affordances, rather than individual symbolic
representations, regulate the cooperative activity of intelligent action. Similarly, we think
of distributed cooperative learning as an activity that transfers knowledge from many
sources and yields a corpus of socially shared knowledge.

For simplicity, we assume that knowledge can be described as a collection of facts
(Nickerson, 1993); we use the term "fact" generically, including rules etc.. Each learner
"owns" a set of facts (i.e., holds as set of beliefs) with respect to a specific domain.
Cooperative learning can be construed as the exchange of facts among multiple learners,
especially from knowing to ignorant learners.

With this simplified model, the notions of distributed and shared knowledge are defined
as follows. Given a group of n persons, with each person i owning a set of facts Fi ,
shared knowledge is the intersection « Fn of all sets Fi..n; i.e., shared knowledge is
knowledge all persons have in common. For distributed knowledge, we introduce the
notion of task relevant knowledge: given a task T, FT is a set of facts sufficient to solve
T. Hence, knowledge to solve a task is distributed if the set FT is not exclusively owned
by a single person.

Knowledge negotiation

During learning, a person has to accept the facts delivered by another person. However, a
student might not immediately accept a fact delivered by the teacher. Knowledge is
usually not just transferred, but actively construed and expanded during learning, as Pea
(1996) emphasizes in his transformative communication approach. Hence, after
negotiation, there are four alternatives: (a) the student eventually accepts the fact as part
of his knowledge, (b) s/he rejects the fact, (c) s/he is undecided, or (d) student and teacher
agree on a new fact as a result of the negotiation process.

Generally, it is not a single fact that is negotiated, but a composite of several facts
pertaining to a topic. We call such a composite a perspective, and multiple learners
normally have multiple perspectives. For example, a group of students wants to learn
how to interpret an experimental finding, and they consult an expert. The expert proposes
an interpretation consisting of four facts (facts 3 to 6 in Table 1). Student A's perspective
consists of three facts, two of which are different from the expert's perspective; student
B's perspective is based on only one fact.
Learning from the expert means to accept his and discard one's own facts; e.g., student A
should accept facts 3, 5, and 6 and discard facts 1 and 2. Of course, we do not argue that
students be uncritical and should directly accept the expert's authority. They should
discuss why her or his perspective is more appropriate (or not), and evaluate arguments
which (dis)confirm it. Metaphorically speaking, active learning is like negotiating: for
example, two parties start negotiating about the price of a car, each announces a starting
offer, they exchange new offers, some threats, and eventually settle on a final price, or
they part without agreement (Raiffa, 1982). Instead of starting offers, multiple
perspectives are debated during cooperative learning; instead of threats, arguments are
exchanged; instead of a final price, shared knowledge is achieved.

Degreement: A measure of shared knowledge

Just as a price moves between two extremes, agreement on shared knowledge moves
between total disagreement and total agreement. The degree of agreement, called
degreement for short, constitutes a quantitative measure, ranging from --1 (total
disagreement) to +1 (total agreement). Qualitatively, it represents the topic of
degreement, and which of the topic's aspects (facts) one agrees or disagrees upon. We
conceptualise degreement as a relation between persons, specifically, as the degree of
similarity between the knowledge Fi and Fj two persons i and j own with respect to a
given topic. We presume that an explicit representation of degreement supports active
learning.

Degreement, in addition to being a quantitative measure, is a function of the facts learners
agree upon as well as of the facts they disagree upon. Furthermore, degreement is an
asymmetric function, i.e., the degree with which I accept somebody's knowledge is not
necessarily mirrored by the degree with which s/he accepts my knowledge. Tversky
(1977) has proposed a measure of similarity which provides a suitable starting point. The
idea is to define the similarity S between two objects A and B, represented as sets of
features, as a function of the ratio of common and distinctive features:

As a measure of degreeement (D), we propose a slightly modified version:
The degreement D between two persons A and B is measured as the Tversky-similarity
between their two sets of facts. Psychologically, it seems plausible to make a difference
between essentially opposed perspectives (D < 1), and perspectives which are consensual
(D > 0). So far we do not distinguish between a belief that a fact is true, a belief that a
fact is not true, and indifference towards a fact. D can in principle be extended to
represent degreement among multiple persons.

Note that this conceptualisation does not directly operationalise how degreement is
assessed. It might be difficult to separate discrete facts and align persons and facts
according to their common and distinctive knowledge. Hence, as an approximation,
degreement is indirectly measured, using rating scales or voting schemes.

In guided learning settings, using the asymmetric variant, learning can now be understood
as the process of maximising degreement from the teacher's point of view. In self-
organised settings, the symmetrical variant seems more appropriate. Here, learning means
to maximise shared knowledge as measured by symmetrical degreement.

Computer support for knowledge negotiation

Computer-supported learning enables learners to communicate in ways which are not
possible in face-to-face interaction. For example, transfer of knowledge can switch from
synchronous to asynchronous modes, or any mixtures inbetween. Some aspects of
negotiation can be hidden, for example, anonymous voting to assess degreement. Shared
knowledge can be represented as a common view, and descriptive measures such as
degreement can than be computed automatically. In this section, we briefly describe how
degreement is dealt with in a learning environment called CROCODILE, currently under
development at GMD-IPSI (Pfister et al., 1998).

Explicit representation in a learning net

The CROCODILE system has two layers for representing content: one is a hypermedia
document structure, where text, graphics, and other content objects are generated and
linked. A second layer, called a learning net, represents the main topics of the domain as
a graph structure consisting of nodes and edges (Pfister et al., 1999). Each node, in turn,
refers to a document where the content of that node is stored, or to a person, who is a
kind of expert with respect to the node content. The learning net serves as a
representation of shared knowledge in several ways: (i) degreement is indicated by
different colors of the nodes, (ii) degreement of each node can be viewed and assessed,
(iii) there is a choice of several methods to assess degreement and to define default values
(e.g., a degreement threshold value for deleting nodes). Exploring the learning net,
learners get an overview of the content under discussion as well as information on topics
with multiple perspectives, i.e., where little degreement exists.

Negotiation support with learning protocols

The CROCODILE system also provides a number of so-called learning protocols
(Wessner et al., in press). Each learning protocol systematically guides a special kind of
communication or cooperation activity. For example, the explanation protocol controls a
dyadic explanation process by systematically switching roles (explainer and explainee),
providing a specialised interface to enter explanations and questions and for storing the
dialogue for future use. Similarly, degreement protocols support the process of
degreement measurement, i.e., they prompt the user to assess degreement, and they
compute various degreement measures (e.g., symmetric and asymmetric).

Discussion

In sum, learning as a self-organised cooperative process in a distributed environment is a
complex process of negotiation, aiming at the construction of shared knowledge. A
computerised learning environment can support this process by providing an explicit
representation of shared knowledge, by providing a measure of the degree of agreement
on the topic under discussion, and by supporting the process of degreement assessment.
In CROCODILE, we aim at supporting all of these aspects. Currently, we are exploring
how to assess and represent degreement appropriately, and we are empirically testing
whether and how negotiating knowledge with CROCODILE improves cooperative
learning processes of distributed learners.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to our colleagues at GMD-IPSI for many valuable discussions and
suggestions.

Bibliography

Koschmann, T. (Ed.) (1996). CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Nickerson, R. S. (1993). On the distribution of cognition: some reflections. In G.
Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions. Psychological and educational considerations
(pp. 229-261). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Pea, R. D. (1996). Seeing what we build together: Distributed multimedia learning
environments for transformative communications. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory
and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 171-186). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Pfister, H.-R., Wessner, M., & Beck-Wilson (1999). Soziale und kognitive Orientierung
in einer computer-gestützten Lernumgebung. In U. Arend, E. Eberleh & K. Pitschke
(Eds.), Software-Ergonomie '99. Design von Informationswelten (pp. 265-274). Stuttgart:
Teubner.

Pfister, H.-R., Wessner, M., Beck-Wilson, J., Miao, Y., & Steinmetz, R. (1998). Rooms,
protocols, and nets: Metaphors for computer-supported cooperative learning of
distributed groups. In A. Bruckman, M. Guzdial, J. L. Kolodner & A. Ram (Eds.),
Proceedings of ICLS 98, International Conference of the Learning Sciences 1998 (pp.
242-248). Charlottesville, VA: Association for the Advancement of Computing in
Education (AACE).

Raiffa, H. (1982). The art and science of negotiation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Salomon, G. (Ed.) (1993). Distributed cognitions. Psychological and educational
considerations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Slavin, R. (1995). Cooperative learning. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.

Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84, 327-352.

Wessner, M., Pfister, H.-R., & Miao, Y. (in press). Using learning protocols to structure
computer-supported cooperative learning. Accepted for ED-MEDIA'99. Seattle,
Washington, June 19-24, 1999.

Authors' addresses

Hans-Rüdiger Pfister (pfister@darmstadt.gmd.de), Martin Wessner
(wessner@darmstadt.gmd.de), Torsten Holmer (holmer@darmstadt.gmd.de)
GMD -- German National Research Center for Information Technology, Integrated
Publication and Information Systems Institute (IPSI); Dolivostr. 15; 64285 Darmstadt;
Germany. Tel. ++49 (0)6151 869 947. Fax ++49 (0)6151 869 963.
