An integrated approach to individual and collaborative
learning in a web-based learning environment
Sadhana Puntambekar
University of Connecticut

   Abstract: In this paper we will discuss the design of a web based interactive learning
   environment. We will focus on the cognitive and collaborative tools that we are
   developing for students learning at a distance. We have adopted a constructivist, problem
   based approach for our design. An essential element of making this approach work is to
   integrate the individual and collaborative learning as well as the affordances and
   scaffolding provided by the different tools. We will discuss the design principles, the
   tools and the framework for integrating individual and collaborative learning.

   Keywords: scaffolding, problem-based learning, constructivism, cognitive tools,
   collaborative spaces, individual and collaborative learning.

Introduction

With the availability of inexpensive and powerful computers and advances in technology, the
World Wide Web has become one of the major technologies in distance education. Distance
learning via the World Wide Web (WWW) presents some unique challenges because learning in
such an environment is a truly distributed event, where learners are physically removed from one
another. Feelings of isolation, of not being part of a community and, lack of motivation are
known to have been reported by students (Wegerif, 1998). Moreover, students' perception of the
usefulness of a course offered on the WWW is dependent on how fruitful and productive their
collaborative interactions have been.

Most web-based courses provide formal and informal discussion forums, in the form of chat
rooms and discussion seminars respectively. However, discussions are not necessarily integrated
with other activities that students undertake. One of the reasons for this is that there is often a
lack of a sound conceptual framework guiding the design of the courses. In order to develop
collaborative spaces that maximize educational benefits, the design of the entire course (or
program) needs to be taken into account so that individual and social learning opportunities
complement each other. The learning environment needs to integrate collaborative learning with
activities that students can undertake on their own. To achieve this, we are developing an
interactive web-based learning environment based on a constructivist, problem-based approach.
It not only integrates individual and collaborative learning opportunities, but also provides
scaffolding at three levels: cognitive, collaborative and metacognitive.

In this paper, we will discuss the conceptual framework guiding the design of the learning
environment. We will describe the cognitive tools and the collaborative spaces we are designing,
the different levels of scaffolding we are building into the tools and discuss how we are
integrating the tools as well as the levels of scaffolding. We will then discuss the context in
which we are using the web-based environment and some preliminary results.
Conceptual framework guiding our design

We are using a constructivist, problem-based approach to designing an interactive web-based
learning environment (WBILE). Constructivists believe that learning is constructing knowledge
from one's experiences rather than directly receiving information from the outside world (e.g.
Collins & Green, 1992; Resnick, 1987; Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989; Collins, Brown &
Newman, 1989). The basic tenets of constructivism are (a) learners construct their own
understanding; (b) new learning depends on current understanding; (c) learning is facilitated by
social interactions and (d) meaningful learning occurs within authentic learning tasks. Solving
authentic problems is one such constructivist approach (e.g., Barrows, 1985; Barrows & Kelson,
1995). Problem-solving environments are richest when drawn from the world of practice, from
real world learning situations. As students work on solutions to complex problems, they have the
opportunity to construct and generate rich meanings (Piaget, 1954; Perkins, 1986). In addition,
students need to reflect on their ideas and solutions, provide explanations and justifications, all of
which can augment their understanding of the domain knowledge. Our design of the web-based
interactive learning environment (WBILE) is being guided by the following principles.

Solving complex problems affords rich opportunities for learning

Problem solving has long been regarded as a generative activity that could promote deep learning
(e.g., Barrows, 1985). Recent research shows that, indeed, students learn content knowledge
deeply by solving relatively complex, real world problems that can have multiple solutions
(Barrows & Kelson, 1995). Koschmann (1994) has put forth six principles for effective learning
­ multiplicity, activeness, adaptation, authenticity, articulation and termlessness and has
emphasized that solving complex ill structured problems provides students with ample
opportunities to engage in all of these. Real world problems have several features that make them
ideal for promoting learning and vehicles for connecting theoretical knowledge to issues in the
outside world. (1) They are complex and ill structured and have multiple solutions or methods of
solving them (Jonassen, 1997). (2) They are generally underspecified, thus requiring the learner
to generate multiple hypotheses, and explore for more information in order to refine these
hypotheses to move towards a solution. (3) They are complex and therefore require the learner to
acquire knowledge and skills to resolve them (Barrows, 1985). (4) Ill-structured problems come
from the world of practice and therefore help learners to make the connections between the
theories they are learning and their application in the real world. (5) They provide opportunities
for collaborative learning in which learners can engage in collective meaning making.

Thus one way to encourage deep learning is to have students engage in solving complex, ill-
structured problems. Our approach to designing a web-based interactive learning environment
for distance learning seeks to do just that. Our aim is to develop problems in the content area of a
given course, and cognitive tools to support student learning as they solve the problems. Each of
the different problem solving experiences in the distance courses that we are developing
becomes a rich "case" available to students as they engage in later problem solving. Case-based
reasoning (Kolodner, 1993) explains that the extent to which an experience is useful to later
learning depends on the richness of analysis the reasoner has undertaken. An experience
anchored in a rich context will provide ample opportunities for analysis. Such an experience will
also provide more opportunities for the learning to transfer to novel situations. If learning is a
process of acquiring the culture of a professional community as described by Lave and Wenger
(1991), distance learning via an interactive environment should offer numerous possibilities for
electronic apprenticeship.

Collaborative learning promotes reflection, articulation and knowledge building

Researchers have demonstrated the importance of reflection as being important to enhance
learning. For example, Pirolli and Recker (1994) suggested that reflection on problem solutions
that focuses on understanding the abstract relationships between problems is related to improved
learning. Collins and Brown (1988) used abstracted replay in which the learners' solution
procedure was reified to help learners examine their solution trees. Research on self-explanations
(Chi, 1989; Bielaczyc, 1994) suggested that students learn better when they generate
explanations thereby monitoring their understanding. Another way that reflection can be
enhanced is through articulation in collaborative discourse. Reflection is not a solitary process
(Schon, 1983, 1987). Collaboration provides students with opportunities to reflect on and
articulate what they are learning.

The importance of the social context in supporting an individual's understanding of her own
learning (i.e., metacognition) was emphasized by Brown & Palincsar (1987). Working in groups
provides many opportunities for exploration, reflection and articulation. Collaborative work
allows students to successfully tackle problems more complex than what any group member
could do alone (Hmelo, Narayanan, Newstetter & Kolodner, 1995). Researchers have
emphasized the importance of collaborative discourse not only to support learning but also build
a community. For example, Brown and Campione (1990) proposed communities of learners and
thinkers, while Scardamalia and Berierter (1994) proposed restructuring classrooms into
knowledge building communities.

Although collaboration is known to promote reflection and articulation, outcomes of
collaborative learning are influenced by several factors. Some of these are the composition of the
pairs or groups (Whitelock, Taylor, O'Shea, Scanlon, Clark, & O'Malley, 1993), the nature of the
task (Puntambekar, 1996) and the nature of the environment itself (Crook, 1994). These factors,
either singly or in combination, lead to different interactions among the learners; the types of
interactions heavily influence the learning outcomes. In addition, learning outcomes in a
computer based environment are also influenced by the instructional roles that the tools support
and when the tools are used in the learning process (Koschmann, 1996). Collaboration has also
been found to be more fruitful and resulting in better learning outcomes if it is anchored, i.e.
students have a purpose to collaborate, such as reviewing or critiquing or answering a question
(Guzdial, 1998).

This is especially true in a distance learning situation on the WWW because learners are
geographically removed from each other. They cannot thus take advantages offered by face-to-
face interactions. Furthermore, the support that learners can provide one another is crucial to the
building of a community of learners. Therefore, the individual and social learning opportunities
in a distance learning environment need to be integrated in such a way as to maximize the
learning benefits. In order to achieve this, the type of support afforded by each tool needs to be
carefully considered so that the tools complement each other.
Scaffolding is critical to help students learn within an ill-structured problem space

An important aspect of making a constructivist, problem-based approach work is the scaffolding
that students require in order to learn within an ill-structured problem space. Scaffolding in a
complex environment such as problem solving needs to be distributed among many agents
(Puntambekar & Kolodner, 1998). This is because complex problem solving involves many
stages and any one agent of scaffolding, such as peer interactions or the software cannot provide
students with the support and adaptability that scaffolding in such an environment requires.
Moreover, both individual and collaborative learning opportunities need to be integrated so that
students are supported during the entire problem solving process. The cognitive and
collaborative tools that we are building serve as vehicles for three levels of scaffolding ­
cognitive, social and metacognitive. An essential aspect of the tools we are building is that it
integrates the scaffolding across both individual and collaborative tools.

Tools to support individual and collaborative learning

We are building tools that provide opportunities for collaboration as well as help students reflect
on their own before and after they engage in group discussions. The tools are ­ 1. reflective
notebooks that will help students flesh out their ideas before discussing them with other students,
2. discussion tools for small and large group discussions and 3. collaborative concept maps.

Reflective notebooks

The 'reflective notebook' enables learners to analyze ideas, explore, articulate and reflect on
solutions to problems. This is an 'individual' tool which is a repository of students' thoughts and
ideas and helps them to think about the issues before they participate in electronic discussions.

The notebooks serve many functions. Based on the notion that "making covert, abstract
processes visible, public and manipulable, serves as a necessary catalyst for reflective
metacognitive activity" (Derry, Tookey & Chiffy, 1994), the notebooks serve as a vehicle for
providing hints. They make thinking visible and record students' journey through the problem
solving process. They also provide prompts to help students decide how to move forward. The
reflective notebooks provide guidance for students both in carrying out activities such as
exploring the problem space and coming up with ideas, etc. and also reflecting on them in order
to learn from them. We are developing two types of prompts for each stage in the problem
solving process ­ generic prompts and specific prompts. The generic prompts are common to all
problems and help students with the process ­ for example, thinking about the major issues in a
problem. The specific prompts are unique to each problem and will encourage students to think
about issues in that problem. These prompts can be customized by the instructor. This is very
important in learning via the WWW because it allows the instructor to modify prompts based on
the electronic discussions that students participated in.

Students can note their responses, append or edit what they had written earlier. Each entry is date
stamped and is saved in a database. Thus it is an excellent source of assessment that enables
students as well as the instructor and designers to understand students progression in (1) a
problem and (2) across problems.
In addition, the notebooks also serve the purpose of evaluation at the end of each module as
students individually write their reflective essays. At the end of each module, students write
essays justifying their solution and drawing connections between the concepts they are learning.

Discussions

Small group

We are planning on using two types of discussion forums. One is meant for small groups of
students working on problem solutions. These are accessible to the group members who can
mentor each other and offer suggestions regarding the problem solution. These will serve the
purpose of informal discussions in which students can ask each other questions and support each
other. This is especially important in a distance learning situation because students are
geographically removed from each other.

Whole class

Whole class discussion (with the instructor as the facilitator) are included in the course. The
discussions are not ad hoc, but are built into the problem solving process in such a way that they
support knowledge building during particular phases in the process. For example, the first
discussion is designed to occur after students have individually (in their notebooks) generated
ideas for solving the problem and have had an opportunity to discuss their ideas within their
group. The discussion will focus on identifying the major issues in a problem and the initial ideas
that students have about solving the problem. A second discussion takes place when students
have done some information gathering which will help them to resolve the problem, based on the
theories they are learning.

Thus by using a constructivist, problem-based approach, we are also aiming to make the
discussions more productive so that the social context (in this case asynchronous) can be used to
augment the cognitive affordances provided by the problem-based approach. Learning in such an
environment is therefore a result of both individual and social processes (Driver, Asoko, Leach,
Mortimer, and Scott, 1994).

Collaborative Concept maps

An additional feature that we will be integrating is 'collaborative concept maps'. Students
collaboratively construct and edit concept maps that summarize the main concepts and show
connections between theories they are learning. This activity is designed to be undertaken in
small groups. It is expected that the maps will increase in richness and complexity as students
complete modules in a given course. Concept maps provide students with an opportunity to
integrate their content knowledge and see connections rather than viewing topics as isolated. As
they progress through the course, students will be provided with opportunities to critique or add
to concept maps drawn by other groups.

Levels of scaffolding provided by the tools

Each of the tools discussed above provides scaffolding that is unique to that tool. The scaffolding
is distributed across the tools and is integrated in such a way that the educational benefits are
maximized.
Cognitive level

The reflective notebooks

The reflective notebooks provide students with scaffolding at the cognitive level. Based on the
Vygotskian notion of making abstract processes more visible, the scaffolding in the reflective
notebooks provides students with support for the processes or steps in problem solving. This
involves helping students to restate the problem, identifying the major issues in solving the
problem, generating ideas about how they might solve the problem, etc.

Concept maps

Student generated concept maps will serve as scaffolds in the form of the conceptual
representation of the theories and concepts that they need to solve the problem. Concept maps
will also allow students to see the connections between the theories that they are learning so that
they get an integrated picture of the topics as opposed to studying isolated facts. As students
progress through the course they will be provided with more opportunities to work on building a
conceptual representation of the domain.

Collaborative level

Scaffolding at the social level comes from the electronic discussions that students engage in.
Learners can play an important role in supporting each other in the process of learning. They can
post ideas, critique each others' ideas and reshape their own, ask questions and provide
explanations. Thus numerous ways to reflect and articulate can be built into the environment
which enables learners to construct meaning. This also has an additional advantage of building a
community of learners. Because of the remote nature of the medium, students often feel isolated
for not being part of a community. By engaging them in meaningful discussions that are also part
of the scaffolding, we believe that their interactions will not only be more meaningful, but will
also help them in building a sense of community. We are designing discussions to serve as
scaffolds during at least three stages in problem solving: initial brainstorming, generating ideas
to solve the problem (both initial ideas and after they researched or read about the issues), and
for explanations and justifications. The instructor plays the role of a facilitator during these
discussions. The instructor will post questions to start the discussions. Student responses in the
notebooks will be taken into account while posting questions.

Metacognitive level

An important aspect of both these levels is that metacognitive prompts to encourage reflection
are embedded in them. Thus, for example, students are provided with prompts that will
encourage them to explain any problem from multiple perspectives, thereby providing them with
an opportunity for generating richer understanding and integration of the domain knowledge.
The concept maps also help them in gaining a deeper conceptual understanding as well as
monitoring their own understanding of the domain.

Integrating multiple levels of scaffolding into individual and collaborative learning

In order for students to take advantage of the scaffolding afforded by the individual and
collaborative tools, and to seamlessly integrate the collaborative aspects of learning with
individual reflection, we have developed a framework that will allow students to learn on their
own as well as collaborate in small groups and with the whole class. Although we have described
three different levels of scaffolding, they are not mutually exclusive and we need to align all the
affordances so that they are well-integrated and taken advantage of. We are integrating the levels
in such a way that that the individual and collaborative learning opportunities are seamlessly
integrated, as described in Table. The scaffolding provided by the tools best supports the process
at that time. Individual and social learning is integrated throughout the problem solving process.
This is especially important in a web-based distance learning situation where students are on
their own and do not have the kind of instructor and peer support as in face to face instruction.
Table 1 shows the stages in the problem solving process and the type of scaffolding provided by
the tools for that stage. In addition, it also describes the activity that the tool supports, and the
type of learning benefit that is expected as a result of the scaffolding.

             Table 1: Stages in the problem solving process and tool support
Implementation and context of use

Implementation of the web-based environment is being undertaken in stages. The first prototype
of the environment consists of the reflective notebook, and the collaboration tool. We have not
yet implemented the collaborative concept maps in the web-based environment. We are presently
using the web-based environment to teach a graduate course in learning theories. The main
objective of the course is to provide students with an overview of the important theories of
learning and help them understand the educational implications of the theories. Students are
presented with cases or problems from the real world. The course comprises of eight cases that
broadly cover the major theories of learning such as Behaviorism, Cognitivism, Developmental
theories, Situated learning etc. They use the individual and the collaborative tools provided to
explain each case or solve the problems presented in the case. The course is being taught as a
web-based course, with only three face-to-face meeting in the semester long course.

Evaluation of the learning environment

Our evaluation plan addresses usability and usefulness as well as user and instructor satisfaction
surveys of the course. A three-tier evaluation plan is currently being implemented.

Tier I - Usability testing

The integration of the physical layout of the program and the way in which navigation is
conceptualized and implemented is an important aspect of learning in a WWW environment
(Jones and Faquhar, 1996). The specific questions during this phase relate to the design features
of the learning environment, including the interface, links and usability of the tools.

Tier II ­ Usefulness testing

Recent research shows that it is important to address the needs of a population of users who are
also learners (Jackson, Krajcik & Soloway, 1998; Soloway et al. 1996). It is therefore important
to evaluate whether the system supports learners, as they develop their understanding over time.
Although the usability of the tools is an important factor, the usefulness of the tools to support
learning is crucial for the success of the learning environment. Hence, during this stage we will
evaluate successive designs of the curriculum, engaging in a process of iterative redesign. The
main objectives of this phase is to understand whether the tools that we have designed are
helping students in what we intend for them to accomplish. The questions during this phase
relate to the problems or cases that we have developed, as well as cognitive tools.

Tier III - Studies for student satisfaction and delivery of the course

Student satisfaction and delivery of the course are important aspects of a web based distance
learning environment. During this phase of our formative evaluation, we will use the WBILE
with larger samples of students (15-20, the number of students enrolled in the course). The main
objective of this phase is to gather data regarding user satisfaction and attitudes about the course,
about technical problems and experiences of the instructor during delivery and about the
experiences of the instructor.
Evaluation of student learning

At present we are offering the course in Learning Theories to twenty five students. Pre and post
survey to understand how comfortable students are with using the tools are being conducted. In
addition, student learning is being evaluated in terms of their responses in the collaborative
discourse and their reflective notebook entries. Preliminary results show that there have been an
average of fifteen postings per day on the discussion area. Preliminary analysis of student
comments show that students are not only explaining the case presented in terms of the learning
theory, but are also actively interacting with each other. In addition, students have also been
solving any technical problems that other students may have had. The reflective notebook entries
show that the collaborative interactions are making the students' summative essays richer. Thus
the integration of the individual and the collaborative learning is working in the sense that both
the tools are complementing each other and together they are contributing to a more complete
understanding of the domain.

Conclusion

Our early findings from the first course being offered in an interactive web-based format seem
promising. Our aim is to integrate the collaborative concept maps in the next version of the web-
based environment.

Bibliography

Barrows, H. S. (1985). How to design a problem based curriculum for the preclinical years.
Springer-Verlag: NY.

Barrows, H. S. & Kelson, A. C. (1995). Problem based learning in secondary education and the
problem based learning institute, Springfield, Il.

Bielaczyc, K., Pirolli, P., & Brown, A. L. (1994). Strategy training in self-explanation and self
regulation strategies for learning computer programming. Report No. CSM-5, University of
California at Berkeley.

Bonks, C.J. & Cummings, J.A. (1998). A dozen recommendations for placing the student at the
center of web-based learning. Educational Media International, 35(2), 82-89.

Brown A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1990). Communities of learning and thinking, or A context by
any other name. In D. Kuhn (Ed.), Contributions to Human Development, 21, 108-125.

Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid,P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning.
Educational Researcher, 18 (1), 32-42.

Brown, A. L., & Palincsar, A. S. (1987). Reciprocal Teaching of comprehension strategies: A
natural history of one program for enhancing learning. In J. D. Day & J. G. Borkowski (Eds.),
Intelligence and Exceptionality: New directions for theory, assessment, and instructional
practice. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations:
How students study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13,145-
182.
Collins, A. & Brown, J. (1988). The computer as a tool for learning through reflection. In H.
Mandl, & A. Lesgold (Eds.), Learning issues for intelligent tutoring systems. New York:
Springer Verlag.

Collins, A., Brown, J. S., Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive Appreneticeship: Teaching the crafts
of reading, writing and mathematics. In L. Resnick (Eds.), Knowning, Learning and Instruction,
essays in Honor of Robert Glaser. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.

Collins, E. & Green, J. L. (1992). Learning in classroom settings: making or breaking a culture.
In H. H. Marshall (Ed.), Redefining student learning: roots of educational change. Norwood, N.
J: Ablex.

Derry, S., Tookey, K., & Chiffy, A. (1994). A microanalysis of pair problem solving with and
without a computer tool. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational
Research association, New Orleans, LA.

Driver, R., Asoko, H., Leach, J., Mortimer, E., & Scott, P. (1994). Constructing scientific
knowledge in the classroom. In Educational Researcher, 23 (7), pp. 5-12.

Guzdial, M., & Turns, J. (1998). Supporting sustained discussion in computer-supported
collaborative learning: The role of anchored collaboration. Journal of the Learning Sciences
(Submitted).

Hmelo, C., Narayanan, N.H., Newstetter, W.C. & Kolodner, J.L. (1995). A multiple-case-based
approach to generative environments for learning. Paper presented at the Second Annual
Symposium on Cognition and Education.

Jackson, S. L., Krajcik, J., Soloway, E. (1998). The Design of Guided Learner-Adaptable
Scaffolding in Interactive Learning Environments. In Proceedings of CHI 1998.

Jonassen, D. H., Dyer, D., Peters, K. Robinson, T., Harvey, D., King, M., Loughner (1997).
Cognitive flexibility hypertexts on the web: engaging learners in meaning making. In Web-based
Instruction, pp.361-368, Badrul Kahn (Ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology
Publications.

Kolodner, J. L. (1993). Case-Based Reasoning. Morgan Kaufman Publishers, Inc., San Mateo,
CA.
Koschmann, T. D., Myers, A. C., Feltovich, P. J. & Barrows, H. S. (1994). Using technology to
assist in realizing effective learning and instruction: A principles approach to the use of
computers in collaborative learning. In the Journal of the learning sciences, 3(3), pp 227-264.
Koshmann, T. (1996). Paradigm Shifts and Instructional Technology: An Introduction. In T.
Koshmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm (pp. 1-24). Mahwah,
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

LaRose, R., Gregg, J., & Eastin, M. (1998). Audiographic telecourses for the web: An
experiment. JCMC, 4(2).

Perkins, A. (1986). Knowledge as design. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child. New York: Basic books.
Pirolli, P. & Recker, M. (1994). Learning strategies and transfer in the domain of progamming.
Cognition and Instruction, 12, 235-275.

Puntambekar, S. (1996) Investigating the effect of a computer tool on students' metacognitive
processes. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, School of Cognitive and computing sciences,
University of Sussex, UK.

Puntambekar, S. & Kolodner, J. L. Distributed scaffolding: Helping students learn in a learning
by design environment. In A. S. Bruckman, M. Guzdial, J. L. Kolodner, & A. Ram (Eds.), ICLS
1998, Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, pp. 35-41.

Resnick, L. B. (1987). Education and learning to think. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.

Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge building communities.
In the Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), pp. 265-283.

Schon, D. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. New York.
Basic Books.

Schon, D. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

The Institute of Higher Education Policy. (1999). What is the difference? A Review of
Contemporary Research on the Effectiveness of Distance Learning in Higher Education.

Whitelock, D., Taylor, J., O'Shea, T., Scanlon, E., Clark, P., & O'Malley, C. (1993). What do
you say after you have said hello? Dialogue analysis of conflict and cooperation in a computer
supported collaborative learning environment. Paper presented at the 11th international PEG
conference, 2nd - 4th July 1993, Edinburgh.

Wegerif, R. (1998). The social dimension of asynchronous learning networks. JALN, 2(1), 34-
49.

Author's address
Sadhana Puntambekar, Assistant Professor in Educational Psychology

Neag School of Education, University of Connecticut, U-2064, 249 Glenbrook Ave. Storrs, CT
06269-2004
