Using A CSCL Tool to Support a Legislative Role-
playing Simulation: Hopes, Fears, and Challenges
Todd C. Reimer, Daniel C. Edelson

Northwestern University, School of Education and Social Policy, Learning Sciences
Program

      Abstract: Educators are increasingly seeking opportunities to engage their
      students in active learning through authentic experiences. These authentic
      curricula, however, often require students to communicate with their peers
      to a degree that is difficult to achieve within the rigid structure of most
      schools. This paper addresses the hopes and fears of three teachers'
      experience integrating collaborative software to support approximately
      370 students in their efforts to communicate and collaborate within the
      competitive context of a legislative role-playing simulation. Following a
      brief overview of the design, the paper address the teachers' fears, hopes,
      and remaining challenges.

      Keywords: computer-mediated communication, discussion forum, situated
      learning

Introduction

Educators are increasingly seeking out opportunities to engage their students in active
learning through authentic experiences. National educational standards for K-12
education in virtually every discipline call for students to participate in, and learn from,
authentic experiences. These curricula, however, often require students to communicate
with their peers to a degree that is difficult to achieve within the rigid structure of most
schools. To overcome this obstacle, educators are increasingly looking to the use of
CSCL tools to afford the communication between students their curricula require. In this
paper, we present the experiences of three teachers as they spent the last year integrating
a CSCL tool to support approximately 370 students in their efforts to communicate and
collaborate within the competitive context of politics. Following a brief overview of the
design, we describe their experiences from the past year, organized around their fears,
hopes, and remaining challenges.

One way teachers attempt to overcome motivational obstacles is by providing their
students with authentic experiences, often through role-playing activities that simulate the
goals, tasks, and contexts of real-world practitioners (Brown, Duguid, & Collins, 1989;
Brown and Campione, 1994; Lave, 1991). Eight years ago, Mr. Madison-- a high school
social studies teacher from the Chicago suburbs --became concerned about his students'
apparent lack of interest, and awareness, when discussing political events in his American
government classroom. Madison (a pseudonym) became concerned that his traditional
approach to teaching government, with its emphasis on transmitting isolated facts and
processes, was contributing to his students' lack of interest in the subject of government
and the topic of democracy.

To address these motivational concerns, Madison and his colleagues created a legislative
role-playing simulation that places every senior in the role of state legislator for sixteen
weeks. As Madison frequently comments, "I was tired of having my students read about
government, I wanted them to become a government." During the past seven years, what
began as a three week mock legislature conducted by one teacher in an isolated classroom
has become a semester-long simulation conducted by three teachers, seven classrooms,
and over 370 high school seniors (in two semesters). Over a sixteen week period,
Madison and his colleagues guide approximately 185 students at a time through the
legislative process modeled on Illinois' General Assembly. By joining a political party,
writing legislation, forming committees, and simulating the House of Representatives in
full session, students assume complete control of the simulation as the semester
progresses. Madison and his colleagues believe that students participating in the
Legislative Simulation engage in the decision-making processes that many educators and
lawmakers claim are critical for the sustained health of a democratic society (Center for
Civic Education, 1994; National Education Goals Panel, 1997).

The complexity of the legislative process can make the enactment of a legislative
simulation difficult. To benefit from authenticity, a legislative simulation must give
learners the opportunity to understand the structure of political organizations, the roles
that different participants play in the political process, and the nature of decision-making
in a democratic assembly. In order to authentically recreate participation in a democratic
assembly, a legislative role-playing simulation must have enough participants to establish
institutional structures, provide the assembly with a diversity of opinion, and furnish
legislators with opportunities for consensus-building and forming political coalitions.
During the first year of the simulation, Madison recognized that the learning environment
he envisioned required his students to communicate in a manner that was not possible
when the participants were split across the seven different class periods of his high
school. Without a common time to meet as a legislative body, Madison and his
colleagues needed a way to promote communication between their classes. This desire to
promote communication led the teachers to the Collaboratory Notebook, an asynchronous
collaboration environment that was installed at their request on thirty computers in the
school's library.

The Collaboratory Notebook (referred to hereafter as simply the Notebook) is a
networked, hypermedia collaboration environment designed as part of the Learning
through Collaborative Visualization (CoVis) Project at Northwestern University
(Edelson, O'Neill, 1994; Edelson, et al., 1995). Overcoming the constraints of time and
space, the Notebook allows students to work on a common project without requiring a
common time to work together. Built loosely on the metaphor of a library, the Notebook
provides students with bookshelves, notebooks, and pages to record and organize their
work. The Notebook's structure was designed to encourage students to share their
thoughts directly with a larger audience of their peers, teachers, and experts in the field.
After experimenting with the software for three weeks during a pilot test conducted in the
Spring of 1998, Madison and his colleagues decided to use the Notebook to support
students during the entire sixteen weeks of the simulation in both semesters of the 1998-
99 school year.

During the four phases of the simulation, students use the Notebook in the following
ways:

The teachers' fears: Student's won't use the Notebook

Initially, the teachers were concerned that even if every student learned how to use the
Notebook, they may not really want to. Having never used CSCL tools to support a role-
playing simulation, they really weren't sure what to expect. Maybe the students would be
uninterested in using the Notebook to communicate their opinions. Maybe the students
would be intimidated by the public nature of the Notebook-- inhibited by the prospect of
addressing an audience of nearly 200 hundred other students. Maybe the task of writing
pages to a largely anonymous audience in a virtual notebook wouldn't make sense--what
would be the point?

After a year of use, the teachers' fears appear to be unfounded. Students' use of the
Notebook has been extensive. Over the course of two semesters --371 students have
created approximately 8000 pages, in over 250 notebooks. Students found the Notebook
so useful that all 17 students interviewed to obtain feedback on the use of the Notebook
requested more class time to read and write comments in the Notebook. Many even
requested a version of the Notebook that could be used from home during their "free-
time". To further illustrate the point, the teachers are currently wrestling with the
dilemma of how to protect students' passwords because a number of stolen passwords
were used in what Madison called "Watergate-style" break-ins. The teachers discovered
that students were stealing passwords to read speeches from members of the opposing
party before they were given in the full session. It should be noted that nothing in these
bookshelves was vandalized (pages altered or deleted); as Madison commented, the
thieves apparently "just wanted to know what the other side was going to say."

To understand the value that the students saw in the Notebook, we conducted a series of
interviews with 17 students immediately following the conclusion of the simulation. Four
trends emerged in their responses. Students have been using the Notebook to: (1) express
their views and see what other students are thinking, (2) communicate directly with
students outside of their class, (3) coordinate personal responsibilities and schedules, and
(4) use other students' comments to revise individual speeches before speaking publicly.

Sharing personal beliefs

A common sentiment was expressed throughout each of the student interviews: students
want to see what other students are thinking. For example, two students said:

      Jessica: "We're shy, and we don't like to talk in front of the class, but this
      way [the simulation] you get a chance more to know what other people
      think. And like, you get a chance to be there. To feel you're important.
      Yeah... like, you get a chance to be important."

      Maria: "Basically we had the power to change people's minds. We had the
      power to ask people what they thought. We had a chance to hear
      everybody."

When we looked at student contributions in the Notebook, it was clear that students
perceived the Notebook's value as a way to exchange personal beliefs. For example, a
thread from a discussion to lower the drinking age:

      I think alcohol should be made completely illegal for all ages. There is
      nothing positive that can come from the consumption of alcohol. If you
      can't find other ways to have a good time then you've got a real problem.

      As for those of you who argue that you just like the taste, I'm sure there is
      something else that tastes just as good that won't rot your liver,
      completely impair you, kill you. Maybe you'd see it my way if you had
      some one close to you die from drinking too much or if you had seen the
      aftermath of a drink driving accident that killed a three year old little girl.
      Just think about it.

Another student then responded:

      I'm sorry to say, but the person who wrote this bill had not thought about
      what they were saying. Alcohol abuse can be the most horrible thing to
      happen to a person or a family. When most alcoholics drink it changes the
      person they are, speech becomes slurred and they say things that normally
      wouldn't come out. I beg all of you who think drinking is cool to do all the
      time--stop. For your future and for those who care about you.
            THINK ABOUT IT!!!!!!!!!!

A third student then enters the dialogue, adding another comment to the thread:

      I fully agree with Representative             . If you haven't gotten a chance
      to, you should read his page. Alcohol has absolutely no benefits. My dad
      was a closet drunk, and my mom got hit by a drunk driver. She almost
      became a quadrapalegic, and almost died. There is no way that anyone is
      going to convince me to let a two year old have Jack Daniels in his bottle
      instead of milk. That is just wrong.

With the introduction of the Notebook, students have the means to share personal beliefs
about issues they find meaningful. The Notebook provides students with a forum to
articulate and share their opinions, exchanging personal stories they find relevant to their
lives as high school students. As one student concluded during her interview:

      "You can express yourself. I mean, there are some people who made
      inappropriate comments, but... you're expressing yourself. There's
      nothing holding you back. And I think that's very important-- especially
      for teenagers. They feel like their rights are being violated, and for them to
      express themselves-- that's the most important thing, you know."

Communicate with students from other classes

A second theme emerged during student interviews: students perceive the Notebook's
value as a means to communicate with students outside of their class. Teachers have
historically voiced their expectation that students should communicate with students
outside of their class to work on the simulation. Based on student interviews, it appears
the Notebook is making communicating with students from other classes easier. For
example, when asked about his opinion of the Notebook, one student commented:

      "It brings the discussion outside of your class. You're not just confined to
      the students in your class, but the other four or five government classes....
      You didn't have the bigshots like always in your class. The Republican
      Floor Leader wasn't in my class. If I needed her, you know, I needed to
      either use the Notebook... or like, write a letter. So..."

This student articulated his perception that the Notebook allowed him to communicate
with students from other classes--an audience seven times larger than a traditional
classroom setting. An excerpt from a discussion between a candidate for Speaker of the
House (Natalie) and a member of her party (Kathy) provides another illustration of how
using the Notebook was perceived to be a valuable way to communicate with students
from other classes:

      Natalie--
      I was just wondering about the time factor. I know you have a really busy
      job and you work a lot, are you going to be able to still commit to the role
      of Speaker?

      In spite of that, I want you to know I am leaning more towards voting for
      you than Tony... Oh yeah, are you playing soccer? If so where does this
      all fit into your schedule? This is just important because I've heard that the
      simulation runs greatly on the knowledge of the Speaker on everything,
      basically. I would just feel badly for you if you got too busy--I know that
      life can get hectic when you have millions of things to do. Just something
      to think about!!!                            -- Kathy

Natalie's response, linked to Kathy's page, written later that afternoon:

      Katie I totally understand where you are coming from. No I'm not playing
      soccer this year. I am fully aware of the time commitment speaker of the
      house takes. I am willing to cut my hours down. It wouldn't hurt me
      because I work more than I need to. I do understand where you are coming
      from and appreciate the questions.

      -- Natalie

Kathy's response written the next day:

      Natalie--Thanks, I understand! You can count on my vote!! -- Kathy

In the context of this paper, we are unable to address whether Natalie's response
persuaded--or at the very least reassured ­Kathy. For the same reason, we are also
unable to speak to the effect this dialogue may have had on other participants in the
simulation. For now, we simply would like to demonstrate that students perceived the
Notebook to be a valuable way to respond directly to questions raised by their peers.

Coordinate personal responsibilities and schedules

As stated earlier, in order to authentically recreate the activities and responsibilities of a
state legislator, students must work collaboratively to accomplish their goals within the
competitive context of politics. Based on our analysis of the students' pages, it appears
the Notebook is making coordinating these legislative responsibilities easier. For
example, a page from the Republican Leadership Bookshelf:

      Hey Dave, when are we going to have our next meeting? People are
      bugging me about this amendment. Ashley can't make Friday but we need
      one tomorrow. Lisa is getting pissed too. Let me know, Denise

Prior to the introduction of the Notebook, students taking government a different hour
had an extremely difficult time accomplishing even the most straightforward tasks--like
scheduling a meeting. A thread from the Rules Committee Bookshelf provides an
example of how students perceived the Notebook's value in coordinating an approaching
deadline:

      I feel that the students who were absent yesterday should be given until
      3:30 TODAY, because we need to know to form the committees this
      weekend!! -- Amy

Later that morning, another member of the Rules committee responded:

      Someone has to announce it. We have to give everyone a chance who
      wasn't here yesterday but is today. Make sure they know!! ­Mark

The next hour, a third member of the committee replied:

      I agree with you Amy--we need to form the committees this weekend and
      therefore I figure we should end it tonight.--Dave

As stated earlier, the Notebook provides students with the opportunity to communicate
across the seven-period day. In addition, it appears students also perceive the Notebook
to be a valuable tool for coordinating personal schedules and responsibilities--tasks
ranging from the mundane (as in the first example) to the apparently urgent (as in the
second).

Prepare public speeches

Finally, students interviewed recognized the Notebook's value in preparing public
speeches. Unlike the previous three uses, this use was not spontaneous--teachers
required that every student write at least one speech and post it in their party's Speech
Preparation Notebook. The teachers implemented this requirement based on their hope
that-- given an opportunity to incorporate feedback from other students-- the quality of
speeches given during the students' actual face-to-face interactions would improve.

Even though this use of the Notebook was required, the students who were interviewed
recognized the value of the Notebook in preparing their speeches. For example, one
student commented:

      "When the people would write speeches, sometimes it would make me
      change my mind or actually be stronger what I was thinking about a
      certain bill."

A thread from the Republican Speech Preparation Bookshelf provides an example of how
students used the Notebook to prepare their speeches. One student submitted the
following speech opposing affirmative action:
      I firmly believe that affirmative action creates more problems than it
      solves. Sure it helps discrimination, but more qualified people are out of a
      job because some minority group person wants a job. Don't think of me as
      some racist bigot, I just don't think affirmative action works at all.-- Larry

The Republican Floor Leader then provided Larry with the following feedback:

      Larry, I would like to ask you to please find some statistics or stories and
      you would be a great candidate to speak on behalf of ending affirmative
      action.

      PS. If you are willing to speak on this behalf please contact myself or Rob

The next week, Larry delivered his speech to nearly 250 people during the full session.
While the context of this paper limits our ability to discuss the impact of peer feedback,
the teachers believe students' use of the Notebook to prepare for the committee hearing
and full sessions has improved the quality of the simulation. During student interviews,
one student commented explicitly on the perceived advantage of using the Notebook to
incorporate peer feedback. He responded:

      "I think the Collaboratory Notebook really helped us interact with other
      classes... because we'd be able to put our bill on the Notebook, and then
      people would make comments. And whether they were good or bad, it
      always helped us. It helped us, like, perfect our argument, our statements.

      And when we went to Full Session or Committee, we knew what the
      arguments were-- we knew what the statements they were going to say
      about the bill. And we could just-- sometimes people wouldn't
      understand the benefits of our bill, just seeing the negatives. We tried, you
      know, to say, `Hey! This is what's going to happen. Listen!' We were
      ready for a lot of questions because of that."

Based on his report, the student-- along with three fellow bill sponsors --used the
Notebook to accomplish the following tasks: they (1) saw what other people thought
about their bill (collecting and analyzing data), (2) refined their comments in response to
other's views (reflecting on and revising arguments), and (3) attempted to persuade their
opponents to change their minds (debating and building consensus). In short, these
students used the Notebook to practice the skills needed to participate effectively in the
democratic process.

The teachers' hopes: The Notebook will increase the authenticity and overall
participation of students in the Legislative Simulation

If the students used the Notebook in the manner in which the teachers envisioned--
across each of the seven classes --the teachers hoped to overcome what had always been
considered the simulation's greatest obstacle-- the seven-period day. The teachers hoped
the Notebook would finally allow their students to communicate directly to one another,
authentically recreating the social dynamics of a functioning legislature. The teachers
also hoped the private nature of the Notebook would increase the participation of students
who had historically been too intimidated to speak publicly--specifically students from
the high school's significant Latino (26%) and special education (15%) population.

Even though students assume the role of state legislator for an entire semester, they have
historically been unable to participate in the legislative process authentically. Before the
introduction of the Notebook, students had only three days to communicate directly with
students in other classes-- three days out of sixteen weeks in which they could function
collectively as a legislative assembly. Because of the limited opportunities for face-to-
face interaction, bill sponsors were unable to lobby representatives for critically
important votes. Party leaders were unable to communicate with "rank-and-file" members
to coordinate strategy. Committee members were unable to discuss upcoming bills with
other committee members before the day of the hearing. In other words, the rigid
structure of the school day presented a real obstacle to authenticity for the simulation.

To overcome this obstacle, the teachers hoped students would use the Notebook, as
Madison stated, "to communicate directly with their peers". The teachers were especially
interested to see if students would take advantage of the Notebook's threaded
discussions, linking their comments "directly" to pages written by other students,
facilitating what they hoped would be the beginning of a meaningful dialogue. An
example of a student dialogue that could not have taken place prior to the introduction of
the Notebook can be found in the Election bookshelf.

For six of the simulation's seven years, students have never been able to campaign for
office in any realistic sense. Prior to the Notebook, students campaigned for office by
asking students in their classes to sign a petition that-- given enough signatures --would
place their names on the ballot. Once a student's name was placed on the ballot, the
candidates frequently created posters and hung them around the school for two days prior
to the election. With the introduction of the Notebook, however, the candidates have a
means to communicate (and for the first time, a reason to actually create) a platform. In
Madison's words, the Notebook allows the election process to move "beyond the slogans
and sound-bites" which previously had to be confined to the space of a poster board. A
few pages from the Speaker of the House Election Notebook illustrates how the
Notebook was used by students to campaign for office:

      All democrats should vote for Natalie if they want a fair shot during the
      simulation. Tony is a republican dressed in democratic clothing. If all of
      the democrats really believe in their issues, they should do their part and
      vote. I signed Natalie's petition and I WILL vote for her on friday. As
      should the rest of the people. NATALIE GOOD, TONY BAD! -- Eric

In her first contribution to this discussion, another student replied:
      I beleive myself to be a friend of Mr.  [Eric]   and I beleive in his right
      to make an opinion as well. I am not saying that I do not agree with his
      opinion, however, I beleive that his reaction may be slight mudslinging. I
      think that both Natalie and Tony are well suited to be Speaker. Let's keep
      this campaign clean. Neither are bad. -- Lisa

The next morning, the candidate in question emerges, creating another link to Eric's page
in the thread:

      Dear Eric,

      I am distressed by your remarks, and think you have misjudged my
      character. I have tried in everything to be honest and forward. I think Ms.
           [Natalie] has done the same, and both campaigns have been very
      clean. I would like to thank her for that, and also say there aren't any bad
      guys (or girls). We are, or should be, working towards the same ends. I
      hope we agree on at least this.

                                  Sincerely, Rep.       [Tony]

The thread (although not the discussion) concludes with Eric replying to Tony later that
afternoon:

      Sorry Tony, but I feel Natalie needs some help. I didn't mean to say that
      you are a bad person, just that if a democrat voted for you, that would be
      bad. I also feel the republican vibes that radiate off you and that could be
      threatening to Natalie's campaign. Again, I am sorry if you mistook my
      words, I should have been more thorough in my words.       --Eric

This dialogue, taking advantage of the Notebook's ability to communicate across class
periods, was not possible in previous years. Students used the Notebook as an open-
forum to argue, question, persuade, criticize, apologize, respond to allegations, even
publicly declare their allegiance-- all in the name of campaigning for political office.
Without the Notebook, Eric (who has government 2nd hour) and Tony (who takes
government with another teacher, 3rd hour) and Lisa (who has government during the
final hour of the day) would historically have been unable to communicate. While
Madison and his colleagues have consistently encouraged their students to meet before
and after school to participate in this kind of discussion, the vast majority of students
legitimately claimed they never had time to meet-- frequently pointing to extensive
extra-curricular and after-school responsibilities, or reasons as straightforward as having
to "catch the bus".

While Madison and his colleagues are encouraged by these examples of Notebook use,
they are also hoping the Notebook will increase the overall participation of students in the
Legislative Simulation, especially students who have traditionally been perceived as
being particularly passive. Because public speaking is at the heart of our legislative
process, Madison and his colleagues require their students to speak in front of the full
assembly--an audience of nearly 250 people. Madison acknowledged that many of the
students (approximately a third of the participants) have historically lacked the
confidence to volunteer. However Madison and his colleagues hoped the Notebook could
be used to build student's confidence before they had to actually take the risk and make a
public speech in front of a large, and often antagonistic, audience. They hoped using the
Notebook to express personal opinions, receive feedback, and revise comments would
provide students with the additional preparation needed to encourage participation. While
the teachers suspect this has been the case, as you will see in the next section, student
participation and engagement are variables that are extremely difficult for the teachers to
capture and assess.

Remaining Challenges: Time and Assessment

While many of the teachers' fears have proven to be unfounded, and some of their hopes
have even been exceeded, they recognize that many challenges remain. During a recent
workshop-- when asked about the greatest obstacle in teaching the simulation --each of
the teachers commented on the stress of "never [having] enough time to do everything we
need to do". As stated earlier, this is the same complaint that students voice most
consistently when asked what they would do to improve the simulation: their answers--
more time for research, more time to write bills, more time to read pages in the
Notebook, more time to prepare speeches for the full session.

While the Notebook has promoted communication among the seven classes, it has also
increased the responsibilities and, consequently, the demands on their time for both
students and teachers. As two students explained:

      Jessica: "I think it [the Notebook] was a good thing. You get a chance to
      know what other people think. And then you have a chance to write your
      speech based on an answer to them of what you think. You get a chance to
      know more of what you wanted to know-- sometimes they have
      information that you didn't know. So that is very helpful--

      Maria: --or sometimes you read the other speeches from other people, and
      you get an idea--

      Jessica: --about how to write it and stuff like that. Basically what I didn't
      like about it is that-- basically, we didn't have a lot of time to go through
      all... the answers and like the pages that in the Collaboratory Notebook."

On the one hand, this comment gives the teachers every reason to feel optimistic--
students are reportedly using the Notebook to acquire, incorporate, and structure
information. On the other, the students complained that they did not have enough time
(class or otherwise) to take advantage of the Notebook as a resource as much as they
would have liked.
The teachers expressed similar concerns about lack of time to use the Notebook. Initially,
the teachers wanted to use the Notebook to monitor students' discussions, helping them
identify "what issues are hot-- what issues the students are talking about." In practice,
they found they didn't have the time to monitor the rapidly growing Notebook
discussions. For example, when the students were first introduced to the Notebook, 186
students created approximately 900 pages in 12 notebooks over the course of two days in
just fourteen class periods. The teachers felt they simply "couldn't keep up" with
students' participation in the Notebook. This poses a recurring dilemma for the teachers:
how do you keep up with the volume of student pages--and should you even try? For in
the end, the teachers recognize that the students are writing their pages to be read and
evaluated by their peers. As long as the students--the active participants in the
simulation--have an opportunity to read the pages in the Notebook, the teachers are
unsure of how important it is that they, as passive observers, monitor in detail students'
participation.

The second challenge that teachers remarked on was assessing students' work in the
Collaboratory Notebook. One of the things that initially appealed to the teachers about
the Notebook was the opportunity to assess students' work in the simulation based on
their contributions to the Notebook. As stated earlier, ideally the teachers hoped to
capture the participation of students who may not have participated in discussions prior to
the introduction of the Notebook-- especially students from the school's significant
bilingual and special education population. However, once students began frequently
using the Notebook, the teachers discovered that assessing work in the Notebook was
more difficult than they expected. This challenge was discussed during a workshop, in
which the researcher, teachers, and department chair were analyzing the following thread
extracted from a Notebook discussion on strengthening immigration requirements:

      **** I understand that it is hard to adjust to moving to a new country, but
      it must be realized that it is that person's choice to do so, and therefore it
      must be their own difficulty to deal with, they must learn to adapt
      themselves. We shouldn't be the ones to have to adapt. **** -- John

      I don't know how you could say that people should have requirements to
      get into the country. First of all not everybody has a job and can hold it!!!!
      Some people don't speak the English language and a lot of people don't
      understand the American culture!!!  -- Alex

      how you expect some body from another country to meet the requirements
      is like you going to a nother country think a bout it..........  -- Miguel

      I can't possibly understnad or even try to understand the difficulty facing
      people trying to enter a new country. A few people were mentioning
      putting some restrictions on immigration. I do believe immigrants entering
      the US should be able to communicate in the English language. Why? do
      you think it's fair for police officers or other Government employies. How
      about if a cop pulls over somebody who doesn't speak English. The cop
      shoudln't have to learn every language. ... Just think about it? -- Scott

The researcher began the discussion by asking the teachers, given enough time, how
would they assess students' pages in the Notebook? One teacher began by commenting
on the dilemma of deciding "what level" to evaluate Notebook pages. For example,
should Miguel's page be graded poorly because of the grammar ? At first glance, another
teacher quickly commented, "I'd give it a D". But then a third teacher mentioned that
Scott seemed to address what Miguel had said in the next page. The department chair
then stated he thought Miguel's comment seemed very relevant, even if it was only very
brief and had grammatical errors. Recognizing the last name, the third teacher quickly
added that Miguel was her student, and was pleased because Miguel was a bilingual
student who "never said a word" in class. In fact, this was the second time Miguel was
taking government; he had failed the first semester. In light of all of these unanswered
questions, how or even should the teachers assess students' contributions to the
Notebook? This is the one of the dilemmas the teachers continue to face.

Conclusion

Despite the remaining questions, Madison believes the Notebook has "enhanced the
students experience in the simulation." We are extremely interested in understanding the
contributions the Collaboratory Notebook makes in supporting large-scale role-playing
simulations like the Legislative Simulation, and examining how our findings can be
extended to the use of CSCL tools in other settings.

Acknowledgments

The Collaboratory Notebook was designed by Daniel Edelson, Kevin O'Neill, and Joey
Gray with important contributions from the members of the CoVis Project. It was
implemented by Joey Gray. This research was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation through grants MDR-9253462 and RED-94547429.

References

Brown, J. S., Collins, A. and Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of
learning. Educational Researcher, 18 (1), 32-42.

Brown, A. and Campione, J. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners,
Classroom Lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice, Cambridge
MA: MIT Press.

Center for Civic Education (1994). National standards for civics and government.
Edelson, D. C., O'Neill, D. K., Gomez, L. M. and D'Amico, L. (1995). A design for
effective support of inquiry and collaboration. Proceedings of CSCL `95.

Edelson, D.C. and O'Neill, D. K. (1994). The CoVis Collaboratory Notebook:
Supporting collaborative scientific inquiry. Proceedings of National Educational
Computing Conference.

Lave, J. (1991). Situated learning in a community of practice, Perspectives on Socially
Shared Cognition, Resnick, L., Levine, J. & Teasley, S. eds., American Psychological
Association

Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

National Education Goals Panel (1997). National education goals report: Building a
nation of learners.

Authors' addresses

Todd C. Reimer (treimer@nwu.edu)
Northwestern University, Learning Sciences Program; Annenberg Hall; 2115 N. Campus
Drive; Evanston, IL 60208; Tel. (847-486-2816)
Daniel C. Edelson (d-edelson@nwu.edu)
Northwestern University, Learning Sciences Program; Annenberg Hall; 2115 N. Campus
Drive; Evanston, IL 60208; Tel. (847-487-1337)
