CSCL as a Catalyst for Changing Teacher Practice
Paul Resta, Mark Christal, Karen Ferneding, Adrienne Kennedy Puthoff

Learning Technology Center, The University of Texas at Austin

      Abstract: This paper presents results of a study of middle school teachers
      using a prototype Macintosh version of CSILE to help create a
      knowledge-building community. The study, involving middle schools in
      two school districts in the Southwest United States, provided teachers with
      training and technical support in the use of the CSILE over a period of one
      semester.

      In-depth interviews were conducted with the teacher participants a year
      after the termination of the project to understand their experiences and to
      learn their stories of the impact of the Knowledge-Building Community
      Project on their teaching practices. Five major themes emerged from the
      analysis of the interview transcription data. This paper presents a summary
      of the teacher reflections and stories related to the emergent theme of how
      the knowledge-building community changed their teaching practices,
      roles, the structure of their classroom discourse, and their views of
      curriculum. The results of the study suggest that CSILE, accompanied by
      appropriate support, can serve as a catalyst in changing teacher practices
      from didactic teaching to more constructivist approaches to learning. The
      paper presents teacher reflections on changes in their roles, views of
      curriculum and classroom discourse as a result of the knowledge-building
      community project.

      Keywords: shared knowledge, constructivism, curriculum

Introduction

The goal of the study was to understand the experience of middle school teachers related
to the long term impact of a knowledge-building community project on their teaching
practices. The concept of knowledge-building community guiding the project was based
on the work of Scardamalia and Bereiter. They describe knowledge building communities
as schools in which people are engaged in producing knowledge objects that lend
themselves to be discussed and tested and in which students see their main job as
producing and improving such objects (Scardamalia and Bereiter, 1994). Such a vision
represents a significant departure from the traditional views of the schooling process and
roles of teachers and students but is congruent with other emerging ideas for restructuring
schools, such as Brown and Campione's (1990) proposal that schools serve as
communities of learners and thinkers. It also represents a departure from typical efforts to
institute change in schools.
As noted by Sarason (1996), most attempts at reforming education are fundamentally
flawed, as they do not attempt to change the structure of discourse within the classroom
setting. The typical structure of discourse in classrooms may be portrayed as the teacher
standing in the center of the dialogue, such that s/he acts as the conduit for nearly all of
the verbal exchanges that take place. Doyle (1986) notes that most oral discourse that
takes place in classrooms may be characterized as recitation. Heap (1985) indicates that
classroom dialogue typically is comprised of three step units consisting of the following
dialogic interactions: teacher initiates, student responds, teacher evaluates. These
practices stem from common sense notions about schools and what Tyack and Tobin
(1993) term the "grammar of schools."

Because knowledge-building communities demand such dramatic shifts in mind-set and
teacher practices, they stand contrary to the common sense notions about schools­ what
Tyack and Tobin (1993) call the "grammar of schools." Consequently, as noted by
Kolander and Guzdial (1996), it was recognized that the views of "traditional schooling"
would represent a significant challenge to the adoption of a technology supported
knowledge-building community. A joint university/public school partnership was formed
to plan and implement the knowledge-building community in the four participating
middle schools. The goal of the Knowledge-Building Community projects was to develop
a knowledge-building community in the classroom and to determine the perceived impact
of the collaborative technologies and support on teacher practices and the structure of
discourse in the classroom.

Description of Knowledge-Building Community Project

The Knowledge-Building Community project provided for the infusion of an Apple
version of CSILE called MacCSILE (later called Co-Learning) from one of the initial
pilot districts (five teachers at two middle schools in a suburban district) to another public
school district (four teachers at two middle schools in an adjacent urban school district.
MacCSILE is based on established cognitive learning strategies (Scardamalia, et al.,
1987). Translating the cognitive science guidelines into features of CSILE software has
resulted in different implementations since CSILE was first introduced in an urban
elementary school in Toronto, Ontario in 1987, but several core features have endured.

The heart of the system is a student-generated database that begins empty, but grows as
students enter their text or graphical notes. Students are encouraged to address all aspects
of their learning process in these notes­their wonderments, their questions, their theories,
their knowledge goals and gaps, their plans for pursuing their knowledge goals, their new
learning­by having the choice of stamping each entry with a "thinking type" that
describes the nature of a given entry. The use of the thinking types helps students make
their covert knowledge construction activities more overt, as well as encouraging specific
cognitive learning strategies such as questioning, identifying knowledge lacks, and
making plans for pursuing specific knowledge goals.

Two middle schools from a high SES suburban school district, "Lakeside ISD" and two
middle schools from a large urban school district, "Central ISD," were included in the
study. The nine teachers participating in the study represented a cross-section of middle
school subjects, grade levels, teaching experience, and teaching styles. The CSILE
experienced middle-school teachers provided inservice training, direct mentoring,
reflective modeling, and on-line support to the teachers from the other school district.
One two-day inservice session hosted at the university and led by the experienced
teachers marked the official project opening and was attended by the teachers and the
university faculty. From that point participants met one day monthly at alternate school
sites to discuss progress, concerns, challenges, and specific technology or design issues
they were addressing.

The one-semester implementation of the project was built on the substantial training and
experience base of the four local district teachers who had been involved in the
Apple/OISE (Ontario Institute for Studies in Education) beta-test piloting of the
MacCSILE software. The project provided a unique opportunity for these teachers to test
and extend their knowledge building as they served as peer mentors for other educators in
exploring applications of the MacCSILE software to their particular settings.

While the experienced teachers served in schools with demographics of predominately-
Anglo middle and upper-middle SES suburban children, the newly-identified urban sites­
by design­were markedly different: one lower SES junior high and one lower to lower-
middle SES middle school with demographics of high proportions of bilingual, free or
reduced lunch, and at-risk students. The urban schools also had a history of higher
percentages of truancy and drop-outs. The suburban school district had a district-
mandated policy of computer competency requirements for all teachers and a district-
wide advocacy of computers and technology-supported learning which was eagerly
supported by their relatively technology-literate, affluent parents and patrons.

Modeled after the original Apple/OISE plan for computer placement used in earlier
pilots, the technology configuration of the project called for four or five computers in
each classroom of the teachers from each of two newly-included schools and two extra
computers for one of the experienced/mentor sites. The classroom computer sets were
networked to a dedicated server in one of the teachers' classrooms at each site. Each
teacher at each site worked both independently and collaboratively to consider and design
specific units of study or supportive curriculum opportunities for their classes to explore
the use of the centerpiece networked software, the MacCSILE program.

Once monthly the teachers were given a full day of release time to meet with the other
participants and support staff. The group met alternately at one of the campuses to
discuss progress, frustrations, difficulties, and technology issues, and to report on the
status of their classes in coming to use the software and demonstrate collaborative
knowledge-building, as well as to reflect on the teachers' processes and challenges. By
the time the semester closed the project group had met six full days and had developed a
level of connectedness and collegial interchange, which had made notable impressions on
each member of the team.
In the end each of the newly-initiated teachers made significant declarations regarding
their professional lives, their considerations of their teaching role, their understandings of
students as active learners, their perceptions of the relevance of computers to the
evolution of a collaborative knowledge-building community. For some it was a
rekindling of what they had long believed about teaching and learning; for others, it
provided a revealing look at alternative views. In the final analysis, the individual,
personal, professional and the institutional impacts of the project on the participants far
outstripped the limited exposure and implementation time. Lingering questions remained
about the resiliency of the changes, the implications of the teachers' experiences for
ongoing professional development, the teachers' embrace of alternative social-
constructivist pedagogy, and teacher interest and integration of technology in the
classroom. These are the questions that led to the effort to revisit the participating
classroom teachers a year later and to collect their stories and their reflections in in-depth
interviews.

Method

A follow-up study, was conducted with the nine teacher practitioners who participated in
the semester-long Knowledge-Building Project. An in-depth, open-ended interview
format was selected as the research format to put the teachers at ease and to set an
exploratory and conversational tone to the interview process. Eleven questions were
asked in a specific order and the researchers explored any relevant aspect that emerged
from the teacher answers. The specific focus and sequence of the questions focused on a
number of interrelated aspects including the technology, teacher persona, pedagogical
issues, curriculum, school and district level policies, resources and support,
school/district climate for change, and teacher culture.

Each interview took from one to two hours and focused on each teacher's perceptions
about the opportunities, challenges, barriers, and the changes and the new developments­
temporary or long term­that were a result of the project activities and technology tools.
The taped interviews were transcribed and a comprehensive report was prepared and
submitted to the funding agency (Christal, Ferending Lenert, Kennedy Puthoff, and
Resta, 1997).

Summary of Findings

The analysis of the teacher interview transcripts yielded five emergent themes, including
how: 1) the knowledge-building community changed teacher practice; 2) adoption of
CSILE transforms social interaction in the classroom; 3) support acts as the structural
framework for the diffusion process; 4) "resistance" and structural factors act as barriers
to the development of a knowledge-building community; and, 5) teachers' models of
educational technology prescribe a new professionalism. A comprehensive description of
all the above themes is described by Christal et al (1997). This paper focuses more
narrowly on the emergent theme of how the knowledge-building community changed
teacher practices. The names used in the summary below are not the real names of the
teachers.
Changes in Classroom Discourse

One of the important changes reported by participating teachers was the change in the
structure of classroom discourse. Sarason (1996) asserts that the observable criterion
which signals a change in the structure of classroom discourse is "question asking in the
classroom" (p. 361): who asks the questions, what are the nature of the questions, how
and by whom are they answered? Sarason explains that the legions of youth who display
a great deal of curiosity, questioning and creativity outside of school to understand their
world, their culture and themselves in arenas that are often unsanctioned in the schools,
are too often turned off by social studies, science, and literature as taught in schools. Why
this is so? Sarason speculates as follows:

      ... In our well-intentioned but misguided efforts to pour information into
      the minds of children we are rendered insensitive to what their interests,
      concerns, and questions are... We do not respect what is in their heads,
      i.e., they are not thinkers, they have unformed minds which it is our jobs
      to form. ... In practice we regard children as incapable of self-regulation.
      (Sarason, 1996, p. 363, author's italics)

Sarason's argument reflects several findings of this study regarding knowledge-building
communities. First of all, we have seen how several teachers characterized their teaching
practice prior to CSILE as traditional, featuring the teacher's control of classroom
discourse. For instance, Charles' classroom practice was characterized by highly
structured Socratic questioning. After using CSILE he had reduced the "teacher-directed"
component of his practice down to 30% of his total classroom activity. Several teachers,
particularly attested that giving students more choice, extending trust to students, and
handing students more control over their own learning were key factors in transforming
teacher classroom practice. Another teacher recognized the secret to selecting appropriate
problems for CSILE classroom investigations was to support her students' deep concern
for the natural environment and allowing them to come up with their own solutions for
improving it.

CSILE researchers have noted that CSILE has subtle effects on classroom discourse by
enabling certain kinds of information flow that are at least conducive to educational
change. It opens up a channel of communication in the classroom that is not teacher-
mediated and, since not all students can work on CSILE at the same time mitigates
against the traditional teaching-learning model in which all students are doing the same
thing at the same time. (Scardamalia, Bereiter, & Lamon, 1994, pp. 208-209).

In addition to these subtle effects, CSILE introduces what we have called a
"philosophical framework" with an emphasis on collaborative learning that engages
students and their teacher(s) in a shared discourse and the construction of a common
knowledge base. This approach is very different from the transmission-based classroom
structure.
Student-Directed Learning

Perhaps the most obvious change noted by our informants was the change from teacher-
directed classroom practices to student-directed learning. The change was expressed as
one of degree rather than of absolute change. In fact, several teachers noted that there will
always be a place for direct-teach methods such as lecture, recitation, and independent
seatwork, because these are such efficient methods of exposing students to basic
information. Some of the teachers reported having made dramatic changes in their
teacher-directed/student-directed ratio. While other teachers did not speak of perceived
changes in their instructional practice specifically in terms of "student-directed," they
were clearly making a transition towards adopting increasingly student-centered
approaches based on their statements about class organization, curriculum development
and instructional procedures.

Collaborative Learning

Another change in teaching practice that the knowledge-building community requires is a
change from independent student learning to collaborative learning. As a form of
computer-supported collaborative learning software, CSILE provides a workspace for
knowledge construction that is very public. It encourages collaboration by
acknowledging and embracing all steps of the knowledge construction process, including
questioning, guessing, predicting, planning, theorizing, and discovery, and making that
otherwise private effort at learning public. The learner's peers are then encouraged by the
software design to collaborate and facilitate each other's learning through commenting,
linking, and group-authored notes. The participating teachers were impressed by how
CSILE promoted collaboration among their students. For example, Nancy, who had been
highly traditional in her teaching style for her whole career, focusing on individual
learning, became a proponent of collaboration after her experience with CSILE, so that
the sharing of learning became a vital element to her new understanding of classroom
practice. She noted that:

      "What is important to me is that a student has the freedom to be an
      individual learner and that he/she can learn something and then want to
      share it with others and own something that is totally his. He sees it
      through his own eyes and it becomes part of his fabric and then by sharing
      it with others hopefully they can be enlightened and see the learning
      through his eyes."

Collaborative learning is so fundamental to the application of CSILE that, as Peggy
explained, "Teachers who aren't used to having students work together, it [CSILE] is
going to force them to."

Multiple, Simultaneous Learning Activities

One way CSILE subtly engenders changes in instructional practice is that while a portion
of the students occupy themselves on the four or five workstations interacting with the
networked knowledge base, the remaining students must occupy themselves in non-
computer activities. The typical classroom situation where all students learn the same
content in "lock-step" fashion, with the teacher lecturing to an entire class or where all
students are working independently on the same seatwork, will not work in a CSILE-
based classroom structure. The teacher must utilize other instructional strategies that
allow students to work on different learning activities simultaneously during the
classroom period.

The requirement for multiple, simultaneous learning activities moved the teachers into
the role of learning guide and facilitator of collaborative learning. Since all students could
not work on the same activity (e.g., because of a 5:1 student/computer ratio), then giving
them a choice of knowledge-constructing activities became a viable alternative. This
involved the teachers "letting go" and trusting the student to pursue their knowledge
goals more independently. Several of the project teachers described how their practice
had changed to support a class where students were doing many different things at once.
Charles, for instance, remarked how he "saw that if we had the curriculum designed
properly, and the kids had multiple jobs to do, that would free us up to facilitate." He
described one typical day when his classroom was working well:

            "We had some kids who were trying to finish up the River Project at that
            time, they were working on that. I had another group who were on the
            computers, kids who had gone down to the lab on their own, and I had
            kids who were in the library or Jack's room working on the books trying to
            work on a due date for the chapter. So, I guess that happened often. That
            was a pretty magical example of how all these things were going on at one
            time. And I think that for me, when that would happen, and it would
            happen at least half or two-thirds of the week, that was an evolution for
            me."

Fundamental Changes in Curriculum Development

Traditionally, instructional practice, as the defining factor of a teacher's professional
duty, requires that the teacher locally implement a curriculum, which has been determined
outside the classroom. Curriculum is the what to teach. Instruction is the how to teach.
The tacit assumption behind this division between curriculum and instruction is that
knowledge can be specified in a decontextualized manner, and that prespecified
knowledge will result from engaging in proper learning activities. In a knowledge-
building community, knowledge is constructed in the context of pursuing higher learning
goals. Teachers, often in collaboration with their students, design the higher level
learning goals and a learning environment that supports the pursuit of those goals. The
assumption now is that much of what has been the traditional curriculum may be
encountered along the way, but those traditional learning outcomes are no longer
prespecified in the traditional, externally specified and decontextualized sense of
curriculum. Students encounter traditional facts on a need-to-know basis, where the need
is determined by the requirements of the learning goal and not because the facts are in the
curriculum and will be on the test.
The difference between traditional curriculum and instruction and knowledge-building
communities may seem subtle at first. They both have in common the goal of student
learning that can be assessed in traditional tests, and CSILE research indicates that
students in a knowledge-building community will perform as well as or better than
students in traditional classrooms on standardized tests (Scardamalia, et al., 1992;
Scardamalia, Bereiter, & Lamon, 1994). Yet, the knowledge-building community is not
merely a platform for the delivery of curriculum. It is a fundamentally different approach
to learning that breaks down the artificial separation between curriculum and instruction.
Curriculum and instruction become subsumed in the practice of creating a knowledge-
building community. Knowledge-building communities therefore change the teacher's
relationship to curriculum in several fundamental ways.

We have seen at least four ways the notion of curriculum has changed for the participants
of the Knowledge-Building Communities project. First, curriculum becomes for the
teacher less a plan for achieving predetermined outcomes and more of an environment
designed to enable knowledge-creation in a specified arena of discourse. Second,
curriculum has less of a focus on subject matter or content and more of an environment
designed around themes, projects, or problem solving. Third, use of curriculum designed
by outside specialists diminishes, as curriculum designed through collaborative
brainstorming between members of the learning community, including teachers and
students, becomes commonplace. Finally, we have seen that, rather than falling into a
fixed set of desired learning outcomes that requires considerable effort to change (usually
by outside experts), teachers are continually revising their curriculum design based on
their on-going experience and emergent instructional needs. Each of these shifts is
examined in the following sections.

A Shift in Curriculum: From a Plan to a Learning Environment

A traditional view of curriculum depicts it as a plan for achieving predetermined learning
outcomes. In a given course, students participate in learning activities that are guided by
learning goals mandated for that course, usually in a specific sequence. By accomplishing
the learning tasks for a few learning objectives every day, they build up sufficient
knowledge and skills to satisfy the learning goals set by the curriculum. In contrast,
within a knowledge-building community the notion of curriculum shifts from a plan for
achieving predetermined learning outcomes to that of a learning environment designed to
enable knowledge-creation in a general area of interest. Learning outcomes are still a
teacher concern, as revealed by teachers' statements about the kind of state-mandated
curriculum coverage they were able to achieve. The difference, however, is that coverage
of the curriculum occurs in a non-linear fashion. Teachers design a learning environment
which contains all the elements of their curriculum, but also gives students as much
responsibility as possible to engage in their knowledge-building activities whereby they
encounter the more traditional curriculum learning objectives on a need-to-know basis.
As Jack put it, "students do what they feel like they need to do rather than what they have
to do."

The traditional approach to curriculum builds up knowledge primarily by accretion. It is
an efficient and thorough way of covering the lower level forms of knowledge such as
comprehension and application, but tends to sacrifice higher level uses of newly acquired
knowledge in analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. In a knowledge-building community,
knowledge goals start out being high level goals, and it is something of a leap of faith,
later born out by teacher experiences, that students will encounter the traditional learning
objectives as they pursue these higher learning goals. As mentioned earlier, CSILE
research does support the claim that students are learning at least as much as students in
traditional classes, based on standardized achievement test scores (Scardamalia, et al.,
1992; Scardamalia, Bereiter, & Lamon, 1994).

Curriculum Designed around Themes, Projects, or Problem-Solving

Traditionally, curriculum is subject- or content-based. The accepted domains of
knowledge that define the structure of curriculum have endured for centuries, such that
the sciences, social studies, mathematics, and language arts are all conceived in the
curriculum as separate entities with their own unique forms of knowledge and content.
The knowledge-building community approaches we have seen in our project, however,
have tended to cut through these curricular partitions and focus instead on themes,
projects, or problem-solving activities that may draw on an interdisciplinary base of
knowledge construction. Though none of these approaches require interdisciplinary
study, they do open up that possibility, and we have seen several of the project teachers
capitalize on the interdisciplinary opportunities afforded by CSILE.

A prime example of the way a project-based curriculum can support interdisciplinary
collaboration is the historical novel project at one middle school that involved all of the
Knowledge-Building Communities teachers at that site. The project, which extended
across two semesters, addressed an entire year of American History curriculum as well as
an entire year of Honors English and regular Language Arts, which also addressed
literature and writing. The teachers demonstrated that not only could a long-term project
support a sustained interdisciplinary study, but also, in their two-week "lesser man"
thematic unit, feature an intense synthesis of a wide range of historical issues, current
events, and literary works. This was a short-term project originated opportunistically
from an enthusiastic classroom discussion conducted by Charles and his student teacher
about Huckleberry Finn, and was implemented in the CSILE database. In this project
students integrated concepts about social power and status from a wide range of sources
they were exploring in their history, language arts, and honors English classes.

Curriculum designed Through Collaboration between Members of the Learning Community

Traditionally, the source of curriculum is from outside specialists who attempt to design a
curriculum that will fit educational requirements specified by authorities at state and
federal levels. Such efforts are quite capable of addressing the top-level concerns for
education, but are not likely to address the local conditions of a given knowledge-
building community. The approach to curriculum reported by the teachers exemplified
collaboration between all members of the community in the creation of curriculum. Not
only did teachers interact closely with colleagues in brainstorming effective curriculum
ideas that would work well for their local community, but students were given as much
responsibility as possible in designing and elaborating significant aspects their own
curriculum. "Student choice" was a phrase that several teachers used to describe the
curriculum they aspired towards.

In three out of four of the schools in the project, teachers collaborated to design and
implement the curriculum. For example, the historical novel project required input from
all three teachers in order to design a curriculum that melded Language Arts, honors
English, and American History into a collaborative effort which also satisfied all of the
teachers' educational responsibilities.

Curriculum under Constant Revision

Once developed, curriculum that derives from such traditional sources as textbooks and
state curriculum guidelines tends to stay fixed. In contrast, we have seen how the
curriculum of knowledge-building communities remains under constant revision, based
on the ongoing experience unfolding in the classroom. The ongoing goals, of course, are
constant improvement and relevance to students.

Several of the teachers indicated how they felt it was necessary to constantly revise the
curriculum as they saw the needs of students become more apparent. For example both
Charles and Cathy expressed misgivings about the historical novel project. They felt that
the curriculum needed to be altered in order to encourage more student collaboration and
reflection, and to have it be more appropriate to all levels of student ability.

Fundamental Changes in Teachers' Roles

When teachers change their instructional practice and their relationship to the curriculum,
they tend to also change their role in the classroom. The traditional role of the teacher
may be characterized as that of a subject-matter expert whose responsibility it is to: 1)
transfer a specific body of knowledge (the curriculum, usually defined as the material in a
textbook) to the minds of students primarily through the method of lecture,
demonstration, and drill; 2) to evaluate the success of the transfer of knowledge through
questioning and tests; and 3) to provide remediation as needed. We have seen teachers in
the Knowledge-Building Communities project depart from the traditional role in three
ways. First, we have seen a departure from the direct teach approach, so that the teachers
use less lecture and demonstration and act more as a learning guide or coach for students
who pursue their own knowledge goals. Second, we have seen teachers become less
consumers of curriculum and become more involved designing curriculum that is more
sensitive to student interests. Third, we have seen teachers becoming less followers of
curriculum as they take on the role of directors of curriculum.

Conclusions

This paper provides the findings related to one of five emergent themes identified by
teachers who participated in the Knowledge-Building Community Project. In this paper,
we have explored how the knowledge-building community requires changes in teachers'
instructional practice, their relationship to the curriculum, and the role teachers play in
the classroom. In order to support intentional learning, departure from what is commonly
understood to be classroom practice is substantial. No longer are students strictly focused
on the teacher who has the responsibility of delivering a curriculum handed down from
above. The whole learning community has considerable latitude in defining the
curriculum and appropriate instructional activities that further the community's pursuit of
knowledge. The profound changes in instruction and curriculum also transform the social
interactions among the members of the learning community. In particular, teachers, who,
in the past, had isolated themselves within their classrooms and explored only their
assigned subject areas, learned to interact more with their colleagues in the knowledge-
building communities and expand their curriculum content. Students also experienced
their relationships with learning and fellow students as being transformed in substantial
ways.

The stories of the nine teachers in the study indicate that innovative technologies to
support collaborative knowledge building, coupled with training and support, can serve
as a catalyst to changing teacher practices. It should also be noted that implementing a
knowledge-building community approach to education can be a difficult uphill battle. At
least part of the reason the project fared so well in three of the four schools in the study
was because of the "bubble of support" that surrounded the initiative with the status of
university and corporate involvement and the fiscal and technical assistance that came
with that involvement. Further research is needed to better understand the conditions
necessary for the successful diffusion and adoption of the knowledge-building approach
to school reform.

Bibliography

Brown, A.L. & Campione, J.C. (1990). Communities of learning and thinking, or a
context by any other name. Contributions to Human Development, 21, 108-126

Doyle, w. (1986). Classroom organization and management. In M.C. Winrock (Ed.),
Handbook of research on teaching (pp.392-431). New York: Macmillan

Heap, J.L. (1985). Discourse in the production of classroom knowledge: Reading lessons.
Curriculum Inquiry, 15(3), 245-280

Kolander, J. & Guzdial, M. (1996). Effects with and of CSCL: Tracking learning in a new
paradigm. In Timothy Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging
paradigm (307-320). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., McLean, R., Swallow, J. & Woodruff, E. (1987).
Computer supported intentional learning environments. In A. Collins (Chair), Strategies
for teaching thinking skills with interactive technologies. Symposium conducted at the
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Washington. (ERIC
Document #ED288913).

Sarason, S. (1996). Revisiting the culture of school and the problem of change. New
York: Teachers College Press.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building
communities. Journal of the learning sciences. 3(3), 265-283.

Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, B., & Lamon, M. (1994). The CSILE project: trying to bring
the classroom into world 3. In Kate McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons: Integrating
cognitive theory and classroom practice. Cambridge: Bradford Books/MIT Press.

Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., Brett, C., Burtis, P.J., Calhoun, J., & Smith Lea, N. (1992).
Educational application of a networked communal database. Interactve learning
environments. 2(1), 45-71.

Tyack, D. & Tobin, W. (1993). The 'grammar' of schooling: Why has it been so hard to
change? American Education Research Journal, 31(3), 453-479.

Authors' addresses

Paul Resta (resta@mail.utexas.edu)
Learning Technology Center; SZB 438, The University of Texas at Austin; Austin, TX
78712. Tel. (512) 471-4014. Fax (512) 471-4655
Mark Christal (Mark_Christal @teachnet.edb.utexas.edu)
Learning Technology Center; SZB 438, The University of Texas at Austin; Austin, TX
78712. Tel. (512) 471-4014. Fax (512) 471-4655
Karen Ferneding (Karen_Ferneding@teachnet.edb.utexas.edu)
Learning Technology Center; SZB 438, The University of Texas at Austin; Austin, TX
78712. Tel. (512) 471-4014. Fax (512) 471-4655
Adrienne Kennedy Puthoff (Adrienne_Kennedy@teachnet.edb.utexas.edu)
Learning Technology Center; SZB 438, The University of Texas at Austin; Austin, TX
78712. Tel. (512) 471-4014. Fax (512) 471-4655
