Multiple Channels of Electronic Communication for
Building a Distributed Learning Community
Anne Rose

University of Maryland, Institute for Advanced Computer Studies

Robert B. Allen

University of Maryland, College of Library and Information Services

Kathleen Fulton

University of Maryland, College of Education

      Abstract: The Maryland Electronic Learning Community (MELC) is part
      of the Baltimore Learning Community, a Challenge Grant project funded
      by the U.S. Department of Education. Created as a partnership between
      the Baltimore City Public Schools, the University of Maryland, and
      corporate and public sponsors, MELC was designed to investigate how an
      electronic learning community could be created around the development
      and use of a multimedia digital library for teacher-generated lesson plans
      and activities. In addition to audio, video, image, text, and web resources
      available in the library, multiple communications technologies (i.e., a
      community web site, email, a threaded discussion board, and distance
      learning laboratories) have supported collaboration and interaction among
      the teacher and university participants. In this paper we present a
      preliminary analysis of the impact of these technologies on teacher
      interaction and technology use. We find a substantial level of teacher
      communication and collaboration across media and we look for evidence
      that the multiple channels of interaction facilitate teacherís professional
      development and increasing comfort with technology.

      Keywords: Chat, communication, digital libraries, learning communities,
      professional development, video conferencing

Background: New models of professional growth through learning communities

While most of the focus around technology in K-12 education has been on the role of
computers in student learning, one of technology's most promising applications has been
as a vehicle for teacher learning (OTA, 1995). Just as projects are supporting student
participation in learning communities, the development of learning communities for
teachers is increasingly seen as a way for teachers to learn about technology while using
it to advance their teaching and professional goals. These learning communities, or
"communities of practice" (Lave & Wenger, 1991), can be powerful vehicles for personal
growth and learning, settings in which knowledge is developed collaboratively based on
common interests, practices, tools, discourses, and shared values, goals, and activities
(Pea & Gomez, 1992; Reil and Fulton, 1999; Ruopp, et al., 1993).

The value of community for K-12 teachers is particularly powerful. Unlike most other
professionals, teachers spend most of their working day isolated from their peers and
colleagues. With the resources now possible through technology, this isolation can be
minimized. Several projects have focused on supporting teachers in learning communities
that remove limitations of time and location. (e.g., the Mathematics Learning Forums
Projects (http://www.edc.org/CCT/); PBS Mathline
(http://www.pbs.org/teachersource/math/); Classroom Connect, 21st Century Teachers,
and the Well-Connected Educator; and LM_Net (http://ericir.syr.edu/lm_net/)). One of
the most ambitious of these virtual learning communities, TAPPED IN
(http://www.tappedin.org/), was developed as a meeting space or "community of
communities" for teachers to communicate about and work on documents or projects in a
shared virtual office space.

Projects like these are offering teachers new resources for learning that differ from the
past models of professional development that consisted primarily of short workshops or
formal coursework. Like just-in-time models of employee training in industry, learning
communities offer teachers customized and flexible opportunities to learn from peers at
times that are convenient for them. According to Darling-Hammond and McLaughlin
(1995, as cited in Darling-Hammond, 1999)), the best models of professional
development are those that are:

   ·  Experiential, engaging teachers in concrete tasks of teaching, assessment, and
      observation that illuminate the processes of learning and development;
   ·  Grounded in participants' questions, inquiry, and experimentation as well as in
      profession-wide research;
   ·  Collaborative, involving a sharing of knowledge among educators;
   ·  Connected to and derived from teachers' work with their students as well as
      involving examinations of subject matter and teaching methods;
   ·  Sustained and intensive, supported by modeling, coaching, and problem solving
      around specific problems of practice; and
   ·  Connected to other aspects of school change.

The Maryland Electronic Learning Community

The Maryland Electronic Learning Community (MELC) was built around this model of
teacher learning. MELC is part of the larger Baltimore Learning Community (BLC)
project, funded as one of the U.S. Department of Educationís Technology Innovation
Challenge Grants in 1995 (http://www.learn.umd.edu/). Created as a partnership between
the Baltimore City Public Schools (BCPS), the University of Maryland (UMDd), and
corporate and public sponsors, MELC was designed to create and document how an
electronic learning community of teachers could be created around the development and
use of a multimedia digital library for teacher generated interactive lesson plans
(Marchionini et al., 1997).

Originally MELC consisted of twelve science and social studies teachers at three middle
schools in Baltimore, and equal number of faculty and graduates students from the
University of Maryland, and technology leadership staff from Baltimore City Public
Schools (BCPS)partnered with faculty and graduates students from the University of
Maryland. Today MELC has close to forty teachers from four Baltimore middle schools,
and it includes math ,and language artsteachers, and special education teachers. Project
partners include Apple Computer, Discovery Communication, the National Archives,
Maryland Public Television, and the Space Science Telescope Institute.

When the project began, most of the teachers had no computers in their classrooms and
little technology expertise or exposure to technology integration in the classroom. Now in
the fifth and final year of the project, eEach MELC classroom is equipped with at least
three student machines provided by the project, one higher-end teacher machine, and two
27-inch monitors. for displaying material to their classrooms. The computers are
connected to a central server and aAll of the computers have Internet access through
ISDN and T1 lines. and each teacher is given a personal email account.Software and
other resources (e.g. a digital camera for each site) are also provided by the project. Just
getting comfortable with the technology has been a challenge for many of the teachers.
As a result, professional development has been a critical element of the project. In
addition to a three-day summer institute held each year, regular after school professional
development sessions have been held where the focus is on creating and sharing
interactive lesson plans for classroom use Technical support has been provided primarily
by UMD graduate students (many of whom spend a day a week in the classrooms) and
BCPS support staff.

Using the technology provided, the goal is to create an electronic community of teachers
who create and share interactive lesson plans for use in their classrooms. To aid the
creation of these lesson plans, project researchers at the University of Maryland has
created a multimedia digital library of approximately 2000 educational resources,
indexed by topic and correlated to national standards (Rose et al., 1998). Provided by
project partners and found on the Internet, the library contains audio, video, image, text,
and web resources from the Internet and project partners. The database was created
around topics studied in the middle school curriculum and is enriched by over 28 hours of
Discovery Comunications video (e.g. Understanding Oceans; The Mystery of Twins, The
Real Ben Franklin, and Buffalo Soldiers) that has been digitized, indexed, and segmented
into small clips the teachers can preview and use in their lessons. Tools for exploring,
searching and adding to the library have also been created. To date teachers have created
281 interactive lesson plans. 14 teachers have authored more than five lesson plans each
and a few teachers have created over 20. Table 1 shows a breakdown of the various types
of multimedia resources used in the lesson plans. We are currently analyzing the lesson
plans in more detail and the results will be reported in Semple (in preparation).
             Table 1: Use of resources within lesson plans (as of 5/99)

The participating teachers are generally enthusiastic about the project, but the learning
curve has been steep and slow. Just getting comfortable with the technology has been a
challenge for many of the teachers Some of this has been due to technical problems with
both hardware and software. As is the case in many technology projects, a few early
adopters have moved along rapidly. Following the Apple-Classroom-of-Tomorrow stages
of instructional evolution (Sandholtz, et al., 1996), a fewst MELC teachers would be
characterized as in the early stages (i.e., entry or adoption), more of the teachers are at the
adaptation or appropriation level, and, only a few could be considered at the invention
stage. But growth has been, for many, quite dramatic since the inception of the
project.rather than the more advanced levels or technology use (i.e., adaptation,
appropriation, or invention Professional development has been a critical element of the
project. In addition to a three-day summer institute held each year (which teachers attend
as a condition of participating in the project, and for which they receive a small stipend),
regular after school professional development sessions have been to create and share
interactive lesson plans for classroom useThree-day summer institutes (which teachers
attend as a condition of participating in the project, and for which they receive a small
stipend) are held each year. They bring renewed enthusiasm to the project but it has been
hard to sustain that level of community during the school year when schedules are hectic..
From the beginning of the project, Tteachers were also given email accounts for
communication. However, use has been limited due, in part, to technical issues related to
implementation of emails accounts in the BCPS. Low usage can also be attributed to the
teachersí initial comfort level with technology (many teachers had never used email, or
computers for that matter) and learning-community issues (teachers needed a reason to
send email to other teachers).

During the past1998-99 school year (the fourth year of the project), a turning point seems
to have been reached in terms of teachers' greater involvement with the project and
comfort level with technology. We have seen evidence of more communication, more
interactions among teachers, and a greater sense of community. Presumably some of this
change can be attributed to time and the continuing project support. BCPS created a
school-based project web site and the project server is now housed in Baltimore
(originally both were housed and maintained by UMD). Presumably some of this change
can be attributed to time and the continuing project support. However, observations and
interviews with teachers suggest that the creation of alternate communications venues has
been an important reason for in the increased sense of community in the project. This
paper deals with the impact to date found for two of these new communication channels,
the development of past year a threaded discussion board (called MELChat) was created
and the creation and use of four distance learning laboratories (DLLs)were built and we
believe these new communication channels have contributed significantly to the
increased sense of community. As evidence, one teacher commented "Over the last year
Iíve seen the community grow and expand. Iíve personally become more involved with
other individuals in the learning community at a more interactive level than in the past
because of the addition of MELChat and the distance learning labs."

How multiple communication channels could affect community and teaching

In this paper, we focus on the community-building aspects of the BLC/MELC project.
Communities and friendships tend to develop among people who communicate
frequently. Kraut and Egido (1988) have demonstrated that this proximity effect is also
observed among people who communicate electronically. We believe that the synergy
among multiple channels of communication (like MELChat and the DLLs) greatly
reinforces this effect. Each channel supports further communication and interaction (both
synchronous and asynchronous), which in turn supports greater use of the technology and
more innovative teaching activities. In other words, there may be direct effects such as
increased opportunities for discussion of teaching ideas and technical support. There may
also be indirect effects such as the opportunity for the teachers to express themselves in
the modality in which they feel most comfortable and providing opportunities for
increased reflection by the individual teachers on their activities. Weedman (1999)
reports this type of effect for email discussion groups among students in distance learning
classes.

MELChat

Because teachers were not using their email accounts to communicate frequently a
threaded discussion board called MELChat was added in Spring 1999. In the first six
months of its existence, over 400 messages have been posted. The majority of messages
are regarding project management issues (e.g., coordinating meeting schedules,
suggestions). Teachers are also using MELChat to share educational resources (e.g., "I
found a great web site"), request collaborations with their peers (Example 1); and ask for
technical help. Teachers across schools, and even within schools, have found MELChat
useful for learning about what others are doing (Example 2). There is also a high volume
of "thank you" and congratulatory messages which seem to foster a greater sense of pride
in the community. There is even some of the "I did it!" variety of reporting proud
accomplishments (Example 3) Table 2 shows a breakdown of the messages by topic
(analysis of 229 messages in first three months).
      Example 1:

      ... my students made Public Service Announcement Posters on the
      Importance of Childhood Immunizations. We have been learning about
      viral and bacterial Infectious Diseases. They also are in the process of
      making PowerPoint presentations on differences between viruses and
      Bacteria and how these diseases are spread. We would love to do a DLL
      sharing activity with you and your students!

      Example 2:

      I work right across from you and I never have time to know what you are
      doing!!! Sounds like some great projects.

      Example 3:

     I used the Distance Lab this week and fell in love with it, so did my
     students. Today they asked when we could return. I used the Doc Cam to
     show examples of correct and incorrect ways that my six graders were to
     set their papers up. Then we analyzed a photo. It was great. My next
     experience with technology was using the digital camera. I selected a
     repeater to be my student of the week. Took his picture, Bill helped me
     with the graphic converter, and then I created a slide and posted it on the
     monitor for others to see. Having printed one out for him, he just marveled
     with pride and anxiety to show his mother. I know that everyone has been
     doing these things forever, but I have just got started.

         Table 2: Frequency of topics in threaded discussions (as of 5/99).

MELChat has become an important communication channel for the project. In a recent
survey (8/99), 74% of the teachers claimed to access MELChat "somewhat" (5-10 times a
week) or "often" (11 or more times a week). Moreover, the teachersí perception of how
much MELChat contributes to the sense of community, their professional development,
and their interactions with other teachers increases with use as shown in Figure 1 which
is based on 22 teacher questionnaires.

             Figure 1. Perceptions of MELChat by frequency of use.

Distance Learning Laboratories (DLLs)

Distance learning laboratories, while common in business and training environments,
have been applied far less frequently in education. Usually, they are used for remotely
distributing lectures and for offering advanced placement or other classes for students in
cases in which the limited numbers of participating students, or limited teacher
availability, makes the sharing of teachers and students over a distance learning network
practical (OTA, 1989). The use of distance learning for the professional development of
teachers is even more limited. What is even less common, however, is the informal kind
of sharing via a distance learning network that has been the format of the MELC sessions
over the past semester.

In Spring 1999, three MELC schools and the BCPS Professional Development Center
were interconnected via Bell Atlantic videoconferencing systems, established by the State
of Maryland in several schools around the city and state (one MELC school still does not
yet have a facility, but plans to complete construction by the end of the Fall 1999
semester). Each Distance Learning Laboratory (DLL) has two sets of fourmultiple
monitors, one set at the front and one at back of the classroom, allowing simultaneous
participation in and viewing of live video from any of the participating locations. Audio
is provided through desktop mikes on the tables where participants sit and small clip-on
microphones worn by presenters at each site. A remote control device allows switching
between various room cameras and a document camera. Computers, VCRs, document
cameras, and other devices are connected to the system and allow shared viewing of
information.

Starting with the Spring 1999 semester, tTwo-hour professional development sessions
were heldwere held each week after school. Prior to the creation of the DLLs, these
meetings were rotated amongheld in various school locations but were never well
attended (i.e., approximately 3-5 teachers came to prior sessions). Teachers reported that
they were not enthusiastic about having to drive across town at the end of the school day
in order to participate. In contrast, data from the Spring 1999 semester indicate that 66%
of the teachers attended some or most of the weekly DLL sessions, approximately 5-10
teachers from each of the participating schools. This percentage is particularly
noteworthy because, as noted above, one school does not yet have a DLLEach week
approximately 5-10 teachers from each of the participating schools attended the DLL
sessions. 89% of the teachers found these sessions useful When asked to rank
community-building tools in August of 1999, teachers ranked the DLL sessions highest
(89% of the teachers found these sessions useful)and and MELChat came in as a close
second. Face-to-face school meetings were ranked the lowest.

Once the teachers became comfortable using the DLLs they have begun began to see
ways they canould use them for activities involving their students. For example, in order
to prepare students for the Functional Reading Exam, which all BCPS students must pass
in the eighth grade, one of MELC teachers offered to teach review sessions over the
distance learning labs so students in other schools could also participate. Two teachers
participated and felt it was a great resource that helped their students focus on the
importance of the examination (Example 43).

      Example 4:
      Congratulations are in order to [Teacher A] and [Teacher B] for using the
      Distance Learning Link between Lombard and Key this morning
      (Monday, April 19). They prepared, coordinated and presented a
      meaningful lesson that should help students (at least two classes) improve
      scores on the Maryland Functional Reading Test. The lesson was taped on
      the second VCR so other classes might share in their efforts. Keep up the
      great work!

An even more ambitious undertaking was a two class-period lesson on the dynamics of
flight, taught across three MELC schools. The idea for this collaborative lesson came up
during one of the distance learning sessions, and required considerable planning and
coordination which was facilitated by MELChat (Example 54).

      Example 5:
      To summarize our plan for the DL lab lesson on flight, we agreed on the
      following items:
     1. Wednesday and Friday, May 19th and 21st
      2. 11 AM to 12 noon
      3. Lombard, FSK, and Hamilton students
      4. [Teacher C], [Teacher D], and [Teacher D] will be the staff involved.
      5. I will be at FSK to push the buttons as needed.
      6. [Teacher C] will fax copies of the papers that need to be duplicated.
      7. [Teacher C] will send [Teacher E] an electronic copy of the lesson plan
      for posting on the web site.

One of the teachers from the project, who did not even have students participating in the
flight session but dropped in to watch anyway, said,

      You know, I used to teach in the same school as [Teacher D] and I'd heard
      she was a fabulous teacher. I never got to visit her class, even though she
      was just upstairs from me. Now we teach at different schools and I finally
      got to see her teaching in action, thanks to the distance learning lab. I
      learned so much just watching her!

A growing number of nonMELC teachers from the participating schools have been
attending the afterschool professional development sessions, suggesting that MELC
teachers have spread the word among colleagues that it is time well spent. We hope to
track this informal expansion of the community.

As with the Star Schools program (http://www.ed.gov/EdRes/EdFed/Star.html), benefits
were also found when students used the distance learning facility. For instance, teachers
reported that their students were more motivated and paid better attention when they were
using the distance learning lab. Some teachers noted that bringing classes together via
video caused much less confusion than bringing them together in person. For some
lessons involving detailed manual work by the teacher (i.e., folding paper airplanes to test
various flight designs) the document camera was particularly helpful in showing close-
ups of what the teacher was doing.

66% of the teachers attended some or most of the weekly DLL sessions. This percentage
is particularly noteworthy because one school does not have a DLL. The most common
reasons for not attending were prior commitments and time of day

Implications and conclusionsImplications for schools

Time, distance, and a lack of shared goals and activities can form barriers to community,
but the MELC project suggest one model of how Nonetheless, in MELC we are finding
evidence that technology can bridge these barriers. Still, the technology itself can present
a barrier. Teachersí early frustrations with the technology made some hesitant to take the
risks of trying it and then having it fail in the classroom. In the early years of the project,
it often appeared that the downsides of technology outweighed the positive possibilities.
But for many, it was a question of getting past a personal critical point of comfort. As one
teacher said, "Now that I know how to logon, I will continue to participate actively.". "
An important factor has been developing a shared vision of what can be done with
technologyóa vision that is gradually built, shared, and nurtured in the electronic venues
of the "face to face" interactions experienced in the Distance Learning Lab and the
asynchronous reflections and conversations of the MELChat.

Teachers need multiple vehicles of support if they are to work and interact as a true
learning community. It is possible that many channels of communication synergize with
each other and that the combination is more effective than each channel would be
separately. Different people have different roles, different styles, and different goals for
communication; multiple complimentary types of interaction provide channels for people
with those differing characteristics. Schools are information-rich environments, and
teachers have expertise that can be captured and shared in multiple ways.

Enhancing human communication by technology is likely to be a powerful tool for
improving schools. It suggests that a larger goal for technology use and school reform
should be an explicit focus on community building. This leads to questions such as::
Does broader participation of teachers in learning communities lead to more interest in
setting up learning communities for students? Can the use of distance learning labs and
other types of video interaction -- such as NetMeeting, extended discussions from chat
sessions and electronic teacher's lounge, and other opportunities for communication (e.g.,
Bly, et al., 1993) -- extend and support the explicit growth and teacher reflection on
practice? Will this be sustained after project support ends? Does broader participation of
teachers in learning communities lead to more interest in setting up learning communities
for students? How might does this expanded community impact students, their learning,
and their valuing the idea sense of community?Conclusion

As suggested by the review of collaborative activities and communities, teachers need
multiple vehicles of support if they are to work and interact as a true learning community.
It is possible that many channels of communication synergize with each other and that the
combination is more effective than they would be separately. Different people have
different roles, different styles, and different goals for communication; multiple
complimentary types of interaction provide channels for people with those differing
characteristics. Schools are information-rich environments, and teachers have expertise
that can be captured and shared in multiple ways. With growing comfort with technology,
supported by human and electronic connections, teachers in the MELC project have
shown themselves to be eager to learn more, create more, and share more. We plan to
continue to monitor the ways this community evolves and the impact it has on teaching
and technology use in the classroom.

Acknowledgments

We thank the Baltimore City Public Schools and the wonderful teachers who are
members of the Maryland Electronic Learning Community. We also thank our colleagues
at the University of Maryland and partners who are involved in other parts of this effort.
A U.S. Department of Education Technology Challenge Grant (#R303A50051) to the
Baltimore City Public Schools has supported this work.
Bibliography

Bly, S.A., Harrison, S.R., and Irwin, S. Media spaces: bringing people together in a
video, audio, and computing environment. Communications of the ACM, Vol. 36, No. 1
(Jan. 1993), Pages 28-46

Darling-Hammond, L., & M. W. McLaughlin. (1995). "Policies that support professional
development in an era of reform." Phi Delta Kappan 76, 8: 597-604.

Darling-Hammond, L. (1999). Teacher learning that supports student learning, Edutopia,
http://www.glef.org/edutopia/newsletters/6.2/darling.html

Kraut, R. E., & Egido, C. (1988). Patterns of contact and communication in scientific
research collaboration. Proceedings of the Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, New
York: ACM, page 1-12.

Lave J. & Wegner, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

Marchinoni, G., Nolet, V., Williams, H., Ding, W., Beale, J., Rose, A., Gordon, A.,
Enmoto, E., & Harbinson, L. (1997). Content + connectivity = community: Digital
resources for a learning community. In ACM Digital Libraries, pp. 212-220.

Office of Technology Assessment, U.S. Congress. (1995). Teachers and technology:
Making the connection. OTA-EHR-616 . Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office. www.wws.princeton.edu/~ota/ns20/year_f.html/index.html or
www.ota.nap.edu/pdf/data/1995/9541.pdf.

Office of Technology Assessment, U.S. Congress. (1989). Linking for Learning:
Technologies for Learning at a Distance. OTA-SET- Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office. www.wws.princeton.edu/~ota/ns20/year_f.html/index.html or
www.ota.nap.edu/pdf/1989/8921.pdf.

Pea, R. D. & Gomez, L. M. (1992). Distributed multimedia learning environments: Why
and How? Interactive Learning Environments, 2(2), 73-109.

Reil, M., & Fulton, K. (1998). Technology in the classroom: Tools for doing things
differently or doing different things. Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the
American Educational Research Association, San Diego, Phi Delta Kappan (submitted).

Rose, A., Ding, W., Marchionini, G., Beale, J., & Nolet, V. (1998). Building an
electronic learning community: From design to implementation. In ACM SIGCHI, pp.
203-210.

Ruopp, R, Gal, S. Drayton, B, & Pfister, M. (1993). LabNet: Toward a community of
practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sandholtz, J.H., Ringstaff, C., & Dwyer, D.C. (1997). Teaching with technology:
Creating student-centered classrooms. New York: Teachers College Press.

Semple, P., Rose, A., Allen, R. B., & Fulton, K. (in preparation). Modules and resources
in the BLC/MELC video digital library.

Weedman, J. (1999). Conversation and community: The potential of electronic
conferences for creating intellectual proximity in distributed learning environments.
Journal of the American Society of Information Science, 50, #10, pp. 907-928.

Authors' addresses

Anne Rose (rose@cs.umd.edu)
HCIL and UMIACS; University of Maryland; College Park, MD, 20742. Tel: 301-405-
2757.
Robert B. Allen (rba@glue.umd.edu)
College of Library and Information Services; 4121E Hornbake Library; University of
Maryland; College Park, MD, 20742. Tel: 301-405-2052.
Kathleen Fulton (kf63@umail.umd.edu)
Center for Learning and Educational Technology; College of Education; University of
Maryland; College Park, MD, 20742. Tel: 301-405-3605.
