Computer Support for Children's Collaborative
Fantasy Play and Storytelling
Kimiko Ryokai and Justine Cassell

Media Laboratory

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

      Abstract: Collaborative fantasy play and storytelling serve an important
      role in preschool children's development. Making up characters and
      telling stories are activities through which children make sense of and test
      their hypotheses about the world. While computers are increasingly
      present to support young children's collaboration in school tasks, there is a
      lack of computational systems to support children's voice in this kind of
      important collaborative activity.

      StoryMat is a system that supports children's collaborative fantasy play
      and storytelling. With StoryMat, however, collaboration can take place
      among co-present peers, or between a child and a previous user, mediated
      by the StoryMat. StoryMat records and recalls children's own narrating
      voices and the movements they make with their toys on the mat. Stories
      from the past are conjured up on the mat as a narrating moving shadow of
      the toy, when they are triggered by the present stories that are similar. By
      hearing peer stories in response to their own story, children's stories and
      the experience of telling them seem to become richer. This paper
      addresses the importance of supporting children's collaboration in fantasy
      play and storytelling and suggests a new way for technology to play an
      integral part in that activity.

      Keywords: peer collaboration, storytelling, fantasy play

Introduction

Computer Supported Collaborative Learning is often defined as a collaboration between a
teacher and a learner mediated by a computer, or two children solving problems together
using a computer. However, collaboration also occurs spontaneously among children as
they co-construct fantasy worlds and tell stories about them, in the process improving
their language and narrative skills, and their ability to work with other children, and
computers can play important roles in this kind of collaboration as well. In this paper, we
look at a particular kind of collaboration in children's play -- that is fantasy storytelling
play. Fantasy storytelling play is important in children's development and collaboration
among peers plays a key role in the success of the activity. We discuss the role that one
computationally-enhanced play mat plays in young children's collaborative fantasy
storytelling play.
Fantasy Play

In children's spontaneous play, their language and actions are both the process and the
product of their fantasy play. For example, a child who is holding a piece of block tells
her playmate, "Pretend this was a train, OK?" Children demonstrate in this language a
sense of possibility -- the concept of "what might be" (Singer & Singer, 1990).

Such imaginative exercise is important in children's development. Fantasy play allows
children to explore different possibilities in their life without the risk of failure and
frustration from unexpected events. Pretense gives children a unique opportunity to
explore their own emotional arousal (Fein, 1987), and also an opportunity to experiment
with possible interactions and relationships among humans (Leslie, 1987). As such,
fantasy play plays an important role in children's emotional and social development.

Fantasy play also fosters children's cognitive and language skills. In fantasy play,
children practice their ability to represent objects, actions, and feelings with something
that stands for them. Such ability is paralleled by a corresponding ability to represent in
language (Nicolich, 1977). By fostering the development of children's symbolic
imagination and providing a field for its exercise, fantasy play and narrative activity
prepare the way for the development of abstract thinking and higher mental processes
(Nicolopolou, 1996).

Young Children's Play: Developmental Perspective

Children's play patterns change as they get older. Children start out by engaging in a
"solo" play style and gradually learn to engage in more social play.

At age 2, children's play is solitary. That is, children play alone with toys regardless of
their proximity to other children. A child may be playing with a toy car right next to a
child who is playing with a toy truck. But neither of them attempts to get close to the
other. They seclude themselves from the presence of others and their interest is only in
their interaction with the object (Parten,1932; Peller, 1955). Children in this stage also
speak predominately in the first person during fantasy play. For example, a child may
say, "What's that?" or "Go away!" in his play, but he does not introduce the quoted
speech.

At age 3, children are predominantly focused on "parallel" play or what Peller (1955)
calls "mirroring" play. Children who engage in parallel play still do not show any attempt
to influence the other's play with their own. But the child plays with similar toys in the
same play style as other children. We may see a child who is playing in a very similar
way to a child who is playing right next to him. "Chu-ga chu-ga." One child plays with
his train toy. And another one says the same thing, "Chu-ga chu-ga," with his toy. Yet
there is no interaction between them.

By age 4, children engage in more social play. Their play becomes more "associative"
and "cooperative." They are concerned with common activity and able to have
conversation with a common goal. They are also able to engage in the higher level of
activity as they are able to play with others in the "shared-imagination" world (Damon,
1983). They coordinate their actions and interpretation of the world in a cooperative
manner. By age four, children also become increasingly competent at speaking from a
perspective that is different from their own. Auwarter (1986), in his experiment with
children age between 3 and 9, found that the ability to take a character role identity in a
story increased as children became older. Auwarter also found that children's ability to
produce the neutral perspective (narrator's perspective) increased as the children got even
older. While younger children are able to narrate from the character's point of view as in
"This tastes really good!," older children were able to also narrate from the neutral
observer, the narrator's point of view, as in, "So, he ate some delicious apples."

Therefore, as they develop, children are more likely to interact cooperatively, and able to
engage in make-believe activities and share the world with others using more
sophisticated language forms. However, make-believe play is at its peak when a child is
between the age 4 and 7 (Vygotsky, 1967). By age 8, a child begins to reason more like
an adult. A child seeks out more logical and realistic scenarios rather than imaginary
made-up scenarios (Miller, 1979).

While preschool children aged between 4 and 7 are able to construct make-believe roles
or situations, they are also able to engage in such activity with others in a cooperative
manner (Damon, 1983). Therefore, that period of one's childhood seems to be devoted to
preparing or practicing imaginative skills, and also to doing so in the social context. In
parallel, children during this age are acquiring the ability to present the content of their
fantasies to others, through the use of the narrative voice. Thus, whereas younger children
may simply roar, older children become able to say "and then the dragon roared `I will
eat you all up.'"

Peer Collaboration in Fantasy Play

Children are better at fantasy play in collaboration with peers than with parents, as peer
play demonstrates more negotiation and is more improvisationally creative (Whiting &
Whiting, 1975). Fein & Fryer (1995) found no evidence that mothers contribute to the
quality or sophistication of peer play. In contrast, in children's play, peers' stories and
imaginary creations serve as a new suggestions for children to enact and tell their story
creatively within the dramatic frame (Baker-Sennett, Matusov, & Rogoff, 1992). It is the
"collective" routines among peers that take children's fantasy play even further (Corsaro,
1992).

Fantasy play among peers also offers a space where children can practice speaking from
different perspectives, such as an imaginary character or a third person narrator. With
age, children learn to take different perspectives and they also become competent at
mixing the roles to achieve more complex uses of language (Auwarter, 1986). Fantasy
play among peers allows children to listen to and become influenced by different uses of
language. Therefore, peer collaboration in fantasy play serves an important function in
children's exploration and practice of language.
In sum, in fantasy play children practice and develop many essential social, cognitive and
linguistic skills, and can then apply what they learn in play sequences to the everyday
cognitive and social demands of life. Peer interaction and collaboration help to foster the
activity. Some children, however, do not have access to the peer context that can scaffold
their fantasy play. Hospitalized or otherwise isolated children suffer from exactly this
lack of peers in their exploration of the world. While computer support for young
children's collaborative learning is often focused on their school tasks such as learning
math and writing the letters of alphabet, there seems to be a need for systems that support
young children's collaborative fantasy play.

StoryMat

StoryMat is a system designed to support children's collaborative storytelling in the
context of their fantasy play. StoryMat is a soft play mat that provides an under-
determined play space for children to tell their own stories, and yet it is an "active" play
mat in that it supports children's storytelling play by recording and recalling their stories.
When children tell their stories with a toy on StoryMat, their narrating voices and the
associated movements of the toys are recorded. The recorded story is then compared with
other stories told by children who have visited the mat previously. One of the past stories
that shares a similar pattern (specifically, the length of the story, the pattern of the path
the toy took, and the identity of the toy) with the present story is recalled on the mat, as a
moving shadow of the toy with its narrator's voice. This in turn provides a space where a
child may continue the themes of the story she heard by telling her own new story. The
child may tell her subsequent story by coming up with a creative solution to the story she
just heard. Or she may continue to tell what she was telling but incorporating some story
elements from the story she just heard. In this sense, StoryMat is a kind of imaginary
playmate, but who also mediates natural collaboration between a child and her peer
group.
Generally, the stories children tell are not saved for some special occasion or just for
adults to hear. Instead, they slip unobtrusively into the flow of children's everyday play
(Miller & Sperry, 1988). Yet, if there were a space where such stories were stored for the
tellers or their peers to hear and for them to explore further, in much the style of peer
collaboration they are excellent at, the experience of storytelling might become richer.
StoryMat was designed to capture children's everyday stories to support more
connections and exchanges of stories among children. By recording and recalling
children's own stories, StoryMat offers more opportunities for children to listen to and
interpret each others' stories even in the absence of physical playmates. As a result, a
child who plays on the mat by herself could tell her stories collaboratively with stories
that were told by other children on the mat, just as she might in playing with her real
friend. And a child who plays on the mat with friends will have more stories to work with
in telling his stories, and a model of collaborative storytelling to depend on. In both cases,
collaboration among peers is exploited to foster creative storytelling on StoryMat.

StoryMat, with its soft and tangible interface that allows more natural manipulation of
digital information (Ishii & Ullmer, 1997), not only creates an emotionally engaging
environment for storytelling, but also invites more collaboration and interaction among
peers. StoryMat uses the voice and the movements children produce as input and output.
Free from the confines of typing and the general desktop arrangement, children on
StoryMat move around and narrate freely with their toys. The voices of the children
recalled and heard on the mat also contribute to creating an environment where peer
collaboration is encouraged.

In addition to providing a larger-than-themselves interface, this particular kind of quilt
serves as a unique interface for collaborative storytelling. Objects sewn on the mat are
story evoking: paths going in different directions, trees, houses, and fields of contrasting
colors. These objects serve as "story starters" for children, yet they are under-determined
enough to be transformed into any objects children imagine them to be. For example, a
house can be imagined by one child to be a candy shop and another child to be her own
home. A blue field can be a magic spring or a field filled with blue flowers. Children on
StoryMat see and hear other children's transformations of the appliqués on the mat
creations and become inspired to tell their own stories creatively.

Technical Implementation

The StoryMat itself is a soft cloth quilt with appliquéd figures on it. Software divides the
mat into 192 (16x12) areas, without any need for attached wires or grids. An ultrasonic
transmitter embedded in the small stuffed animal allows wireless tracking of the animal's
movement on the mat. Squeezing the stuffed animal triggers the computer to start
recording the child's narrating voice and the two dimensional coordinates of the stuffed
animal. When the child lets the stuffed animal go, the coordinates and the voice are
combined into a movie file and saved in the computer to be played at the appropriate
locations of the mat. When new input is subsequently encountered at the same place on
the mat, the movie file is then automatically triggered and played back via a projector
mounted above the mat, and heard through a pair of speakers next to it. The animation of
the stuffed animal is projected onto the mat and travels the course of the recorded path,
complemented by the child's recorded voice. When there are multiple sessions stored at
the same place on the mat as the new session, the one with most similar size and pattern
(the length of the story session, pattern of the path the toy took, and the identity of the
toy) as the new session is chosen to be played back. The idea is to mediate a collaboration
between a child and the peer by connecting the present stories with the past stories, but
also to have the computer play a role of a playmate by responding to the child's story
with a peer story that is similar.

The stories on StoryMat are also designed to be manipulatable objects of collaboration.
During the course of a playback, when the user squeezes the stuffed animal and begins to
tell a new ending for the played-back story, a new animation is created of child #1's
beginning and child #2's ending, and this new animation is stored in the library of
possible stories to be played back on the mat. Thus, layers of children's stories
accumulate in the library alongside original one-child stories.

StoryMat User Study

Our belief is that the StoryMat system acts as a kind of imaginary playmate or peer,
standing in for absent children when a child is playing alone on the mat, and mediating
communication between two children playing on the mat when children play together. In
this way, we believe that the StoryMat encourages creative exploration of language and
narrative in young children. In order to investigate these claims, we investigated how
playing on StoryMat impacts the experience of children who are playing alone and
playing together with a playmate, and we compared children who are playing on the
active StoryMat and children who are playing on a passive quilt. That is, groups of
children who played alone and children who played with a playmate on StoryMat were
compared with groups of children playing alone and groups of children playing with a
playmate on a passive mat. The identical quilt without the recording and recalling
function of stories is what we call the passive mat.

We recruited 36 children between the age of 5 to 8 for the study. Children were randomly
assigned into one of two groups: 1) StoryMat group, who played on StoryMat and 2) a
control group, who played on the passive mat. In each group, 6 children played alone and
12 children played with another playmate, resulting in 6 dyads and 6 singles in each
group.

The children played on StoryMat or the passive mat for 15 minutes. The first 10 minutes
of discourse were collected from all the child participants. All the 36 children's speech, a
total of 24 10-minute sessions (12 singles and 12 dyads sessions) were transcribed.

We analyzed the transcripts in two ways, to examine the two claims expressed above.
First we looked at whether StoryMat provides a place for collaborative storytelling, and
how collaboration was expressed among dyads and with solitary children. We analyzed
the transcripts by examining the number of story elements from other children's stories
incorporated by the children in different groups. Second, we looked at whether more or
less developmentally advanced types of fantasy storytelling play were fostered by
children using StoryMat in the different conditions. We analyzed the transcripts by
investigating how children used different identity roles in their fantasy play.

(1) Incorporations

In fantasy play, children include others' make-believe games into their own by
transforming objects, acts, or themes that follow a sequence or order (Singer & Singer,
1990). In order to investigate collaborative storytelling on StoryMat, we looked at
incorporations of language style and story elements. That is, incorporations of a particular
style of saying a word or a phrase, and incorporations of particular fantasy objects. The
following is a discourse segment of a child who played in a dyad on StoryMat, which
illustrates such an incorporation.

      Girl (8-year-old)

      [note: the words in italics indicate a peer story provided by StoryMat]

      Let's see what this yellow house is. It doesn't look like a garage. click
      click click [child makes sounds]. No answer. Let's try this one. Click click
      click. There might be a note inside like our houses. Let's go look. No
      nothing. Wait, here's something! It says `this is a mysterious music pad.
      Go on it and have some fun.

      Oh, boy! A mysterious music palette! That's so much fun! Come on!
      Look, it's a piano! All I have to do is say something, and it turns on!

In this example, the child hears a StoryMat story with the unusual story element of a
`mysterious music pad'. Immediately afterwards, she incorporated that element into her
own story, and continued the story in that vein.

By incorporation we mean either a story theme from a StoryMat story or a clear linguistic
register from a StoryMat story that are subsequently used by the current child playing on
the mat. The number of incorporated language style and story elements per session was
compared across the groups. We were interested here in a 4-way comparison among the
groups, as shown in the following graph:
The dyads on StoryMat had more incorporations than any other group. Detailed analysis
of the results showed that the dyads on StoryMat incorporated elements both from their
co-temporal, co-spatial peer and StoryMat. This result is interesting as it provides an
evidence for a child being able to collaborate with StoryMat stories at the same time as
with a physical playmate. The single children on StoryMat also incorporated elements
from StoryMat stories as much as a child did from a peer on the passive mat. This result
also provides evidence for a child being able to collaborate with StoryMat stories in much
the same way as children collaborate with other children.

The result showed that both the dyads and the singles on StoryMat incorporated elements
from stories provided by StoryMat. By incorporating others' story elements into their
own stories within their dynamic story frame (Singer & Singer, 1990), the children on
StoryMat told stories in much the way they might with a real life peer. StoryMat was able
to play a role of a playmate by responding to the children's story with a peer story that
was similar.

(2) Speaker Identity

It is clear from the above result that StoryMat supports collaborative activity, in children
playing alone and playing together. What is the nature of this activity? Are children
actually telling stories in the way they might with flesh-and-blood playmates? In order to
investigate this question, we looked at one very robust measure of `narrativity' -- the
ability to shift back and forth between the roles of character, narrator, and everyday
person. This aspect of narrativity is particularly interesting as it is just being acquired in
the pre-school to early-schooling age range that we examined in our study.

Thus, the average percentages of different roles taken by a child in telling a story were
compared across the groups. The following graph shows the results:
The results show that the single children on the passive mat mainly took the character
role. The very rare use of the narrator role among children in this group reflects the fact
that the children did not introduce quotes of a character (i.e. "Then he said, `Oh, no!'"),
but rather only acted as characters (i.e. "Oh, no!"). The exclusive use of character voice
characterizes children's pretend play rather than fantasy storytelling, and is a
comparatively younger form of play (Auwarter, 1986). Children are enacting the
different roles in their fantasy situation, but not narrating them.

The single children on StoryMat took the narrator's role most of the time, but also took
the character role fairly often. These results indicate that single children on StoryMat
were engaging in storytelling rather than pure fantasy play. When a character's words are
introduced with verbs of saying (said, yelled, told), the story becomes understandable by
others and becomes more self-sufficient (Scarlett & Wolf, 1979). The single children on
StoryMat both acted out as a character and told stories about the character. But they
seemed to successfully mix the two roles to tell stories, rather than engaging solely in
pretend play.

The dyads on the passive mat took three different roles, everyday, character, and narrator.
In the everyday personality role, they had a conversation with their peers as a way of
scaffolding an unfolding story (e.g. "Let's do a school story -- you be the principal!").
They used this role extremely rarely, however. The dyads on the passive mat mainly used
the character role, and occasionally the narrator role. The fact that they used the character
role more than the narrator role indicates that the dyads on the passive mat were more
engaged in pretend play than storytelling. This contrasts with both the singles and the
dyads on StoryMat.

The dyads on StoryMat also took three different roles. They had a conversation with their
peer as an everyday person, used a character role, and used a narrator role. As mentioned
earlier, an interesting contrast between the dyads on the passive mat and the dyads on
StoryMat is the use of the narrator role. The fact that they used the narrator role more
than other roles indicates that they were narrating and were able to mix other roles. The
notable difference between the two dyad groups is that StoryMat dyads narrated most of
the time while those on the passive mat spoke as characters most of the time. The
balanced mixture of roles displayed by the dyads on the StoryMat is the most
characteristic of mature storytelling.

The results suggest that StoryMat provides a place where children are encouraged to
narrate rather than to engage in pretend play. As explained by Scarlett and Wolf (1979),
storytelling with the help of a narrating voice allows others to understand the intention of
the author. The audience has to be able to construe what is happening within the story. By
connecting children's present stories with the past stories, StoryMat seems to create an
environment where a child is encouraged to engage in this kind of mature audience-
focused storytelling.

Discussion

The proceeding analyses of the children's storytelling process show that the single
children on StoryMat told stories by taking a narrator's role but also used a character role
to act out some of their imaginary characters. This contrasted with the single children on
the passive mat who predominately took a character role. By using the character role in
conjunction with a narrator role, the single children on StoryMat created a world of
stories that is more self-sufficient (Scarlett & Wolf, 1979). The single children on
StoryMat were also able to switch between different roles to introduce more complex
narrative utterances (Auwarter, 1986).

A similar contrast was observed between the dyads on StoryMat and the dyads on the
passive mat. The dyads on StoryMat mainly used a narrator's role but in conjunction with
a character role, whereas the dyads on the passive mat predominately used a character
role. These results suggest that StoryMat fosters developmentally advanced storytelling.

It was also shown that the dyads on StoryMat produced the high number of
incorporations. That is because the dyads on StoryMat had two collaborators, a peer and
StoryMat stories. The dyads on StoryMat incorporated elements both from their peer and
StoryMat stories. But, importantly, single children playing on the StoryMat incorporated
as many elements from the stories that the mat told as two children playing on a passive
mat incorporated from each other's stories. These results provide evidence for StoryMat
offering a place for collaborative storytelling for children with or without a co-temporal
co-spatial playmate. For children who play alone, StoryMat plays an imaginary playmate
by offering peer stories. For children who play together with a playmate, stories offered
by StoryMat serve objects of their collaboration in addition to the ones offered by a
physical playmate.

Conclusions

This paper presented the design framework and some results from a user study of the
StoryMat system. By offering peer stories, StoryMat seems to provide a place where
children are able to practice and foster their storytelling skills. By offering peer stories,
StoryMat also seems to offer a place for a child to experience collaborative storytelling
regardless of the absence of a co-temporal and co-spatial playmate. The children on
StoryMat listened to peer stories offered by StoryMat in much like the way they do with
the stories offered by real life peers. In fantasy play, collaboration among peers is
important and technology can step in as a key member of the peer group, like an
imaginary playmate with an active imagination.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the members of the Gesture and Narrative Language group and
others at the MIT Media Lab for their collaboration and help.

References

Auwarter, M. (1986). Development of Communicative Skills: The construction of fictional reality in
children's play. In Cook-Gumperz, J. (Ed.), Children's Worlds and Children's Language. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.

Baker-Sennett, J., Matusov, E. & Rogoff, B. (1992). Sociocultural processes of creative planning in
children's playcrafting. In P. Light & G. Butterworth (Eds.), Context and cognition: Ways of learning and
knowing. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Corsaro, W. (1992). Interpretive reproduction in children's peer cultures. Social Psychological Quarterly,
55, 160-177.

Damon, W. (1983). Social and Personality Development. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

Fein, G. (1987). Pretend Play: Creativity and Consciousness. In Gorlitz, D. & Wohlwill, J. (Eds.) Curiosity,
Imagination, and Play, Mahwah, N.J.: Erlbaum.

Fein, G., & Fryer, M. (1995). Maternal contributions to early symbolic play competence. Developmental
Review, 15, 367-381.

Ishii, H., & Ulllmer, B. (1997). Tangible Bits: Towards Seamless Interfaces between People, Bits, and
Atoms. In Proceedings of CHI '97, ACM.

Leslie, A. M. (1987). Pretense and Representation: The Origins of "Theory of Mind," Psychological
Review, 94, 412-422.

Miller, L. (1979). The idea of conflict: a study of the development of story understanding. New Direction
for Child Development, 6, 41-51.

Miller, P., & Sperry, L. (1988). Early talk about the past: the origins of conversational stories of personal
experience. Child Language, 15, 293-315.

Nicolich, L. M. (1977). Beyond sensorimotor intelligence: Assessment of symbolic maturity through
analysis of pretend play. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 23, 89-99.
Nicolopoulou, A. (1996). Narrative Development in Social Context. In D.I. Slobin, J. Gerhardt, A.
Kyratzis, and J. Guo, (Eds.), Social Interaction, Social Context, and Language: Essays in Honor of Susan
Ervin-Tripp. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Parten, M. (1932). Social participation among pre-school children. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 1932, 27, 243-68.

Peller, L. E. (1955). Libidinal phases, ego development and play. Psychoanalysis, 1955, 3(3), 3-12.

Scarlett, W. G., & Wolf, D. (1979). When It's Only Make-Believe: The Construction of a Boundary
Between Fantasy and Reality in Storytelling. New Directions for Child Development, 6, 29-40.

Singer, D. G., & Singer, J. L. (1990). The House of Make-Believe: children's play and the developing
imagination. Cambridge, M.A.,: Harvard University Press.

Vygotsky, L. S. (1967). Play and its role in the mental development of the child. Soviet Psychology, 1967,
12, 62-76.

Whiting, B. & Whiting, J. (1975). Children of six cultures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Authors' Address

Kimiko Ryokai & Justine Cassell
MIT Media Laboratory
E15-320R
20 Ames Street
Cambridge MA, 02139 USA
[kimiko, justine]@media.mit.edu
