Imagery as Data: Structures for Visual Model Building
Brian K Smith & Erik Blankinship

MIT Media Laboratory

      Abstract: Scientific visualization tools render quantitative data into visual
      representations that can be analyzed and manipulated by students. But
      certain problems require more qualitative, observational data that cannot
      be easily represented with current visualization software. This paper
      describes an approach to using photographs and video as a primary data
      source for observational inquiry. We describe a framework for students to
      collaborate around photographs and video, collaboration that leads to
      inquiry and the development of explanatory models. We also describe two
      of our learning environments to illustrate how students can begin to
      develop predictive theories from image data.

      Keywords: digital imaging, explanation, modeling, problem-based
      learning

Introduction

Techniques and tools from scientific visualization hold great promise for changing the
ways that students conduct classroom inquiry (Gordin & Pea, 1995). By representing
large quantities of quantitative data visually, students can begin to grasp complex ideas
that were once foreign to classroom activities. For many problem domains, the visual
representations provided by scientific visualizations are simpler to master and manipulate
than symbolic and numerical ones, allowing students to more easily detect patterns and
make sense of complex data. Instead of simply memorizing and applying formulas and
algorithms, students can use static and dynamic visualizations to gain a deeper
understanding of domain phenomena through authentic activities.

Most applications of scientific visualization map quantitative data into visual
representations. For instance, temperature may be displayed as a color spectrum, with red
being the hottest points, blue being the coolest points. Such mappings work when
numerical data can be collected, but many problems require more qualitative,
observational data in order to be explained. For instance, census values can tell us a great
deal about the population of migrating animals, but we may need other sorts of
observational data to understand why their numbers are increasing or decreasing. In this
paper, we discuss ways to use observational data in visualization and modeling activities.
Rather than map numerical quantities into graphical forms, we use ordinary photographs
and video clips as primary sources of data. Imagery can provide evidence for claims
about observable processes and behaviors, and our research provides students with tools
to analyze and generalize explanations from still and moving images.
In this paper, we describe a class of activities where students use photographs and video
to investigate and explain complex phenomena. By removing the narratives and captions
that generally accompany images and film, we create situations where students must
discover visual patterns for themselves. Once patterns are discovered, they develop
qualitative models to generalize their findings and make predictions about additional,
related visual data. In this way, we shift from the use of imagery as an information source
to imagery as data to facilitate model building and explanation.

We describe a framework for developing models from image data and two learning
environments for high schools that embody the framework. The first, Animal Landlord,
presents digitized nature films to students exploring issues in behavioral ecology. These
students annotate and compare film clips to produce qualitative models of predator-prey
behaviors. The second application, Image Maps, presents students with historical images
of their communities that are used to develop understandings of urban planning and
cultural change. In both cases, students collaborate around image data to construct
qualitative models of observable processes (i.e., predation behaviors, community
change). The remainder of the paper describes how students use images in inquiry tasks.

Why imagery?

Visual events are rich with opportunities for students to pose questions and reflect on
behaviors and processes (Bransford, Franks, Vye, & Sherwood, 1989; Collins & Brown,
1988; Wetzel, Radtke, & Stern, 1994). Teachers can encourage students to think about
events and anomalies present in the imagery, including issues not explicitly mentioned in
a film's narration or a photograph's caption. Being able to view moments in time with
photographs and video can also facilitate learning ó watching a lion chase its prey or
seeing the styles of dress in the 1940's is dramatically different than simply reading about
animal behavior or history. And because imagery maintains a historical record, students
can return to it, reexamine it, and continue to learn from it. As a result, imagery
establishes a context for problem solving, for generalizing explanations from pictorial
evidence.

Imagery as data

However, photographs and video are not typically thought of as artifacts for problem
solving and inquiry; they are more likely to be treated as "visual aids" to accompany text
or audio information. For video, we can draw distinctions between video as information
and video as data (Nardi, Kuchinsky, Whittaker, Leichner, & Schwartz, 1996; Whittaker
& O'Conaill, 1997). The former treats video as an additional sensory channel
accompanied by text and/or audio information. In educational films, narratives provide
most of the content, creating self-contained "lectures" complemented with visuals
(Erdman, 1990).

While there can be useful content in such films, getting students to generate their own
questions and hypotheses around video can also be instructive. Video as data assumes
that viewers will analyze and interpret the visual information for themselves. More so,
video as data provides opportunities for collaboration between teachers and students, as
problem solving becomes the central task. For instance, there are learning environments
that allow students to analyze properties of motion (Cappo & Darling, 1996; Rubin,
Bresnahan, & Ducas, 1996; Rubin & Win, 1994) and kinesiology (Gross, 1998) with
digital video. With these, students measure physical phenomena directly from video clips
to develop quantitative stories about distance, rate, and time relationships or how muscle
movements relate to human actions. Educational television formats can also present
contexts for using imagery as data. For instance, The Adventures of Jasper Woodbury
provide problems to be solved and clues to their solution (Barron et al., 1998), rather than
giving away solutions as many educational films do (Ellsworth, 1990).

Similarly, Goldman-Segall's Learning Constellations (1997) allows students and teachers
to become "multimedia ethnographers" as they study video of their classroom practices.
Nardi et al. (1996) use video to facilitate real-time collaboration during neurosurgery.
Medical students use the same video clips after surgery to understand the demands of
operating room practices. And collaboration around video also plays a role in Media
Fusion, a system integrating digitized video with quantitative data tools (e.g.,
spreadsheets) for students to back imagery with numerical evidence for problems
(Bellamy, 1996).

Investigating and modeling with image data

In all of these applications, students use video as data to conduct authentic inquiry around
a problem. We build upon this previous work by stressing the role of photographs and
video in our learning environments. Expert practitioners often use imagery in their
research as a basis for developing models and theories about phenomena. For instance,
behavioral ecologists might use videos of animals to study and analyze behaviors and
patterns. Urban planners often use historical images to make decisions about future
zoning and construction issues. Students can also engage in this use of imagery as data to
develop models and predictions of visual events. Just as students can learn by analyzing
and modeling quantitative data (e.g., Jackson, Stratford, Krajcik & Soloway, 1995;
Mandinach & Cline, 1994), we suspect that much can be learned through similar
activities with image data.

Students need support to become active observers and investigators of visual data. In
particular, if we want them to develop causal explanations and models from visual data,
they will need task structures to facilitate the inquiry process. Students can learn by
generating questions and hypotheses for themselves, but they also need to understand
what makes a good question, a reasonable hypothesis. More so, they need to understand
how to assemble photographs and video into explanatory models. Our imaging
applications are designed to explicitly model expert strategies for investigation (Tabak,
Smith, Sandoval, & Reiser, 1996), articulating strategic knowledge needed to explain
complex events and processes with image data.

Strategic activity

Assembling a causal story about complex behavior means organizing observational data
into coherent structures or models for explanation. It means thinking about the types of
actions or events involved in the process and understanding how they influence final
outcomes. Through consulting with experts in several domains, we developed a structure
for constructing explanatory models from image data. That structure defines four steps
that assist in building models from casual observations of still and moving images:

   1.  Decompose. Complex processes consist of many constituent, related actions.
       Interactions between predators and prey, for instance, must progress through
       stages of detection, stalking, chasing, and finally capturing. The changes in a
       city's major modes of transport may progress from horses to trains to automobiles.
       Identifying these components provides the building blocks for the remaining
       strategic steps.
   2.  Compare. It is not enough to analyze a single film or photograph of a complex
       process. Our students investigate libraries of video and images and compare them
       to look for similar events. By looking for variations in a routine or across time,
       students can identify patterns that may prove critical to explaining the process.
   3.  Identify factors. Once variations are detected through comparison, students need
       to perform additional analyses to determine the factors influencing the variance.
       For example, one might observe that trees are disappearing over time in a
       collection of urban photographs. To explain why this is the case, it is necessary to
       look deeper at the images, to identify additional factors that may account for the
       disappearance (e.g., the number of electrical poles are increasing).
   4.  Model. With variations and influencing factors identified, students can generalize
       causal models that explain the phenomenon under investigation. These may take
       the form of decision trees explaining the flow of an event or causal chains
       describing changes over time. Regardless of the form, the modeling step creates
       an explanatory framework that can be used to predict and design future
       configurations of the problem space.

This investigation model provides structure for analyzing complex, observable processes,
whether that means field observations or observations of imagery. While students are
accustomed to looking at photographs and films, they are not necessarily accustomed to
making fine-grained observations and explanations with imagery. The investigation
model helps them move from raw image data to predictive theories about observable
phenomena. We also provide domain-specific heuristics to help students understand the
types of questions to ask during their investigations. For instance, in behavioral ecology,
asking about costs and benefits of particular behaviors is a good strategy when trying to
explain how and why an action has evolved. In urban planning, one may want to look for
variations in land use patterns to understand how neighborhoods arise.

Explaining animal behavior with video

To understand how the investigation model is instantiated in curricular materials, we
provide two examples of learning environments that we have developed. The first is
concerned with animal behavior. Nature documentary films are commonly used in
biology classrooms to introduce concepts in animal behavior, but they tend to provide
descriptive overviews of behavior, neglecting many interesting causal processes in favor
of straightforward outcomes. For instance, a film might mention that a creature performs
a particular behavior without explaining the complexities of how and why it does so.
Narration is the primary source of knowledge in such educational films (Ellsworth, 1990;
Erdman, 1990), yet there is a great deal of implicit information in the video that students
can observe and explain for themselves.

We developed a video environment, called Animal Landlord, for high school students to
investigate the hunting behaviors of the Serengeti lion (Smith & Reiser, 1997; Smith &
Reiser, 1998). Only 15-30% of all hunts attempted by lions result in successful capture
(Bertram, 1979) and understanding the reasons for this requires investigating the causal
interactions between the lion, its prey, and the environment. Students become field
researchers with digitized nature films, working to understanding how and why lions and
their prey interact during the hunt. In conducting their investigations, they explore topics
in behavioral ecology such as social organization, resource competition, variation
between individuals and species, and environmental pressures.

Animal Landlord provides support for the investigation structure described earlier (Figure
1). Students decompose hunting sequences into important actions using an annotation
tool. For each action identified, they also record observations (e.g., What do we observe
as 'predator stalks prey'? It follows at the rear and crouches down low.") and
interpretations (e.g., "What can we interpret or ask about 'predator picks target'? The
lionesses probably chose the fat one because it would provide the most meat.") that are
later used to construct behavioral models. There is also a tool for comparing these
collections of annotated videos, allowing students to detect similarities and differences
across filmed events. Students use the comparison tool to identify reasons for variation in
the films. For instance, by lining up all actions marked "Predator stalks prey", students
can visually inspect all films to see how stalking actions differ (e.g., the type of prey, the
amount of ground cover). These factors can then be used to describe evolutionary reasons
for the variation.
Figure 1: Activities in Animal Landlord. From left to right, students observe nature films,
 annotate them with significant events, compare across films to identify variations and
 factors leading to them, and, finally, produce decision tree models to explain predator-
                               prey interactions.

Students create models of the possible predator-prey interactions that can occur during a
hunting episode. They currently do this by taking their video annotations and creating
decision trees on posters. These trees represent the space of all hunting decisions made by
predator and prey during the observed videos. The poster-sized decision trees are
displayed around the classroom, and teachers lead whole-class discussions to help
students think about the evolutionary reasons for the paths through the tree. For instance,
a teacher might focus on a node marked "Predator ignores prey" to get students
discussing the energy costs related to predation. Such a discussion might also lead to
discussions of variance between male and female lions, why their energy costs might
differ, hence their different hunting behaviors. In other words, the decision trees allow
students (and teachers) to question why certain behaviors seem to reoccur during hunting
and to examine behavioral transistions in light of optimization and evolutionary
adaptation.

The decision trees are also used when viewing nature films after the computer
intervention. That is, whenever additional hunting films are shown in class, students use
their decision trees to make predictions about the behaviors of the animals and to refine
their models if needed. For example, a film on chimpanzees might violate the students'
models, for chimps ó unlike lions ó hunt better when there is less vegetation in the area.
This causes the students to generalize their original models to include creatures like
chimpanzees. In this way, we tried to make all classroom nature film exercises
incorporate model testing and refinement after the Animal Landlord intervention.

Pretest-posttest evaluations of Animal Landlord in classrooms showed students
articulating more justifications about predator-prey behaviors following the intervention
behaviors (F(1, 42) = 14.14, p < .001). These justifications also showed more causality
than the naïve, anthropomorphic and teleological explanations (Tamir & Zohar, 1991)
given prior to the interventions (x^2 (2) = 14.97, p < .001). These results are highly
dependent on the teacher developing a culture of argumentation around nature films
(Smith & Reiser, 1997; Smith & Reiser, 1998). Students do not work in isolation on these
problems; they collaborate in small-group and whole-class discussions around the
investigation model and software tools. In small groups of 3-4 students, students analyze
a subset of videos to develop decision trees. In a Jigsaw fashion (Aronson, 1978),
members of these groups rotate around the classroom to critique others and to finally
assemble a complete, whole-class model of hunting. In the end, students no longer sit
quietly and watch nature films; they now engage in collaborative argument around the
adaptive behaviors of predator and prey.

Explaining community change with photographs

Our second example explores urban planning and community change with historical
photographs. The seemingly ordinary landscapes that we live in contain a great deal of
history that goes unnoticed by most residents of a community. When students are taught
to explore their outdoor surroundings, they become more aware of the intricacies of man-
made environments (Stilgoe, 1998). Not only can they begin to appreciate architectural
patterns, they may begin questioning and posing hypotheses about historical and social
aspects of their communities. For instance, the high rent district of Cambridge,
Massachusetts still holds evidence of its industrial past, and observant students may begin
to wonder when the area shifted to high-technology. A key to answering such a question
lies in the historical images of Cambridge. By making these images accessible to
students, we hope to develop new ways for them to collaborate and investigate how and
why local communities have evolved over time.

Figure 2: An "out of the box" look at the Image Maps hardware. A Kodak DC260 digital
 camera is attached to a Trimble Lassen SK-8 GPS and a Precision Navigation TCM-80
                             digital compass.
Camera historica

Careful observation of the present can yield interesting questions, but we also need to
provide students with a glimpse of a community's past. The photographs found in a local,
historical archive are well suited for developing a story of a community's past, but these
are typically difficult for the general public to access. To gain access to these image
collections, we send students into their communities to become urban researchers armed
with a digital camera augmented with a global positioning system (GPS) and a digital
compass (Figure 2). When students take photographs, the position and orientation of the
camera are recorded directly into the digital image file. By integrating geographical
information systems (GIS) with multimedia (Kraak, 1996; Spohrer, 1998), we can record
a "geo-referenced" trail of students' photographs that can be used for inquiry. And, as
opposed to Animal Landlord, students are now responsible for collecting field data as
well as producing models from imagery.

Students go outside their schools to take seemingly ordinary photographs of buildings in
their neighborhoods. When they return to their classrooms and download their images
into an application we have developed, they can peer into the past. Our program parses
each image, extracts the position metadata, and performs a search (Tsui, 1998) of a
Cambridge GIS map to return the name of the photographed building. By identifying the
current building, we can retrieve and display historical images of the photographed
location (Figure 3). In this way, our camera provides a window into the past: students
photograph the present and receive historical images for their investigations of
community change.
  Figure 3: Modeling community change with Image Maps. Students photograph their
  communities and annotate the images with features that appear to be changing. They
compare their images against historical photographs retrieved by our software. They then
              construct causal models of patterns in the community.

Once historical images are retrieved and displayed, students can begin annotating and
comparing them. Photographs are annotated with features that appear to change over
decades. For instance, a trail of Cambridge photographs shows the evolution of
transportation from horses to railways to automobiles. Students can mark photos with
appropriate labels (e.g., "automobiles", "trains") and search on these tags to retrieve
similar photos from different eras. We want this activity help them notice how similar
features may vary across time.

More importantly, student can begin to build models of how and why their local
communities have changed over time. The models that they construct are based on the
architectural patterns described in (Alexander, Ishikawa, & Silverstein, 1977). A
problem/theme is chosen (e.g., "Crosswalks for people"), the context for the problem is
described (e.g., pedestrian traffic is conflicting with transportation), and solutions are
provided in the form of historical images. In the crosswalk case, students would construct
a causal chain illustrating the progression from unmarked pavement to marked
crosswalks. After constructing a number of chains, they can return to the field to see how
well their generalizations hold up in unexplored parts of the city. That is, the exercise
does not conclude with a single community outing; we expect students to iterate on their
hypotheses. For instance, if they think that Harvard Square was rearranged to minimize
traffic flow, they may need to return to the location to discover how traffic was rerouted.
Additional photographs in the present lead to historical pictures that may help them
discover the answer to traffic routing issues.

As with Animal Landlord, students use image data to create models of "behavior"; in this
case, the behaviors are changes in a community over time. As well, students will
collaborate and argue around these data to develop hypotheses about change. For
instance, we may divide a class into groups where each one studies a sector of the city.
As a class, they can assemble a more complete model of community change than a single
group could on its own. We also imagine that much discussion and debate will revolve
around the causal chains that students produce. Teachers will be responsible for helping
students make use of investigation strategies as they go into the world to collect their data
and to moderate arguments around their hypotheses.

Conclusion

With Animal Landlord and Image Maps, students use imagery as data to construct
explanatory models of complex processes ó the interactions of predators and their prey
and the changes in a community's architecture. They also share the same investigation
model, the process of annotating, comparing, identifying factors, and creating predictive
models to explain the image data. 300+ students in 12 Chicago-area classrooms have
used Animal Landlord, and a new set of students will use it in the fall of 1999 with video
content tailored for a unit on conservation biology. As with the original version, we hope
to see students developing causal justifications of behaviors and their importance for
making conservation decisions. The Image Maps project is also scheduled to deploy in
the fall of 1999.

We are working towards a new class of visualization and modeling applications that use
imagery as a primary data source for inquiry. Rather than simply looking at photographs
or watching videos, we would like to see students arguing and debating over differences
in image data. While most scientific visualization tools map quantitative data into visual
representations, our students work directly with image data, constructing qualitative
models to predict future outcomes and events. Because students often lack an
understanding for the importance of modeling (Grosslight, Unger, Jay, & Smith, 1991;
Schauble, Glaser, Duschl, Schulze, & John, 1995), we imagine that the immediacy and
concrete qualities of imagery may be an appropriate way to scaffold students into more
complex, quantitative modeling tasks. The applications described in this paper represent a
first step towards reusing existing photographs and video for inquiry learning and model
construction.
Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Brian J. Reiser for his role in advising the development of
Animal Landlord. The Image Maps have benefited from the gracious donation of many
decades of historical photographs from the Cambridge Historical Commission and
development assistance from Michael Baker, Alfred Ashford III, and Timothy Hirzel.
The James S. McDonnell Foundation and a Patricia Roberts Harris fellowship from the
United States Department of Education funded the original implementation of Animal
Landlord. Image Maps is supported by the MIT Media Laboratory's News in the Future
Consortium and donations from Eastman Kodak. We also thank our anonymous
reviewers for helpful suggestions.

Bibliography

Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., & Silverstein, M. (1977). A Pattern Language: Towns,
Buildings, Construction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Aronson, E. (1978). The Jigsaw Classroom. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.

Barron, B.J.S., Schwartz, D.L., Vye, N.J., Moore, A., Petrosino, A., Zech, L., Bransford,
J.D., & the Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1998). Doing with
understanding: Lessons from research on problem- and project-based learning. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7(3&4), 271-311.

Bellamy, R.K.E. (1996). Designing educational technology: Computer-mediated change.
In B.A. Nardi (Ed.), Context and Consciousness: Activity Theory and Human-Computer
Interaction (pp. 123-146). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Bertram, B.C.R. (1979). Serengeti predators and their social systems. In A.R.E. Sinclair
& M. Norton-Griffiths (Eds.), Serengeti: Dynamics of an Ecosystem (pp. 223-248).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bransford, J.D., Franks, J.J., Vye, N.J., & Sherwood, R.D. (1989). New approaches to
instruction: Because wisdom can't be told. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and Analogical Reasoning (pp. 470-497). New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Cappo, M. & Darling, K. (1996). Measurement in Motion. Communications of the ACM,
39(8), 91-93.

Collins, A. & Brown, J.S. (1988). The computer as a tool for learning through reflection.
In H. Mandl & A. Lesgold (Eds.), Learning Issues for Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp.
1-18). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Ellsworth, E. (1990). Educational films against critical pedagogy. In E. Ellsworth & M.H.
Whatley (Eds.), The Ideology of Images in Educational Media: Hidden Curriculums in
the Classroom (pp. 10-26). New York: Teachers College Press.

Erdman, B. (1990). The closely guided viewer: Form, style, and teaching in the
educational film. In E. Ellsworth & M.H. Whatley (Eds.), The Ideology of Images in
Educational Media: Hidden Curriculums in the Classroom (pp. 27-42). New York:
Teachers College Press.

Goldman-Segall, R. (1997). Points of Viewing Children's Thinking: A Digital
Ethnographer's Journey. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Gordin, D.N. & Pea, R.D. (1995). Prospects for scientific visualization as an educational
technology. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(3), 249-279.

Gross, M.M. (1998). Analysis of human movement using digital video. Journal of
Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 7(4), 375-395.

Grosslight, L., Unger, C., Jay, E., & Smith, C.L. (1991). Understanding models and their
use in science: Conceptions of middle and high school students and experts. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 28(9), 799-822.

Jackson, S.L., Stratford, S.J., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (1995). Making systems
dynamics modeling accessible to pre-college science students. Paper presented at the
Annual Meeting of the National Association on Research on Science Teaching. San
Francisco, CA.

Kraak, M.-J. (1996). Integrating multimedia in geographical information systems. IEEE
Multimedia, 3(2), 59-65.

Mandinach, E.B. & Cline, H.F. (1994). Classroom Dynamics: Implementing a
Technology-Based Learning Environment. Maywah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Nardi, B.A., Kuchinsky, A., Whittaker, S., Leichner, R., & Schwarz, H. (1996). Video-
as-data: Technical and social aspects of a collaborative multimedia application. Computer
Supported Collaborative Work, 4, 73-100.

Rubin, A., Bresnahan, S., & Ducas, T. (1996). Cartwheeling through CamMotion.
Communications of the ACM, 39(8), 84-85.

Rubin, A. & Win, D. (1994). Studying motion with KidVid: A data collection and
analysis tool for digitized video. In Conference Companion to CHI '94 (pp. 13-14), New
York: ACM Press.
Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R.A., Schulze, S., & John, J. (1995). Students'
understanding of the objectives and procedures of experimentation in the science
classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(2), 131-166.

Smith, B.K. & Reiser, B.J. (1997). What should a wildebeest say? Interactive nature films
for high school classrooms. In ACM Multimedia 97 Proceedings (pp. 193-201), New
York: ACM Press.

Smith, B.K. & Reiser, B.J. (1998). National Geographic unplugged: Classroom-centered
design of interactive nature films. In Proceedings of the CHI 98 Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 424-431), New York: ACM Press.

Spohrer, J. (1998). Worldboard: What comes after the WWW? Available:
http://www.worldboard.org/pub/spohrer/wbconcept/default.html.

Stilgoe, J.R. (1998). Outside Lies Magic: Regaining History and Awareness in Everyday
Places. New York: Walker and Company.

Tabak, I., Smith, B.K., Sandoval, W.A., & Reiser, B.J. (1996). Combining general and
domain-specific strategic support for biological inquiry. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 288-296), London:
Springer Verlag.

Tamir, P. & Zohar, A. (1991). Anthropomorphism and teleology in reasoning about
biological phenomena. Science Education, 75(1), 57-67.

Tsui, C. (1998). Multimedia Data Integration and Retrieval in Planning Support Systems.
Unpublished M.S. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Wetzel, C.D., Radtke, P.H., & Stern, H.W. (1994). Instructional Effectiveness of Video
Media. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Whittaker, S. & O'Conaill, B. (1997). The role of vision in face-to-face and mediated
communication. In K.E. Finn, A.J. Sellen, & S.B. Wilbur (Eds.), Video-Mediated
Communication (pp. 23-49). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Authors' addresses

Brian K Smith (bsmith@media.mit.edu)
MIT Media Laboratory; 20 Ames Street; Cambridge, MA 02139; Tel. (617) 253 6537.
Fax (617) 258-7444.
Erik Blankinship (erikb@media.mit.edu)
MIT Media Laboratory; 20 Ames Street; Cambridge, MA 02139; Tel. (617) 253 1401.
Fax (617) 258-7444.
