A Lab by Any Other Name: Integrating Traditional
Labs and Computer-Supported Collaborative
Investigations in Science Classrooms

Matthew Brown and Daniel C. Edelson

Northwestern University, Institute for the Learning Sciences and School of Education and
Social Policy

      Abstract: Among the most common form of collaborative discourse in
      middle school science classrooms is the carefully planned laboratory
      investigation, where groups of students follow prescribed procedures in
      order to reproduce and measure some scientifically explainable event.
      While there are clear pedagogical benefits to replicating scientific
      processes in a controlled classroom setting, students often have difficulty
      comprehending how such phenomena manifest on larger scales and
      connecting their lab results to the real world. The WorldWatcher data
      visualization software adds a novel dimension to classroom investigations
      by allowing students to investigate and discuss global climate phenomena
      within a globally situated geographic context. This paper will discuss the
      design of an integrated classroom curricular unit on global warming in
      which WorldWatcher activities and traditional classroom labs complement
      each other in order to support student collaboration in classroom science
      investigations. Based on analyses of students collaborating in pairs and in
      whole-class discussions, we will argue that our two-pronged approach to
      curriculum design represents an effective framework for introducing
      innovative computer-supported inquiry tools in urban middle school
      science classrooms while remaining sensitive to the existing practices of
      teachers and students in these contexts.

      Keywords: curriculum, project-based learning, inquiry, design framework,
      conceptual change, partnering, shared knowledge

I. Introduction: beyond traditional science labs

The role of traditional labs

Among the most common form of collaborative discourse in middle school science
classrooms is the traditional classroom lab experiment, where students engage in
prescribed tasks involving controlled variables, measurement tools, and data collection in
order to observe or deduce some scientifically explainable event. In a typical lab, students
may discuss a scientific phenomenon, make predictions, design an experiment , and
discuss findings. Typically, such labs focus on isolated scientific phenomena, where
classroom scale events are reproduced in an easily digestible format.

Traditional labs can help students to sharpen their investigation skills, facilitate
understanding of the scientific method, and make difficult to comprehend events visible
within a straightforward setting that allows novices to interact with scientific ideas.
Furthermore, labs provide opportunities for students to work together (whether it be to
design experiments, solve problems, or analyze outcomes) and provide stimulus for
group discussions around a set of commonly observed events.

Limitations of traditional labs

However, there is a wide range of scientific topics which involve abstract, large-scale
phenomena which are difficult to replicate on a classroom scale. For example, students
investigating the issue of global climate change must understand concepts such as global
variations in incoming solar energy, albedo (the reflectivity of solar energy), and carbon
emissions, and how these factors correlate with surface temperature, surface
characteristics, and human population. These concepts and the relationships among them
are difficult to comprehend with conventional lab tools. In the absence of a means to
explore the global datasets required for such investigations, the potential scope and scale
of scientific inquiry is significantly narrowed.

Furthermore, most traditional classroom lab experiments simplify and decontextualize
scientific phenomena such that novices fail to see their connections to scientific events
outside the classroom. Research on student conceptions of scientific phenomena reveals
that students often fail to make meaningful connections between scientific knowledge
acquired in the classroom and "everyday events" (e.g., McCloskey, 1984; Reif & Larkin,
1991). Also, students are challenged to connect the experimental procedures of classroom
labs with larger scientific issuesó they have difficulty understanding the goals of science
experiments and are often unable to coordinate investigation strategies with the
explanation of science concepts. In their discussion of studentsí understanding of
classroom experimentation, Schauble et. al. (1995) point out the difficulties that students
have making connections between classroom experimentation and events in the world.
Traditional approaches to classroom science investigations "reflect the somewhat
artificial fragmentation of science into isolated skills... [S]tudents in hands-on programs
too often engage in a string of unrelated, one-period, 40-min activities that emphasize the
use of science materials and equipment but are often poorly or entirely unmotivated from
the studentís point of view" (p. 132). They cite the difference between procedural
knowledge and skillful reasoning with that knowledge, the difficult balance between
processes and concepts, the tendency of many teachers to emphasize performance of
tasks and "right answers" rather than reflection and conceptual understanding, and the
difficulty of managing the vast array of student-generated knowledge and procedures that
arise in inquiry-based classrooms. These findings point to the shortcomings of traditional
lab environmentsó where investigations are fragmented, unrelated and decontextualized
from meaningful scientific issuesó in helping students to comprehend and integrate
science concepts and experimental processes.
Addressing the issues: WorldWatcher and the Global Warming Project

What is needed to extend the scope and scale of classroom science inquiry beyond its
traditional boundaries are investigation tools that provide classrooms with access to
abstract, large-scale, scientific phenomena as well as curricula which create meaningful
contexts for ongoing, integrated scientific investigations. One way we have been
attempting to support student investigations of global scientific phenomena is through
WorldWatcher, a computer-based data visualization environment that provides students
with access to global datasets in the form of interactive color maps (Edelson, Gordin &
Pea, in press). WorldWatcher visualizations invite students to identify patterns in
complex data, providing a catalyst for student conversations about global scientific
phenomena (Gordin, 1997). By providing learners with opportunities to investigate
abstract, large-scale phenomena, WorldWatcher thus provides one example of how
computer-supported data investigation environments can augment classroom
investigations of complex scientific phenomena.

However, the large scale and abstract nature of WorldWatcher representations presents
significant conceptual obstacles to student comprehension of the phenomena they are
investigating. To respond to this challenge, we have developed a curriculum design
strategy of creating paired labs that associate classroom scale, physical labs with
computer investigations of global data. While many traditional physical labs may fail to
support studentsí connections between classroom experiments and scientific events
outside the classroom, many of them nonetheless remain effective means of representing
complex scientific phenomena in an easily digestible (if not decontextualized) format
which is amenable to the settings of most classrooms. So rather than "throwing the baby
out with the bath water," we seek to build upon and extend the reach of such existing
classroom practices by combining them with computer investigations of global data. The
Global Warming classroom project (GWP) represents a combination of these two
approaches, where the strengths of traditional labs in exploring scientific events on an
easily digested classroom scale are combined with the strengths of WorldWatcher
investigations in exploring abstract phenomena on a global scale. By creating settings in
which students can investigate scientific phenomena on both levels, the GWP attempts to
support knowledge acquisition by extending the scope and scale of classroom
investigations ().

Furthermore, the GWP attempts to support the coordination of investigation strategies
with the explanation of science concepts (e.g., Schauble et. al., 1995) by integrating
multiple investigations within an overarching project scenario. Throughout the GWP,
students use their knowledge to advise various nations of the world on the socially
pertinent climate change debate by explaining the scientific basis of the debate,
highlighting potential impacts of climate change on various regions of the world, and
exploring solutions to the potential problems posed by climate change. Integrating the
various investigations within a meaningful project narrative helps students to connect
their experiments to the larger goals and processes of an ongoing scientific investigation,
combating the fragmentation that is common to traditional science lab settings.
In the Global Warming project students engage in laboratory investigations of scientific
events in order to investigate how a climate-related phenomenon manifests on a
decontextualized classroom setting and then use WorldWatcher to investigate how that
same phenomenon manifests on a recontextualized global settingó exploring how it
interacts with other phenomena and impacts different geographic regions. WorldWatcher
activities augment classroom investigations by providing what traditional science labs
often lackóopportunities to investigate climate phenomena within a global context using
actual climate data. By designing activities that take advantage of the affordances of
classroom scale and global scale experiments and through attentiveness to the issues
involved in bridging these two approaches, we have attempted to forge a "two-pronged"
approach to the design of classroom investigations that attempts to coordinate the
development of complementary physical labs and visualization activities. What follows is
a discussion of how we designed this project, an example of integrated curricular design,
an analysis of how students and teachers engaged in these activities, and discussion of
how this approach to the design of software-supported curricular materials supports
student collaboration in middle school science classrooms.

II. Integrating physical labs and computer-based data investigations

What is a "lab" anyway?

Designing a curriculum which effectively integrated innovative computer investigations
and traditional physical labs meant capitalizing on the respective expertise of software
developers and classroom teachers. The Global Warming curricular unit was created
through a design partnership between Northwestern University researchers and middle
school teachers from two Chicago Public Schools as part of the Center for Learning
Technologies in Urban Schools (LeTUS). The aims of this collaboration were to design a
classroom learning environment that integrated technological and pedagogical
innovations with the established practices and beliefs of students, teachers, and
classrooms. Integrating traditional and innovative approaches to science investigation
required that the design partners understood each othersí conceptions of scientific
inquiryó namely, what constitutes an effective science investigation.

Bridging these two communities of research and practice often proved challenging.
During the design process it became apparent that the two communities did not always
share common conceptions of scientific inquiry, as evidenced in a debate that emerged
over whether WorldWatcher investigations could be considered another type of "lab
investigation." While both parties agreed that labs should involve the testing of
hypotheses, designing an experiment, collecting data, and open-ended analysis, the
teachers initially failed to see how WorldWatcher, which provided access to existing
datasets, could be used to such ends. While this view changed as teachers learned more
about how to use the software in classroom situations, the debate regarding what
constitutes a "lab" nonetheless prompted both parties to reconsider their established
beliefs and examine the ways in which physical labs and computer-supported
investigations of global data were pedagogically similar and different. The process of
negotiating shared meaning led us to a mutual appreciation of each type of investigation
and opened the door to an integrated approach to curricular design. While the two parties
may never have established complete consensus, articulating their respective definitions
of "labs" provided an open dialogue about how traditional physical labs and
WorldWatcher-supported investigations could augment each other, thus facilitating the
design goals.

An example of the two-pronged approach to activity design

A vivid example of how to integrate traditional labs and WorldWatcher-supported data
investigations emerged in our design of an activity sequence exploring the reflectivity of
sunlight. This sequence was tested in a 7th grade Chicago Public School classroom as part
of a complete pilot test of the entire Global Warming curriculum. The following section
will describe the design of the activity sequence, using the experiences of the class to
illustrate how the integration of a physical lab and a computer investigation of global data
supports student comprehension of the concept of solar reflectivity on both classroom and
global scales.

Global temperatures are affected in large part by the extent to which energy from the sun
is absorbed or reflected by Earthís surface and atmosphere. In order to model the manner
in which the color of surface features impacts the absorption of sunlight, the lab engages
students in the measurement of temperature increases over time of different colored
envelopes under a heat lamp. After measuring the temperatures of the different-colored
envelopes at multiple intervals over a 15-20 minute time span, students graph the changes
and then discuss the extent to which lighter or darker colors absorb more or less energy.
Their graphs yielded a pattern whereby darker colored envelopes achieved greater net
increase in temperature than lighter colored envelopes. In this activity, students were able
to note how a phenomenon (the absorption of light energy) was impacted by a variable
(the color of a substance). However, aside from an ensuing discussion of studentsí
experiences wearing black versus white t-shirts on a summer day, the lab itself did little
to help students understand how reflectivity and absorption manifested naturally on
Earth.

At the same time, other students engage in a WorldWatcher investigation that seeks to
answer the question "What impacts the reflectivity and absorption of sunlight on Earthís
surface?" involving the comparison of Albedo (or percentage of "Earth-atmosphere
reflectivity) and Vegetation datasets. This activity has been designed to accompany the
lab described above, and, depending on the number of students in the class, the available
computing and lab facilities, and the schedule, the two activities can either be done
simultaneously by dividing the class in half for each activity (and switching activities
during the following class period) or in sequential order by the entire class. In order to
help teachers support two classroom activities simultaneously (2), the WorldWatcher
activity is designed in a rather structured fashion, where the comparison of two specific
datasets is prioritized over a more open-ended approach to student investigation (the
investigations adopt a more open-ended approach later in the project, once students have
had the chance to gain more familiarity with WorldWatcherís features). In addition to
addressing logistical constraints, dividing the class can also provide a basis for students in
the different activities to share what they learn with their colleagues, similar to the
"jigsaw" method discussed by Brown and Campione (1994).
The example described here involves a pair of boys, randomly selected by the teacher for
observation, who completed the WorldWatcher investigation subsequent to doing the
Envelope Lab. They begin the activity by listing any factors they can think of which
would cause sunlight to be reflected away from Earthís surface. Their list ranges from
"buildings" to "sand" to "skin." One of the students notes that different shades of skin
pigment will absorb different amounts of energy, just as different colored envelopes
heated up at different rates. His comment constitutes a direct reference to the Envelope
Lab, revealing a strong understanding of the role that color plays in an objectís energy
absorption. Interestingly, though the worksheet prompt asks them to list "factors" which
might cause sunlight to be reflected, both students focus their initial comments about
reflectivity mostly on tangible objects from their surroundings, such as buildings and
cars. Since they have not yet developed a contextual framework for talking about more
abstract geophysical characteristics (such as the atmospheric features or different
categories of ground cover), their preference for concrete rather than categorical variables
is to be expected. (Chi, Feltovitch & Glaser, 1981; Smith, di Sessa & Rochelle, 1993).

Next, they are prompted to analyze WorldWatcherís "Energy Balance" diagram (Figure
1), which uses pictures and arrows to illustrate the interactions between the different
elements of Earthís energy budget, and asked to explain "what happens to solar energy
when it reaches Earth." Upon seeing the diagram, Marcus exclaims "Oh yeah, the
atmosphere [reflects solar energy] too!" As they explore further, they begin to discuss
other planetary features that might impact solar reflectivity.

      Charlie: Whatís happening?

      Marcus: You can see that energy is being reflected,

      He points to the area in the Energy Balance diagram where the arrow
      from the sun points downward and then up again towards space.

      Charlie: Energy is being reflected off the oceans.

      Marcus: Just write energy is being reflectedó

      Charlie: Off water.

      Marcus: No, it could be anywhere.

      Charlie: No, but it seeÖ

      He points to where arrow is hitting a region of the Earth that is blue,
      signifying that it is reflecting off an oceanic region of Earth.

      Marcus: It just means Earth, anywhere!
Though they still lack a clear understanding of the specific characteristics of the surface
which impact reflectivity, the mere fact that their discussion has shifted from local
objects to global features signifies that they are now prepared to think of reflectivity on a
more abstract global scale. Discussing reflective properties of atmosphere and oceans
rather than buildings and windows represents a shift in the scale of their thinking about
climactic phenomena. The visual model provided by the Energy Balance diagram thus
provides a foundation for the students as they begin to connect what they have learned in
the Envelope Lab to an actual geophysical setting.

             Figure 1: Energy Balance Diagram, which helps to contextualize datasets

Students then use the Energy Balance diagram as a menu to access a dataset which shows
the percentage of sunlight that is reflected away from Earth (albedo) visualization, which
shows the geographic variation in reflectivity on Earth (Figure 2). So that they may
observe the reflectivity of the surface only, the students use a dataset specially generated
under "clear sky" (i.e., cloudless) conditions such that the atmosphere is factored out.
Once they have selected the clear-sky albedo dataset, the students immediately begin to
interpret what they see.

      Charlie: The darker areas mean less solar energy is reflected and the
      lighter areas mean more solar energy is reflected.

      Marcus: Oh so thatís all being reflected!

      He points to the north polar region, which in this visualization is mainly
      "white" (thus representing a high percentage of reflectivity).

      Charlie: ëCause its all ice there so it gets reflected.

Their analysis combines an informal geographic knowledge (that the poles are covered in
ice) with a basic understanding, stemming in part from the previous dayís Envelope Lab,
of the reflective properties of color (that white envelopes absorb the least about of light
energy). Even before they fully understand the meaning of the visualization, they
informally apply familiar bits of knowledge towards the task of understanding the
geographic variation of reflectivity. In this manner, the geographic interface of the
WorldWatcher visualization, combined with the visual patterns evident in the data,
provides students with an opportunity to connect their existing knowledge of reflectivity
within a global context.

As the students begin more formal analysis of the visualization, they continue to draw
upon knowledge of reflectivity acquired in the Envelope lab in order to understand
phenomena on a global scale.

      Charlie: And which parts reflect the most sunlight?

      Marcus: The lower part.

      Charlie: No, no, noÖ

      Marcus: Look.

      He scrolls down so that Antarctica, which was off the screen, is now
      visible.

      Charlie: Whoa!

      Marcus: Yeah!

      Charlie: So the southern, yes. Because thatís white.

      They record their observations.

      Charlie: Which parts of the earth reflect the least amount?

      Marcus: Near the equator

      Charlie: No. [he looks for himself] Yeah, youíre right, near the equator.
     Like a little less than the equator.

      Marcus: Below the equator. Or below the equator and above the southern
      part.

      Charlie: And a little lower.

      Marcus: A little lower than the equator.

      Charlie [reads]: "What do you think makes some parts of the earth reflect
      more than other parts?"ó The ice!
        Marcus: The snow.

By navigating around the visualization map the students begin to understand geographic
variations in reflectivity, though they seem to have an easier time explaining high-
reflectivity areas given their knowledge that ice is white and white is highly reflective.
They readily appropriate the language of the simple "black and white" colorscheme in
order to spot trends in the data and begin exploring the geographic variation in these
trends. While the WorldWatcher visualization is not introducing a new concept (they
have already learned in the Envelope Lab that white substances are the most reflective), it
is providing an opportunity for the students to test out their theory about the reflectivity
of different colors and expand it from mere colors to the colors of actual substances on
Earthís surface such as ice.

In the final stage of the activity, students open a dataset that reveals physical composition
of Earthís surface, namely a ground cover (or vegetation type) visualization. After
making some visual comparisons between the two datasets, the students shift to a more
quantitative analysis, using WorldWatcherís selection tools to select by value all the areas
above a certain percentage of reflectivity in the Albedo visualization. With the
synchronization feature activated, WorldWatcher automatically selects the same regions
in the Vegetation Type visualization (Figure 2). Students can then observe which types of
ground cover correspond to areas of high reflectivity (and visa versa, where they use the
same WorldWatcher features to "select by vegetation type" and then find the specific
reflectivity values for each type of ground cover).

        Charlie [reads]: What types of ground cover are the most common types
        in areas with over 30% surface reflectivity?"

        Marcus: The lighter because itís white. So its like the uh, the uh [points to
        the Sahara Dessert] peach colored areas are also common types.

At this point the students begin formally to map their knowledge regarding the reflective
qualities of dark versus light colors to specific features of Earthís surface. They notice
that in addition to the polar ice caps, dessert regions also reflect a large amount of
incoming solar energyó establishing a pattern regarding the high reflectivity of light
colored ground cover that corresponds to their experiences in the Envelope Lab. The
presence of geographic cues in the Vegetation Type visualization, such as several
different types of "light colored" ground cover, provide an opportunity for theory
confirmationóby noticing that desserts, like ice, also reflect a large percentage of solar
energy.
Figure 2: Albedo (reflectivity) and Vegetation Type visualizations. With the "synchronized mouse" feature
     activated, the areas with greater that 30% reflectivity have been selected in both visualizations.

With the help of the Vegetation Type visualization, the students move beyond their basic
"ice reflects because itís white" to incorporate new types of ground cover in different
regions of the world. They explore these findings further by selecting one by one various
other types of ground cover in one visualization and observing its reflectivity value in the
other. In doing this, students can quantitatively analyze the reflective properties of each
type in order to establish a clear pattern in the data and confirm their theories.

The WorldWatcher activity illustrates how global data visualizations provide
opportunities for students to expand their understanding of scientific concepts by
exploring how they manifest on a global scale. The data diagram and visualizations and
strategic prompts in the worksheet provide "conversational stimuli" that prompt the
students to reason with knowledge gained in a traditional lab. Furthermore, the activity
reveals a deepening of their understanding as they expand, contextualize, refine, and test
their theories about the relationship between reflectivity and color.

Connecting physical labs to computer investigations of global data: Conversations across activities

Students must have a sense of the purpose and rationale of their experiments to be able to
make sense of their experimental procedures and connect their findings to larger
concepts. Exploring a given scientific phenomenon via multiple forms of classroom
investigation not only reinforces conceptual understanding of that phenomenon; it also
provides a crucial sense of perspective regarding the experimental procedures. However,
this does happen merely by token of strategic activity juxtaposition. Schauble et. al.
(1995) observe that "[b]ecause students do not share this understanding of the overall
structure of the discipline, the logic behind the sequence may be apparent to teachers but
a mystery to students" (p. 133). Understanding the broader experimental context of
classroom investigations often requires explicit teacher support -- while it is evident that
the two students in the previous example established conceptual linkages between the
Envelope Lab and WorldWatcher investigation, we cannot automatically assume that the
experimental rationale for pairing the two activities is evident to the students.

After half the class had done each of the investigations (prior to the groups switching
tasks), the teacher conducted a reflective discussion which prompted the students to (a)
share procedural aspects of each of the activities with their peers, (b) reflect on what was
learned in each activity, (c) connect the main findings of each activity to each other in
order to see how they relate, (d) discuss their findings within the overarching context of
their ongoing project, and (e) attempt to integrate what was learned to a real world
scenario. The discussion marks an attempt by the teacher to help the students to
understand and appreciate the larger goals their experiments. By explicitly drawing
linkages between the two activities, the students begin to integrate the concepts involved
in the two activities and construct a shared understanding of reflectivity.

      Teacher:       The class was not doing two different activities today. You
      were doing 2 parts of the same activity. Can someone from each group
      describe what they did in their activity?

      After this opening question, students representing the Envelope Lab
      groups and the WorldWatcher groups each summarize the procedures of
      their investigations.

      Teacher: Who thinks they see a similarity between what the 2 groups did?

      Justin: The similarity is that both groups, they were comparing types of
      surface and how much light they collected to each other. Because the
      reflection map shows how much light comes in and is reflected out and
      with the lab it shows which color takes in the most light and which
      reflects.

      Teacher: Someone who did the lab, did the results which you got confirm
      what you expected to happen?

      Zack: No. I thought the white one would be hotter because the light goes
      in easier. I thought it would be the hottest one but it isnít.

      Shirley: I thought the white will be the hottest because when you wear
      dark colors you get hot.

      Teacher: Then why would white be the hottest?

      Shirley: I meant the dark colors would be the hottest.
Once the students have described each of the two activities, the teacher then asks them to
draw deeper comparisons. Justin, a student who did the WorldWatcher activity, is able to
see the conceptual linkages to the Envelope Lab described by his peersóthough he
obviously has a deeper knowledge of the WorldWatcher activity. To achieve balance, the
teacher asks a question targeted at the Envelope Lab students. Zack responds by
explaining how his initial theory was challenged by the results. Shirley attempts to relate
the results of the lab to her everyday experience.

By asking students to explain why the two groups were in fact "doing two parts of the
same activity," the teacher encourages students to reflect on the underlying goals of the
two experiments. He moves the discussion freely between the two activities, providing
opportunities for students from each group to contribute to the shared understanding of
the community. This provides a clear example of how students, when prompted, can
effectively reflect on the goals and purposes of their classroom investigations, publicly
test and refine their theories and hypotheses, and attempt to articulate findings in
everyday terms. These are all crucial elements to the shared construction of ideas within a
classroom scientific community and represent an important means by which students can
think about classroom science in broader terms. Further analysis of similar discussions is
needed in order to develop a clearer sense of how best to facilitate such discussions.
However, such activities show how teachers can help students negotiate the meaning of
scientific concepts by reasoning from their experiences in different types of classroom
investigations.

III. Discussion

Curricular innovations must exist within the context of existing classroom practices, not
only because the beliefs of practitioners dictate the ways in which they enact such
innovations, but also because existing classroom practices have benefits which should be
not be overlooked when implementing classroom innovations. Traditional classroom labs
can provide a highly accessible means for students to explore scientific phenomena.
However, such experiments all too often represent a decontextualized setting for
scientific concepts. Our discussion illustrates how data visualizations can help students to
integrate scientific concepts acquired in a traditional laboratory investigation within a
real-world global context. Furthermore, our discussion of a teacher-led, whole-class
discussion illustrates a means by which students understand the high-level goals of
classroom experimentation by discussing multiple methods of investigation and publicly
refining emerging theories about scientific concepts. Embedding innovative tools for
collaborative inquiry within the existing contexts of science classrooms holds promise
not only for the effective implementation of curricular innovations, but also for the
enhancement of student learning. This process involves working closely with teachers in
order to find ways to translate promising innovations into the language of typical
classrooms.
Acknowledgements

The authors also wish to express gratitude to the teachers with whom we have
collaborated on the development of the Global Warming Project, Bernie Bradley, Mary
Pat OíConnell, Gloria Pritikin, Susan OíNeill, Kim Fryzel, and Carmen Gomez. We also
wish to acknowledge the help of Kim Williams, Kylene Chinsio, and Duane Griffin.
WorldWatcher was programmed by Brian A. Clark.

This work was completed as part of the WorldWatcher Curriculum Project, which is
supported, in part, by the National Science Foundationís Instructional Materials
Development Program (grant # ESI-97206987), and the Center for Learning
Technologies in Urban Schools (LeTUS), which is supported, in part, by the National
Science Foundation (grant # REC-9720383). Opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the foundation.

Bibliography

Brown, A. L., Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. (pp.
229-270) In Classroom Lessons: Integrating Cognitive Theory and Classroom Practice,
Cambridge MA, MIT Press.

Chi, M. T. H., Feltovitch, P. J., Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of
physics problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, pp. 121-152.

Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., Pea, R. D. (in press), Addressing the Challenges of
Inquiry-Based Learning through Technology and Curriculum Design. To appear in
Journal of the Learning Sciences.

Gordin, D. N. (1997). Scientific Visualization as an Expressive Medium for Project
Science Inquiry. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Northwestern University.

McCloskey, M. (1984). Naïve Theories of motions. In D. Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.),
Mental Models (pp. 289-324), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Reif, F., & Larkin, J. H. (1991). Cognition in scientific and everyday domains:
Comparison and learning implications. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28,
733-760.

Smith, J.P., di Sessa, A. A., & Rochelle, J. (1993) Misconceptions reconceived: A
constructivist analysis of knowledge in transition, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2),
115-163.

Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R. A., Schulze, S., & John, J. (1995). Studentsí
Understanding of the Objectives and Procedures of Experimentation in the Science
Classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(2), 131-166.
Authors Addresses

Matthew Brown (matt-brown@nwu.edu)
Northwestern University; School of Education and Social Policy; 2115 North Campus
Drive, office #319; Evanston, IL 60208. Tel. (847) 467-3869. Fax. (847) 491-8999.
Daniel C. Edelson (d-edelson@nwu.edu)
Northwestern University; School of Education and Social Policy; 2115 North Campus
Drive, office #332; Evanston, IL 60208. Tel. (847) 467-1337. Fax. (847) 491-8999.
