Reflections on WebGuide: Seven Issues for the Next
Generation of Collaborative Knowledge-Building
Environments
Gerry Stahl

University of Colorado at Boulder, Center for LifeLong Learning & Design, Institute of
Cognitive Science and Department of Computer Science

      Abstract: A number of software environments have been developed as
      media to support collaborative knowledge building, typically featuring a
      Web-based threaded discussion facility. We have recently developed such
      a system, known as WebGuide. The distinctive feature of this system is
      support for structuring collaboration and knowledge construction with
      personal, group and comparison perspectives. While piloting WebGuide in
      a middle school classroom and a graduate seminar, we encountered a
      variety of issues related to both software design and classroom practices.
      Some of these issues are common to experiences with similar systems and
      some have to do specifically with support for perspectives. In this paper
      we review seven of the major issues encountered with an eye toward
      suggestions for future work.

      Keywords: computer mediated communication, discussion forum, shared
      knowledge

Introduction

There is a growing genre of software systems that I will refer to as Knowledge-Building
Environments (KBEs). KBEs are intended to support collaboration processes in which,
for instance, a classroom of students researches, discusses, critiques and articulates their
own developing understanding of scientific phenomena. Perhaps first explicitly
championed by Scardamalia and Bereiter (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991), KBEs have
been implemented and assessed in the past decade by research centers at the universities
of Toronto, Michigan, Berkeley, Northwestern, Colorado, Vanderbilt, Georgia Tech,
Stanford and Swarthmore, among others.

I have argued elsewhere that understanding is perspectival and that computer
environments should deliver information to people based on their preferred perspectives
on the information (Stahl, 1993; Stahl et al., 1995). In particular, collaboration consists of
processes of perspective-making and perspective-taking involving personal and group
perspectives (Boland & Tenkasi, 1995). To explore the representation of perspectives
within KBEs, we (see acknowledgments) developed a system called WebGuide. This
year we piloted WebGuide in a middle school environmental science classroom and in an
interdisciplinary cognitive science graduate seminar. We ran into many of the same
issues that have confronted other KBEs. Our perspectives-based software addresses or
transforms some of the issues and raises others of its own.

This paper reflects on seven issues raised by our WebGuide experiences. We think these
issues are critical to the ability to support collaborative learning with Web-based
environments. The potential for computer mediation of collaboration seems
extraordinary, but our experience warns us that the practical barriers are also enormous.
The following issues for KBEs like WebGuide are not problems that we have solved, but
rather foci for future work, in analogy with Halaszís (1988) issues for hypermedia.

This paper summarizes our understanding of the seven issues we identified for future
work. That understanding is based on a synthesis of theory and reflection on our
experiences with WebGuide. For background details, see: (Stahl, 2000) which presents a
theory of collaborative learning and our approaches to computer support that led to
WebGuide; (Stahl & Herrmann, 1999) which describes the technicalities of intertwining
perspectives and negotiation to support group and individual learning and contrasts
WebGuide's mechanisms to related work; (Stahl, 1999) which describes the software
interface, its underlying cognitive theory and its trial application in two use situations.

Issue 1: Constructing perspectives on knowledge from threaded discussions

Most KBEs consist primarily of persistent discussion forums, with typed nodes and other
supplementary software features and classroom practices to guide the discussion from
personal opinions to collaborative knowledge. WebGuide is designed to go a bit further
than most KBEs in supporting both knowledge construction and collaboration with a
structure of personal and group perspectives. In order to support knowledge construction,
it provides functionality for each student to process the ideas in the shared discussion:
selecting, editing, arranging, linking and summarizing notes freely within one's own
perspective without affecting the views in other peopleís perspectives (see the knowledge
construction commands in Figure 1).
Constructing knowledge involves tasks that are difficult for people to do individually, let
alone collaboratively. Providing virtual workspaces for people to formulate their own
perspectives and to view each otherís ideas may simplify and clarify this process.
WebGuide also provides group perspectives in which a team or the class as a whole can
agree on expressions of negotiated knowledge. This is designed to structure and model
the collaborative process, seen as an interplay among individuals and groups. In this way,
WebGuide is intended to support collaboration.

The ability of students and groups to select subsets of the shared repository of discussion
notes and to arrange them at will also addresses the problem of growth of the repository
contents, which can otherwise lead to information over-load and chaos. Our theory of
group memory evolution identifies phases of seeding (e.g., the teacher starts a project off
with some ideas or background information), growth (the discussion takes place) and
reseeding (somehow the repository must be weeded and reorganized) (Fischer et al.,
1997). In WebGuide, the reseeding process can take place continuously, simultaneously
with the growth process. Individuals or groups can be responsible for organizing their
own perspectives on knowledge.
Issue 2: Distinguishing learning tasks

In iterating the design of WebGuide it has become increasingly clear that there are
significant differences between knowledge building and simple discussion. Students more
readily engage in discussion, responding spontaneously to existing notes without taking
time to appropriate the ideas in new syntheses. True construction of knowledge involves
distinct tasks ñ including brainstorming, articulating, reacting, organizing, analyzing and
generalizing. Rather than trying to support all of these within a threaded discussion
format, it may be more effective to provide specific components, such as an editing
window to set down tentative ideas, a discussion area to respond fluently to a flow of
interchanged ideas and a separate facility for making sense more reflectively of selected
notes. (See Buckingham Shum & Hammond, 1994, for a critical review of hypertext
design rationale systems that took similar approaches.) These different tasks require
distinct skills, states of mind and supports.

Collaboration can facilitate knowledge building by bringing many minds (and
perspectives) to the job and by practicing social processes that will later become
internalized skills (Vygotsky, 1930/1978). But collaborative learning also introduces
complexity. We should not expect novices in thinking, writing and researching (e.g.,
middle school students) to do what most experts cannot do ñ like write a truly
collaborative paper ñ on their own without significant scaffolding. It will be important to
develop new forms of functionality, structure and computer support to enable
collaborative knowledge construction ñ and then to differentiate and integrate these
various supports within KBEs.

Issue 3: Representing collaborative perspectives

In our classroom experiences, WebGuide provided three kinds of perspectives or views
on the shared network of notes: group, personal and comparison perspectives (see Figure
2). The group perspectives were seeded by the teacher to suggest topics of research and
discussion. All participants had their own personal perspectives, where they could create,
modify, link and organize whatever notes they wanted to. Personal perspectives included
or inherited all information that was in their group perspectives. The comparison
perspectives included all information from a set of personal perspectives, so they could
be browsed to see notes by everyone in the group. The goal of the class was to share
ideas (perspective-taking) in the comparison perspectives, synthesize them (perspective-
making) in personal perspectives and then agree to promote some of them (collaborate) to
the group perspectives. Thus, the network of perspectives represents and supports the
dynamics between individuals and groups that defines collaboration.

The fact that an individual note may have different edited versions and different linking
structures in different perspectives, that notes may have multiple parents within the
discussion threads, that new perspectives can be added dynamically and may inherit from
multiple other perspectives sets WebGuide apart from simple threaded discussion media.
It also makes the computations for displaying notes extremely complex. This is a task
that definitely requires computers. Although the software now hides much of the
complexity, it is not yet at the point where people can operate smoothly without
confusion.

One problem is that people using WebGuide do not have a clear mental model of
relationships of perspectives to each other. The current WebGuide interface of the
perspective structure (see Figure 3) is inadequate. The expandable outline hierarchy,
which is useful in other ways, cannot accurately represent the convergent structure of
multiple inheritance (compare Figure 2). The comparison perspectives are listed multiple
times, under each perspective that they aggregate. A graphical representation is needed to
show the structure of perspectives and also that of multiply-linked notes. Similarly, a
graphical interface might be useful for manipulating and organizing notes within a
perspective as well.

Issue 4: Converging ideas

In reviews of KBE experience, Hewitt (Hewitt et al., 1998) and dePaula (dePaula, 1998)
identify divergence of ideas to be a common problem. They argue that the tree structure
imposed by standard threaded discussion support is inadequate for collaboration. The
idea of a threaded discussion is that one contribution or note leads to another. The result
is that discussions proceed along ever diverging lines as they branch out, and there is no
systematic way to promote convergence (see Figure 4). It seems clear, however, that
collaboration requires both divergence (e.g., during brainstorming) and convergence
(e.g., during negotiation, synthesis, summary and consensus).

WebGuide addresses this structural problem at three levels:

   1.  The note linking mechanism in WebGuide allows notes to be linked to multiple
       parents (Figure 4), so that they can act to bring together and summarize otherwise
       divergent ideas.
   2.  Similarly, the graph of perspectives (Figure 2) allows for multiple inheritance, so
       that comparison perspectives aggregate or converge the contents of multiple
       perspectives.
   3.  By introducing carefully conceived headings high in the perspective inheritance
       network, a teacher can define topics that will be inherited in all other perspectives,
       encouraging related ideas to be arranged together.

Issue 5: Negotiating agreement

However, it is not enough that convergence is technically possible or that a teacher
desires it. Students need opportunities and supports to bring ideas together and to agree
on whose ideas will be accepted as group positions. WebGuide was originally designed to
include a negotiation component to complement the perspectives mechanism. The idea is
that individuals propose notes from their personal perspectives to be voted on. When
enough votes are entered for a given proposal, that proposal is promoted to the group
perspective. Communication on proposals proceeds asynchronously and is subject to
threads of discussion.

A promoted note represents knowledge accepted by the group. As such, it is
automatically inherited into the personal perspectives of all group members, where they
incorporate it into their own knowledge organization. In this way, collaborative
knowledge exceeds what any one member had expressed and it is always subject to
interpretation by individuals. As in unsupported collaboration, individuals build upon
knowledge they inherit from their social context, and the relation of their understanding
to the group interpretation is always tenuous.

In our classroom trials, negotiation had to proceed face-to-face or not at all. Clearly, the
addition of software support for negotiation is a priority. The hard part is to make it an
enjoyable social experience and a flexible, consensual process rather than a burden that
discourages usage.

Issue 6: Encouraging system use

The clearest failure of KBEs is that people avoid using them. There are many
explanations for this. Media competition poses a barrier to acceptance of new
communication software. People are naturally hesitant to adopt yet another
communication technology. They must calculate how much a burden the new medium
will impose in terms of learning how to use it, acquiring the equipment, checking
regularly for incoming messages and letting people know that they are communicating
through it. Clearly, a critical mass of adoption by one's communication partners is
necessary as well.

In a classroom context, some of these problems are minimized. Still, communication with
classmates is much easier face-to-face then typing everything (knowing it may influence
grading). Perhaps the integration of new capabilities and uses of KBEs can increase their
practical value and spur increased usage, as long as confusions and conflicts are not
introduced. For instance, providing facilities for people to maintain lists of annotated
Web bookmarks, things-to-do, favorite references, up-coming deadlines, etc. within their
personal perspectives might not only give them familiarity with using the system, but
would also spur adoption. Gradually, they could start to construct their own knowledge in
the KBE: personal diary, research notebook, inspirations for papers, theory insights.
Then, the step to computer-mediated collaborative knowledge building would follow
more naturally.

Issue 7: Scaffolding learning practices

We have argued based on previous experience that the crucial aspect of supporting
collaborative learning has to do with structuring social practices (Koschmann et al.,
1998). Practice is the set of generally tacit procedures that are culturally adopted by a
community. In introducing WebGuide into its two user communities, we tried
unsuccessfully to establish certain usage practices, both by instruction and by
enforcement in the software (see Figure 5). In the middle school classroom it proved too
confusing to allow students to work in every perspective, so the interface was changed to
limit navigation to the student's personal perspective and their group and class
comparison perspectives. This still left the problem that they preferred to work in the
comparison perspectives where they could easily engage in threaded discussion.

For the graduate seminar, the interface was configured to let students navigate to any
perspective but to limit what they could do in most perspectives. Most knowledge
construction operations were allowed only in one's personal perspective and new options
were added to permit copying or linking notes back to one's personal perspective from
the other perspectives. This made discussing someone else's note awkward, so simple
discussion notes were later allowed everywhere. But then one could not edit even typos
that one made in fluent discussion. There seemed to be no satisfactory solution to these
detail design decisions short of rethinking the larger issues raised in this paper. The
problem of designing classroom practices and matching them with software supports will
be with us for the long haul.

Powerful KBEs are not just a fulcrum for leveraging practices that are more student-
centered; ideally, they facilitate new classes of practices that would not be feasible
without such computer support. Nevertheless, such technologies can also be adapted to
reinforce traditional teacher-centered approaches. As Scardamalia & Bereiter
(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996) say, "Nobody wants to use technology to recreate
education as it is, yet there is not much to distinguish what goes on in most computer-
supported classrooms versus traditional classrooms" (p. 249). How can the use of KBEs
be structured to provide students with a visionary model of collaborative learning? Such a
model could prefigure a networked globe where individual competition is replaced by
collaborative cognition, social division of manual and mental labor is superceded by
equal intellectual access and private ownership of socially created ideas succumbs to
unfettered sharing.

Conclusion

It has become a cliché that computer mediation has the potential to revolutionize
communication just like the printing press did long ago. But the real lesson in this
analogy is that widespread literacy involved slow changes in skills and practices to take
advantage of the technological affordances. Culture and technology co-evolved
dramatically; the transition from orality to literacy involved a radical change in how the
world thinks and works (Ong, 1998). Although social as well as technical changes can be
propagated much faster now, it is still necessary to gradually evolve suitable mixes of
practices and systems to support the move from predominantly individual, paper-based
construction of knowledge to a new level of collaborative, Web-based cognition. This
will involve the refinement of software support systems that are sophisticated, specialized
and flexible, yet capable of becoming transparent in skilled practice. The design of such
software will involve extended research into issues such as those raised in this paper.

Acknowledgments

The WebGuide research has been a collaboration of the author with Rogerio dePaula and
other L3D members, Ted Habermann and his group at NOAA, Dan Kowal and his middle
school students, the participants in the WebGuide seminar, Thomas Herrmann and his
students at Dortmund, and the researchers in the ICS "Articulate Learners" project. The
work reported here was supported in part by grants from NSF IRI-9711951, the
McDonnell Foundation and NSF EAR-9870934.

Bibliography

Boland, R. J. & Tenkasi, R. V. (1995) Perspective making and perspective taking in
communities of knowing, Organization Science, 6 (4), pp. 350-372.

Buckingham Shum, S. & Hammond, N. (1994) Argumentation-based design rationale:
What use at what cost?, International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 40(4), pp.
603-652.

dePaula, R. (1998) Computer Support for Collaborative Learning: Understanding
Practices and Technology Adoption, Masters Thesis, Telecommunications Department,
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO.

Fischer, G., Grudin, J., McCall, R., Ostwald, J., Redmiles, D., Reeves, B., & Shipman, F.
(1997) Seeding, evolutionary growth and reseeding: The incremental development of
collaborative design environments. In G. M. Olson, T. W. Malone, & J. B. Smith (Eds.),
Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah, NJ, p. in press.

Halasz, F. G. (1988) Reflections on NoteCards: Seven Issues for the Next Generation of
Hypermedia Systems, Communications of the ACM, 31 (7), pp. 836-852.

Hewitt, J., Scardamalia, M., & Webb, J. (1998) Situative design issues for interactive
learning environments, at http://csile.oise.on.ca/abstracts/situ_design.

Koschmann, T., Ostwald, J., & Stahl, G. (1998) Shouldn't we really be studying practice?
[panel position paper], International Conference on the Learning Sciences (ICLS '98),
Seattle. Available at:
http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~gerry/publications/conferences/1998/icls98/ICLS%20Work
shop.html.

Ong, W. (1998) Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the World, Routledge, New
York, NY.

Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1991) Higher levels of agency in knowledge building: A
challenge for the design of new knowledge media, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1,
pp. 37-68.

Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1996) Computer support for knowledge-building
communities. In T. Koschmann (Ed.) CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging
Paradigm, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 249-268.

Stahl, G. (1993) Supporting situated interpretation, Proceedings of the Cognitive Science
Society (CogSci '93), Boulder, CO, pp. 965-970. Available at:
http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~gerry/publications/conferences/1990-
1997/cogsci93/CogSci.html.

Stahl, G. (1999) WebGuide: Guiding collaborative learning on the Web with
perspectives, Annual conference of the American Educational Research Association
(AERA '99), Montreal, Canada. Available at:
http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~gerry/publications/conferences/1999/aera99/index.html.

Stahl, G. (2000) Collaborative information environments to support knowledge
construction by communities, AI & Society. Available at:
http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~gerry/publications/journals/ai&society/index.html.

Stahl, G. & Herrmann, T. (1999) Intertwining perspectives and negotiation, International
Conference on Supporting Group Work (Group '99), Phoenix, Arizona. Available at:
http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~gerry/publications/conferences/1999/group99/index.html.

Stahl, G., Sumner, T., & Owen, R. (1995) Share globally, adapt locally: Software to
create and distribute student-centered curriculum, Computers and Education. Special
Issue on Education and the Internet, 24 (3), pp. 237-246. Available at:
http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~gerry/publications/journals/c&e/index.html.

Vygotsky, L. (1930/1978) Mind in Society, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Authors' address

Gerry Stahl (mailto:Gerry.Stahl@Colorado.edu)
Center for LifeLong Learning & Design; Institute of Cognitive Science and Department
of Computer Science; University of Colorado; Boulder, CO, USA 80309-0430. Tel. (303)
492-3912. Fax (303) 492-2844.
