Collaborative Learning through Computer-Mediated
Argumentation
A.L. Veerman, J.E.B. Andriessen & G. Kanselaar

Department of Educational Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands

      Abstract: This article reports on three studies that involved undergraduate
      students collaboratively working on authentic discussion tasks in
      synchronous and asynchronous Computer Mediated Communication
      systems (Netmeeting, Belvédère, Allaire Forums). The purposes of the
      assignments were respectively to develop insight and understanding in a
      theoretical framework, to co-construct meaningful didactics for a
      computer based training program and to develop insight and
      understanding in educational theories in relation to technology. To
      examine whether the use of the CMC systems could meet these ends,
      students' dialogues are characterised in terms of their constructive and
      argumentative contributions and by their focus on the meaning and
      application of concepts. In addition, we compare different forms of
      support, from peer coaching synchronous discussions, offering graphical
      support at the interface to reflective moderation in asynchronous
      discussions. Although we compare different systems and assignments, the
      interplay between focused argumentation and constructive contributions
      allows us to analyse and compare interaction and learning in different
      CMC systems, with and without forms of pedagogical support.

      Keywords: argumentation, computer-mediated communication, discussion
      forums

Introduction

The aim of the present research is to study constructive discussions in Computer
Mediated Communication (CMC) systems in the context of regular academic courses.
Constructive discussions in this context involve information exchanges in which
information is constructed through addition, explanation, evaluation, transformation or
summarising (Veerman, Andriessen & Kanselaar, in press). The main questions of our
research are how to characterise such discussions on focused argumentation and
constructive contributions and how to provide pedagogical support by humans or CMC
systems.

An important issue in learning research is the construction of knowledge through
negotiation. It is believed that learning is particularly effective when collaborating
students encounter conflicts, engage in argumentation and manage through negotiation to
produce a shared solution (e.g. Piaget, 1977; Doise & Mugny, 1984; Baker, 1996;
Erkens, 1997; Savery & Duffy, 1996; Petraglia, 1997). In effective collaborative
argumentation students share a focus on the same issues and negotiate about the meaning
of each other's information. Incomplete, conflicting, doubted or disbelieved information
is critically checked, challenged or countered on its strength (is the information true?) and
its relevance (is the information appropriate?), until finally a shared answer, solution or
concept arises. However, generating effective argumentation in educational situations is
not always guaranteed. First of all, focusing is important for the interpretation and
understanding of communication. Students have to initiate and maintain a shared focus of
the task. They have to agree on the overall goal, descriptions of the current problem-state,
and available problem-solving actions (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995). Failure to maintain a
shared focus on themes and problems in the discussion results in a decrease of mutual
problem solving (Baker & Bielaczyc, 1995; Erkens, 1997). Second, assessing information
critically on its meaning, strength or relevance depends on many factors, such as the
(peer) student, the role of the tutor, the type of task, the type of instruction and the
selected medium (Veerman & Andriessen, in press). Key problems that may inhibit
students to engage in critical argumentation are that students tend to believe in one
overall correct solution, that students show difficulties with generating and comparing
counter-arguments and with using strong, relevant and impersonalised justifications
(Treasure-Jones, submitted thesis, p.13; Kuhn, 1991). In addition, students' exposure of a
critical attitude can be inhibited because of socially biased behaviour. For example,
students may fear to loose face (e.g. in front of the classmates), to go against dominant
persons in status or behaviour (e.g. a tutor), or for what other people think (e.g. that you
are not a nice person)

To support and optimise students' engagement in argumentative dialogues for learning
purposes, Computer Mediated Communication systems (CMC) provide new educational
opportunities. CMC systems are network-based computer systems offering electronic
opportunities for group communication, such as Newsgroups, E-mail conferencing
systems, Internet Relay Chat and Virtual Classrooms. Text-based and time-delayed
communication can be beneficial to keep track and keep an overview of complex
questions or problems under discussion. Text-based discussion is by necessity explicit
and articulated. In addition to the chat windows a history of the dialogue can be used to
reflect over time on earlier stated information. Contradictions, gaps or conflicts may be
revealed through text-based and time-delayed discussion. In addition, in CMC systems
students lack physical and psychological cues such as physical appearance, intonation,
eye-contact, group identity etc. sometimes leads to democratising effects (Short, Willams
& Christie, 1976; Kiesler 1986; Rutter, 1987; Spears & Lea, 1992; Smith, 1994; Steeples,
Unsworth, Bryson, Goodyear, Riding, Fowell, Levy & Duffy, 1996). Critical behaviour,
therefore, is expected to be less biased towards a tutor or a dominant peer-student than in
face-to-face discussion.

However, it is unclear how the use of an electronic system, and which characteristics of
such a system, relates to effective collaboration in learning situations. The purpose of this
contribution is to analyse and compare the interplay between focusing, argumentation and
learning in different CMC systems, with and without forms of pedagogical support. The
research questions are:
(1) How can electronic dialogues, in synchronous and asynchronous CMC systems, be
characterised in terms of focusing and argumentation and how does that relate to the
production of constructive activities?

(2) How does pedagogical support, provided by humans or the CMC system, relate to
constructive discussions in learning situations?

Three studies

We compare the results of three studies that involved undergraduate students
collaboratively working on authentic discussion tasks in electronic environments as part
of a 2 to 3 month course in Educational Technology and Computer Based Learning. In
these tasks, students worked in pairs, triplets or small groups (8-12 students). With or
without a (peer) coach present, they had to externalise (incomplete) knowledge, beliefs
and values and to use each other as a source of knowledge and reflection in order to reach
a (shared) solution. In sequence of admission, the tasks were aimed at the following
goals:

(1) developing insight and understanding in a theoretical framework

(2) co-constructing meaningful didactics for a computer based training program

(3) developing insight and understanding in educational theories in relation to technology

The tasks were respectively conducted as a synchronous text-based discussion task, a
synchronous text-based and graphical discussion task and an asynchronous text-based
discussion task. Before we turn to some more detailed descriptions of these three studies,
we first sketch our analysing system by explanation and an example.

Data Collection

All electronic sessions were logged automatically on the computer and were screened on
the presence of content-related fragments, defined as written exchanges in which
thematic information had been expressed in relation to the task goal. These fragments
were subsequently analysed on focus, argumentative moves and constructive activities
produced.

Focus categories were related to the task goals: the development of meaning of concepts
and the use of conceptual knowledge to solve a problem or to support a claim. Two focus
categories reflected this: (1) focus on the meaning of concepts, (2) focus on the use of
concepts. In addition, the focus could be (3) on the task strategy (planning how to start
the task, time management, how to carry out the task etc.). In addition, two categories of
focus shifts were distinguished: focus shifts from understanding to the use of concepts
and vice versa, and shifts from the meaning and use of concepts to the task strategy and
vice versa.
The categories of information exchange indicated how argumentation was triggered.
Considering several approaches in the field of analysing Educational Dialogue (including
analyses of Dialogue Games, Exchange Structures and Communicative Acts, Argument
and Rhetorical Structure; see Pilkington, McKendree, Pain & Brna, 1999; Treasure-
Jones, submitted thesis; Erkens, 1997), we embodied six dialogue moves into our
analysing system: statements, checks, challenges, counters, acceptances and conclusions.
Although all these categories may embody elements of argument, we only consider
checks, challenges and counters as argumentative information exchanges.

At the epistemological level, the discussions were analysed on types of constructive
activities. We analysed goal-oriented activities in which relevant information was added,
explained, or evaluated, summarising information and information transformations.
Inter-judge reliability of the coding system showed a Cohen's kappa (Cohen, 1968) of
0.91 for the focus variable, a kappa of 0.89 for information exchange categories and a
kappa of 0.74 for constructive activities

Example of analysis

In Figure 1 we present an authentic example from the first study of a content-related
discussion fragment analysed with MEPA (Erkens, 1998), a tool developed for Multiple
Episode Protocol Analysis. In this study students had to discuss a protocol of a tutoring
session by using the Conversational Framework (Laurillard, 1993), a model for
categorising teacher-student interaction. For technical reasons, messages longer than 2
lines are truncated to two lines in the screen dump.

   Figure 1: Example of analysing a discussion (C.A. = Constructive Activity type;
                     Expressions = information exchange type)
Description of the analysis:

Student 1 (S1) starts a content-related discussion phase (F3: d1) and proposes to
categorise sentence 4 of the protocol of the tutoring session. The focus is on the task
strategy (where to start the discussion = c. strategy), the proposal is coded as a statement.

Student 2 (S2) agrees and states what category of the Conversation Framework (CF) fits
sentence 4. S2 focuses on the use of the CF and adds content-related information
(`student tries to define a conception').

S1 challenges S2 by proposing another category and adds information (`...student decides
what to do').

S2 then counters S1 and the information is evaluated (`...the student tries to define the
task assignment. The student asks a question but there are no questions in the
Conversational framework! So, this is not an adaptation towards an earlier action as a
consequence of feedback...).

S1 shifts focus towards the meaning of concepts and checks understanding. New content-
related information is added (... to jump from category 8 to 4 or ... via adaptation or
reflection).

Then, S1 shifts back to the use of concepts and checks mutual agreement. S2 agrees and
accepts the choice for category 10.

In Table 1, an overview is given of the main differences considering the entities that
affect argumentation in the three studies. The description of the three studies will follow
next.
              Table 1: Differences considering entities that affect argumentation

CMC            Communication       Task window           Group size        Time on       Support
system         window                                                      task

Netmeeting     Synchronous;        Text editor           2 students        45--60        Outside
                                   accessible for one                      minutes
                                   student at the time
               Not structured                            (20 groups)                     peer-coaches
                                                                                         (experimental
                                                                                         design):

                                                                                         `reflective' versus

                                                                                         `structure' coach

Belvédère      Synchronous;        Graphical tool,       2 à 3 students    2 times       Inside
system                             accessible for all
                                   students
               Not structured                            (13 groups)       60-90         Graphical diagram
                                                                           minutes       construction tool

Forum-         Asynchronous;       ---                   8 -- 12           28 times      Outside
discussions                                              students          two-week
                                                                           discussion
               Branching and                                                             `reflective'
               threading                                 S 36 students                   moderation

                                                                                         fading moderation

Study 1: Netmeeting

We integrated an experiment in an actual undergraduate course on Educational
Technology. One of the learning goals in this course was to reach insight and
understanding in the `Conversational Framework' (Laurillard, 1993; p.102), a model that
one can use for analysing and categorising teacher-student interaction. The model is
considered to be discussible and can be interpreted in many different ways (Bostock,
1996). We designed a task using this framework in which students were first asked to
individually analyse and code a dialogue with it. Then, they were randomly paired and
confronted with each other's codings and asked to analyse the same protocol together,
using the synchronous electronic communication system NetMeeting. Students were
instructed to finally reach shared answers.

NetMeeting is a synchronous communication system. NetMeeting can be used for text-
based communication with groups of students of any number. The working screen of the
program displays an unconstrained chat box. To communicate with a partner, messages
can be created, sent and will be displayed in a shared chat-history. A history of the
dialogue can be used to reflect over time on earlier stated information.

Student pairs were assigned to three different conditions: a `structure' peer-coaching
condition, a `reflective' peer-coaching condition and a control group (no coaching). The
`structure' coach focused on argument building, particularly on generating and
comparing alternative and contrasting statements, arguments and elaborations. The
`reflective' coach focused on checking information on meaning, strength and relevance
and on questioning connections between claims and arguments. We compared coached
student pairs to a control group of non-coached student pairs (see for further detail:
Veerman, Andriessen & Kanselaar, in press).

Study 2: Belvédère

Belvédère is a synchronous network-tool developed by the Learning Research and
Development Centre at the University of Pittsburgh (Learning Research and
Development Centre, 1996). Among many other applications, Belvédère can be used for
constructing argumentative diagrams online with individuals or groups of students of any
number (see: Figure 2). The working screen of the program displays a communication
and a diagram construction window. To communicate with a partner the student has chat-
box, similar to the Netmeeting system, in which messages can be created, sent and are
displayed in the shared chat-history. Adding data into the diagram window is constrained;
students must use the predefined set of boxes ('hypothesis', 'data', 'unspecified') and links
('for', 'against', 'and').

                   Figure 2: Screendump of the Belvédère system

Thus, Belvédère provides students with a tool for non-linear argumentative diagram
construction in addition to linear chat discussion. Since an argument is not linear by
nature (e.g. Adam, 1992), Belvédère may be especially good for mediating argumentative
discussions. Research has shown that graphical representations tend to foster
comprehension when they support a focus on salient and important features of the task
(Ghyselink & Tardieu, 1999; Reimann, 1999). The diagram construction tool, therefore,
may help students to organise their argument and to keep track of the main issues under
discussion, including unjustified statements, unclear information, gaps or conflicts that
can trigger discussion (Veerman & Treasure-Jones, 1999).

We integrated the Belvédère study in an undergraduate course on Computer Based
Learning. Small groups of students (of 2 or 3 persons) were instructed to use the
Belvédère system for 60 - 90 minute discussions about learning goals and pedagogical
aspects concerning their own design of a Computer Based Learning program. They were
asked to submit their finally constructed diagrams to the tutor. We analysed (1) students'
discussions on focus, argumentation and the production of constructive activities, (2)
students' diagrams on organisation and overlap of information with the chat discussion
and (3) on the relationship between types of chat discussions and types of diagrams
constructed (see for further detail Veerman, Andriessen & Kanselaar, 1999).

Study 3: Forumdiscussions

Allaire Forums is an asynchronous network-tool that can be used for electronic group
discussion. In Allaire Forums conferences can be created, which embody single or
multiple `threads' and 'branches'. In Figure 3, a thread is shown with several messages
sent and `branched'.

         Figure 3: Screendump of a discussion `thread' in Allaire Forums

We integrated a study about asynchronous Forum discussions in a 3-month
undergraduate course on Educational Technology. The learning goal was for students to
integrate personal experiences, theoretical knowledge and expert insights to reach
conceptual understanding and insight and to use conceptual knowledge for application
into educational practice. We created two conferences with discussions considering either
theoretical or applied aspects of educational technology. Every two weeks, in each
conference we created two to three new threads embodying strong statements for
discussion, e.g. "simulation based learning fits the principles of a constructivist learning
environment" or "human tutors adapt better to students' learning styles than intelligent
tutoring systems". These statements were based upon the literature students were
supposed to study.

Students were assigned to different theoretical and practical discussions (8 -- 12 students
per discussion). They were provided with computers at home and had access to Allaire
forums 24 hours a day. Some discussions embodied a `reflective' moderator where others
did not. A `reflective' moderator focused on checking information on meaning, strength
and relevance and on questioning connections between claims and arguments (see e.g.
Veerman, Andriessen & Kanselaar, in press). In addition, the moderator summarised
information when a shared thematic focus in regard to the learning goal was lost. In sum,
28 discussions were collected. We compared `highly' moderated student discussions (at
maximum 25% of the messages was sent by a moderator) to less moderated and not
moderated discussions. Thus, we could analyse (1) the effects of moderation
interventions on students' focused discussion and the production of constructive activities
within each discussion, and (2) the effects of faded moderation interventions on students'
behaviour.

We expected the asynchronous communication system to offer some advantages above
synchronous CMC systems. First of all, students are not (psychologically) pressed to
react in a short unit of time. This might support the production of constructive activities
that integrate earlier stated information with new meaning and insights such as
knowledge transformations. Secondly, in most systems students can organise their
messages by `branching' them around themes. Thus, despite time stamps questions and
answers, arguments and elaborations, statements and counters all can be linked together.
This may enhance focus maintenance.

It is obvious that we are comparing different systems, and different assignments, and this
does not allow strict comparison of results. However, the interplay between focusing,
argumentation and constructive activities is studied in all cases, and a comparison may
lead to interesting hypotheses for further research.

Results

In sum, we analysed 20 synchronous chat discussions in the NetMeeting study, 13
synchronous chat discussions and related diagrams in the Belvédère study and 28
asynchronous discussions in Allaire Forums. All discussions (n=61) were subsequently
analysed on content-related thematic fragments, in which each single message was coded
on focusing, argumentation and constructive activities. Furthermore, the interplay
between focusing, argumentation and the production of constructive activities was
analysed and the effects of pedagogical support provided by humans (NetMeeting,
Allaire Forums) and the CMC system (diagram construction tool in Belvédère). For each
study, we additionally executed a K-Means cluster analysis. We aimed at identifying
relatively homogeneous groups of student discussions considering focus, argumentation
and the production of constructive activities. Analysis of variance F statistics revealed
information about each variable's contribution to the separation of the clusters (Everitt,
1974).

 Table 2: Frequencies, correlations and cluster analysis across NetMeeting, Belvédère
                                                  and Forum discussions

                                  Netmeeting (N=20)        Belvédère (N=13)         Forum discussions
                                                                                    (N=28)

Frequencies:                      Content-related: 64%     Content-related: 42%     Content-related: 88%

Focus                             - meaning: 9%            - meaning: 24%           - meaning: 41%

                                  - use: 41%               - use: 18%               - use: 47%

                                  - strategy: 14%          Planning: 28%            Organisational: 9%

                                  Not-task related: 36%    Technical: 29%           Not-task related: 3%

Argumentation                     - 22% check              - 21% check              - 23% check

                                  - 12% challenge          - 10% challenge          - 3 % challenge

                                  - 8% counter             - 19% counter            - 3 % counter

Constructive Activities           - 12 % additions         - 21% additions          - 23 % additions

                                  - 8 % explanations       - 7% explanations        - 37 % explanations

                                  - 15 % evaluations       - 19% evaluations        - 10% evaluations

                                  - no summaries           - no summaries           - 1% summaries

                                  - no transformations     - no transformations     - 1% transformations

                                  SUM CA: 35%              SUM CA: 48%              SUM CA: 72%

Correlations:

Argumentation Û CA                no relationship          --- *1)                  R = .33 (p = .09)

Focus on meaning Û CA             no relationship                                   R = .55**

Shift focus {meaning - use}Û      R = .47*                                          R = .67**
CA
{Focus on meaning * argument}    R = .48*                                                R= .34 (p = .08)
Û CA

Cluster analysis:

- Conceptualisers                N=5                    N=2                              N=6

- Conceptual Achievers           N=3                    N=6                              N = 6 high; 16 low

- Achievers                      N = 12                 N=5                              N= 0

*1) Relationships found could be explained by the amount of messages sent per discussion

As shown in Table 2, the Forum discussions embodied most content-related talk (88%),
followed by the NetMeeting discussions (64%) and the Belvédère discussions (42%).
However, in the NetMeeting study content-related talk embodied conceptual talk (about
the meaning and use of concepts) ánd strategy-related talk (about planning issues etc.). In
the Belvédère and Forum studies content-related talk embodied only conceptual talk
(focus on meaning and use of concepts). The NetMeeting discussions were mainly
focused on the use of concepts (41%), only 9% of the messages were focused on the
meaning of concepts. The Belvédère discussions were focused more on the meaning of
concepts (24%) then on the use of concepts (18%). The Forum discussions were focused
on both conceptual meaning (41%) and on the use of concepts (47%).

To compare the three studies in more detail, we looked at content-related fragments that
were only focused on the meaning or use of concepts. These messages were all coded on
argumentation and the production of constructive activities. For each study, we
standardised the sum of content-related messages to 100% in order to compute and
compare the relative amount of argumentation and constructive activities produced across
the studies. First of all, we found the Belvédère discussions to be most argumentative.
Every second message was coded as a check (21%), challenge (10%) or counter-
argument (19%). The NetMeeting discussions embodied a comparable percentage of
checks (22%) and challenges (12%), but contained fewer counter-arguments (8%). The
Forum discussions contained a comparable percentage of checks (23%) but hardly
embodied challenges (3%) and counter-arguments (3%). Considering the production of
constructive activities, we found that summaries and transformations did not occur in
synchronous discussions (NetMeeting and Belvédère) and rarely in asynchronous
discussions (Forum). Most constructive activities were produced in the Forum
discussions (72%), especially explanations (37%) and additions (23%). The Belvédère
discussions embodied more constructive activities than the NetMeeting discussions (resp.
48% and 35%), however, the division among the types of constructive activities was
comparable: they were mainly coded as additions and evaluations.

Correlation measurements showed some consistencies in the interplay between focus,
argumentation and the production of constructive activities. In the NetMeeting and
Belvédère discussions, argumentation (S (checks + challenges + counters)) in itself
showed no relationship with the production of constructive activities. However, in the
Forum discussions we found a weak but positive relationship between argumentation
(mainly checks) and the production of constructive activities (r = .34; p= .09). A
significant relationship could be found between focusing on the meaning of concepts and
the production of constructive activities (r = .55*). In both NetMeeting ánd Forum
discussions a relationship could be found between shifting focus between the meaning
and use of concepts and the production of constructive activities (resp. r = .47* and r =
.67**). In addition, in both studies we found a significant relationship between focused
argumentation on the meaning of concepts and the production of constructive activities
(resp. r = .48* and r = .34; p = .08). The Belvédère chat discussions showed comparable
types of relationships, unfortunately, we had to explain these findings by an intermediate
variable: the total amount of messages sent per discussion. The more messages sent, the
more focused argumentation occurred, the more constructive activities were produced.

The results of the cluster analysis showed that in each study three comparable types of
clusters could be distinguished, that we labelled as groups of (1) Conceptualisers, (2)
Conceptual Achievers and (3) Achievers. The first cluster could be characterised as a
cluster in which students focused argumentation mainly on the meaning of concepts,
shifted focus between the meaning and use of concepts, and produced a fair amount of
constructive activities. We labelled this cluster as a group of Conceptualisers. The second
cluster could be characterised by students who engaged in discussion but focused their
argumentation partly on the meaning ánd partly on the use of concepts. They shifted
focus between the meaning and use of concepts and produced constructive activities. We
labelled this cluster as a group of Conceptual Achievers. The third cluster could be
characterised by students who focused argumentation mainly on the use of concepts and
shifted focus to the task strategy and not-task related issues. They produced a low amount
of constructive activities. We labelled this cluster as a group of Achievers.

In both the NetMeeting and Belvédère discussions we found groups of Conceptualisers,
Conceptual Achievers and Achievers. However, the Belvédère discussions were more
often conceptually oriented than the NetMeeting discussions (resp. 8 out of 13 versus 8
out of 20). Asynchronous Forum discussions only embodied groups of Conceptualisers
and Conceptual Achievers. The latter group could be split into a 'high' and 'low' group of
Conceptual Achievers. 'High' groups engaged into much more discussion than 'low'
groups. However, both groups focused their argumentation partly on the meaning and
partly on the use of concepts, shifted focus between meaning and use of concepts and
produced constructive activities.

Considering pedagogical support for constructive discussions, in the NetMeeting study
we found that a 'reflective' coaching strategy appeared to be a small first step in the right
direction. 'Reflective' peer coaches triggered students to check more information on
strength and relevance (see for further details: Veerman, Andriessen & Kanselaar, in
press). Checking information, related to a focus on the meaning of concepts, showed to
be important for the production of constructive activities across all three studies.
However, in the Belvédère study student groups engaged into more conceptually oriented
discussions than 'effectively' coached students in the NetMeeting study. Taking both task
characteristics and group size into account, we think this finding relates to the diagram
construction tool that seemed to help students to keep focus, to keep track of the
discussion and to mediate constructive chat discussions (see also: Veerman, Andriessen
& Kanselaar, 1999). The Forum study embodied most effective discussions. Students
focused strongly on content-related information, they showed no technical difficulties or
problems to keep track of their discussion, and they produced most constructive
activities. 'Reflective' moderation supported students' critical information checking only
in first weeks' discussions. In later discussions, students checked each other's information
critically and summarised information if necessary. They showed no further need for a
'reflective' moderator. In Allaire Forums, students seemed to benefit from the
asynchronous mode of communication for reflection, the transparency of the interface
and the organised structure for communication in 'threads' and 'branches'.

Conclusions

In this study, we analysed and compared academic discussions in synchronous and
asynchronous Computer Mediated Communication systems (Netmeeting, Belvédère, and
Allaire Forums) on the interplay of focused argumentation and the production of
constructive activities (as a definition for learning in process).

The results indicate that, first of all, all discussions were highly argumentative. From our
point of view, this can be an effect of task characteristics that provoke and structure
argumentation to a greater extent than to interface characteristics (Veerman & Treasure-
Jones, 1999). Second, students' learning from electronic discussion requires analysing
focus in relation to argumentation. Argumentative information exchanges are not solely
related to the production of constructive activities. Thirdly, considering focusing,
argumentation and the production of constructive activities asynchronous and
synchronous discussions could be characterised differently. In both the synchronous
NetMeeting and Belvédère system, students engaged into short and strong discussions.
They checked, challenged and countered each other's information and produced additions
and evaluations. The Belvédère system appeared to stimulate students to check and
counter each other's information most frequently and to focus strongly on the meaning of
concepts. The asynchronous Forum discussions could be characterised as highly
constructive, students tend to argue 'mildly' by information checks and they mainly added
or explained information. Students focused on and shifted focus between the meaning
and use of concepts. Across studies, student groups could be clustered as groups of
Conceptualisers (engaged in meaningful discussion), Conceptual Achievers (meaningful
and task-oriented) and Achievers (task-oriented; aimed finishing the task). Forum
discussions only embodied student groups that were labelled as Conceptualisers or
Conceptual Achievers. The NetMeeting and Belvédère discussions embodied all types of
student groups, however, the Belvédère discussions were more conceptually oriented.
Remarkably, in neither the asynchronous nor the synchronous discussions students were
driven to produce summaries or information transformation. This may be due to required
cognitive effort but also to an incomplete, intuitive and personalised understanding of
information under discussion (Treasure-Jones, submitted thesis; Kuhn, 1991). Students
need sufficient understanding of a topic and a mutual framework for interpreting each
other's information before they can state firm positions and stick to a position (Coirier,
Andriessen & Chanquoy, 1999). To reach new insights, there must be a certain level of
(shared) understanding. In our studies, considering task characteristics, students'
preparation time, prior knowledge and time available for discussion, reaching (deeper)
understanding may have been the highest goal reachable, especially through the use of
asynchronous CMC systems. Reaching new insights may be just the next step, for
instance, when students are sufficiently prepared to take firm positions to engage in
critical, strong and hefty argumentation (triggered best by synchronous CMC systems?).

Fourth, task characteristics and interface affordances interact and determine to a greater
extent the constructiveness of a discussion than a tutor or moderator. While a 'reflective
tutor', who checks information on strength and relevance, had some relationship to the
production of constructive activities in the Netmeeting task, the Belvédère interface
might have taken over this role. In the Forum discussions, the 'reflective' moderator's role
appeared to be easily taken over by students. However, in asynchronous discussions, we
do not observe many challenges and counter-argumentation. This may be due to the
relative permanence of text produced, which requires greater barriers to overcome to
produce a piece of text (Mason, 1992). Our observations have shown that tutors
challenging and countering their students immediately end any discussion. But it may be
a social phenomenon, overcome by experience.

To conclude with, reflective support offered by human moderation or structured
(graphical) interaction at the interface may help students to engage in meaningful
discussion. Students can be enhanced to engage in conceptually focused critical
argumentation. However, we don't think that educational task- or software designers have
to embrace all problems we found. E.g. spending energy on finding support for the so-
called Achievers may be a waste of time. Such students can be found across every type of
task and CMC system. Of course, software designers have to consider students' attitudes,
motivation and self-regulation when developing a system, but we also think that
academic students have to take responsibility for their own learning, especially in
interactive learning scenarios (Andriessen & Sandberg, 1999).

Bibliography

Andriessen, J.E.B. & Sandberg, J.A.C. (1999). Where is Education heading and how
about AI? International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in education 10 (2), 130-150.

Baker, M. (1996). Argumentation and cognitive change in collaborative problem-solving
dialogues. COAST Research Report Number CR-13/96, France.

Baker, M., & Bielaczyc, K. (1995). Missed opportunities for learning in collaborative
problem-solving interactions. In J. Greer (Ed.), Proceedings of AI-ED 95 - 7th World
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 210-218). Charlottesville:
Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE).

Bostock, A.J. (1996). A critical review of Laurillard's classification of educational media.
Instructional Science (24), 71-88.
Cohen, J. (1968). Weighted kappa: nominal scale agreement with provisions for scales
disagreement of partial credit. Psychological Bulletin 70, 213-220.

Coirier, P., Andriessen, J.E.B., & Chanquoy, L. (1999). From planning to translating: The
specificity of argumentative writing. In: P. Coirier & J.E.B.Andriessen (Eds.)
Foundations of argumentative text processing. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.

Doise, W. & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford:
Pergamon Press.

Erkens, G. (1997). Cooperatief probleemoplossen met computers in het onderwijs: Het
modelleren van cooperatieve dialogen voor de ontwikkeling van intelligente
onderwijssystemen [Cooperative problem solving with computers in education:
Modelling of cooperative dialogues for the design of intelligent educational systems].
Ph.D. thesis, Utrecht University, the Netherlands.

Erkens, G. (1998). Multiple Episode Protocol Analysis (MEPA 3.0). Internal publication.
Department of Educational Sciences, Utrecht University, the Netherlands.

Everitt, B. (1974). Cluster analysis. Heinemann Educational books, London.

Gyselinck, V. & Tardieu, H. (1999). The role of illustrations in text comprehension:
What, When, for Whom, and Why? In H.van Oostendorp & S. Goldman (Eds.) The
construction of mental representations during reading. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, p. 195-
218.

Kiesler, S. (1986). The hidden message in computer networks. Harvard Business Review,
64 (1), 46-58.

Kuhn, D. (1991). The Skills of Argument. Cambridge: University Press.

Laurillard, D. (1993). Rethinking university teaching: a framework for the effective use of
educational technology. Routledge, London.

Learning Research and Development Center (1996). Advanced Cognitive Tools for
Learning. http://advlearn.lrdc.pitt.edu/belvedere/index.html . University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh.

Mason, R. (1992). The textuality of computer networking. In R. Mason (Ed.), Computer
Conferencing: The Last Word. Victoria, British Columbia: Beach Holme Publishers
Limited.

Piaget, J. (1977). The development of thought: Equilibration of cognitive structures. New
York: Viking Penguin.
Petraglia, J. (1997). The rhetoric and technology of authenticity in education. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Pilkington, R., McKendree, J., Pain, H., Brna, P. (1999). Analysing educational dialogue
interaction: towards models that support learning. `A One day Workshop at AI-Ed '99',
9th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, Le Mans, France.
July 19-22, 1999.

Reimann, P. (1999). Commentary: the role of external representations in distributed
problem solving. Learning and Instruction, 9, 4, 419 - 424.

Roschelle, J. & Teasley, S.D. (1995). Construction of shared knowledge in collaborative
problem solving. In C. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer-supported collaborative learning. New
York: Springer-Verlag.

Rutter, D. R. (1987). Communicating by Telephone. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Savery J. & Duffy, T. M. (1996). Problem based learning: An instructional model and its
constructivist framework. In B. Wilson (Ed.) Constructivist learning environments: Case
studies in instructional design (pp. 135-148). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational
Technology Publications.

Short, J., E. Williams, and B. Christie (1976). The social psychology of
telecommunications. New York: Wiley.

Smith, J.B. (1994). Collective Intelligence in Computer-Based Collaboration. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Spears, R. & Lea, M. (1992) Social influence and the influence of the social in computer
mediated communication In: Context of computer mediated communication. Ed: Martin
Lea, Bodmin, Great Brittain.

Steeples, C., Unsworth, C., Bryson, M., Goodyear, P., Riding, P., Fowell, S., Levy, P., &
Duffy, C. (1996). Technological support for teaching and learning: Computer-mediated
communications in higher education (CMC in HE). Computers & Education, 26 (1-3),
71-80.

Treasure-Jones, T. (submitted thesis). Supporting students' critical essay planning:
towards a computer based approach. Computer Based Learning Unit, The University of
Leeds.

Veerman, A.L. & Andriessen, J.E.B. (in press). Collaborative argumentation in academic
education. Learning to Argue in Higher Education, Heinemann-Boynton/Cook book.
Veerman, A.L., Andriessen, J.E.B. & Kanselaar, G. (1999). Computer-mediated
discussions through graphically structured interaction. Presented at the 8th European
Conference for Research on learning and Instruction. August 24-28, Göteborg, Sweden.

Veerman, A.L. & Treasure-Jones, T. (1999). Software for problem solving through
collaborative argumentation. In P. Coirier & J.E.B. Andriessen (Eds.), Foundations of
argumentative text processing. Amsterdam University Press, the Netherlands.

Veerman, A.L., Andriessen, J.E.B. & Kanselaar, G. (acceptedin press) Enhancing
learning through synchronous discussion. Special Issue of Computers & Education -
CAL99 conference-. Elsevier Science Ltd., London.

Authors' addresses

Arja L. Veerman (A.Veerman@fss.uu.nl; http://eduweb.fss.uu.nl/arja/)
Utrecht University, Department of Educational Science, Heidelberglaan 2, 3523 EN
Utrecht, The Netherlands Tel: ++31 (0)30 -- 2534827. Fax: ++31 (0)30 - 2532352
Jerry E.B. Andriessen (J.Andriessen@fss.uu.nl)
Utrecht University, Department of Educational Science, Heidelberglaan 2, 3523 EN
Utrecht, The Netherlands Tel: ++31 (0)30 -- 2534942. Fax: ++31 (0)30 - 2532352
Gellof Kanselaar (G.Kanselaar@fss.uu.nl)
Utrecht University, Department of Educational Science, Heidelberglaan 2, 3523 EN
Utrecht, The Netherlands Tel: ++31 (0)30 -- 2534893. Fax: ++31 (0)30 - 2532352
