How Youth and Mentors Experience Project-based
Learning in an Internet-based Shared Environment for
Expeditions (iExpeditions)
Minjuan Wang, Jim Laffey, Tom Tupper

Center for Technology Innovation in Education, University of Missouri, Columbia

Paul Wangemann

Motorola University

Carl Harris

McKay School of Education, Brigham Young University

      Abstract: This paper describes experiences of youth and their mentors with
      authentic problem solving in an Internet-based Shared Environment for
      Expeditions (iExpeditions). The key questions examined are in what ways
      and to what extent do youth become engaged in an Expedition. First we
      examine parentsí attitudes toward the iExpeditions project, and youthís
      motivation for these online activities. Then we present the design for
      youthsí first two-weeks of activities and then the reality of what occurred.
      After that, we present results of an active group of fourteen youth and
      analyze why they were more engaged than others were. We describe four
      cases from this group to further explore this question. Our discussion
      summarizes youthsí status of participation as a whole, factors that have
      affected youthsí engagement, and what we should do to ensure a good
      startup for the second round of the project.

      Keywords: action research, computer-mediated communication, project-
      based learning

Introduction

The Internet-based Shared Environment for Expeditions (iExpeditions) project is both a
development effort of the Center for Technology Innovations in Education (CTIE),
University of Missouri, Columbia, and a research project conducted in partnership with
Motorola, Inc. and a researcher at Brigham Young University. The project seeks to
develop and understand the use of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL)
technologies for supporting distributed learning communities via the web.

"Expedition" is a metaphor for participantís involvement in a team problem-solving
activity. In the expedition reported on here, participants were challenged to come up with
solutions on how to design, develop and market telematics. Telematics is wireless
communications designed for the car providing drivers with personalized information,
messaging, entertainment and location-specific travel and security services. The entire
expedition lasted eight weeks, with one milestone for each week. Each week participants
needed to accomplish a milestone, which contains several problem statements called
challenges. Challenges were distributed by the mentor to the youth participants as a
special type of document inserted in their expedition log. Participants conducted their
activities through a web site providing a coordinated set of CSCL tools facilitating their
communication, information access, collaboration and knowledge representation.

Theoretical background

Computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) is considered as an emerging
paradigm in instructional technology. It focuses on the use of technology as mediational
tools within a collaborative methods of instruction (Koschmann, 1996). Pea and
Roschelle (1999) summarized the discussion at a workshop on "Tools for Learning
Communities," by emphasizing the difficulty of using the web and CSCL-type tools as a
medium for constructivism. It is much easier to read, view and hear than to create and
collaborate. They call for better understanding of the processes and better tools to support
the processes of collaborative work and learning. In alliance with this, Koschmann (1996)
argued that the central focus for research in CSCL should focus on the social factors in
the process of learning, the use of technology, and the learner interactions. The group or
social interaction nature of the online educational environment is one of the major themes
theoreticians and practitioners in educational technology commonly address (Harasim,
1990b). Little research, however, has been done to assess and document technology-
assisted cooperative learning. Though the interest in understanding the process from a
participantís viewpoint is growing, there have been only a small number of studies of
participantsí talk and the artifacts they generate (Koschmann, 1996). Furthermore, there
is a lack of theorizing and conceptual models for creating guidelines for practice
(Johnson & Johnson, 1996).

Because of the importance we place on building theory from the understandings of the
participants in CSCL, the main purpose of this study is to better articulate the experiences
of the youth and mentors in iExpeditions. The researchers examined the actions, reports,
and impressions of the participants in iExpeditions. The emerging themes, e.g., origin of
motivation, youthsí individual differences, social and intellectual interactions,
engagement, learning outcomes in CSCL, have been integrated into a descriptive model
of the observed practices (see figure 2). This model of CSCL-mediated project-based
learning will be verified and further developed during the second pilot of the
iExpeditions. In this way, the researchers hope to build new knowledge and generate
principles for the future implementation of CSCL systems and tools.

Research questions

The long-term research question is: "How do youth and mentors experience project-based
learning in an Internet-based Shared Environment for Expeditions (iExpeditions)?" It is
derived from a review of literature on computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL)
(Koschmann, 1996), project-based learning (Blumenfeld et al., 1991), online learning
environments and educational computer-mediated communication (Harasim, 1990). To
answer this question, we examined three dimensions of this project-- the learning
experiences of the youth, the teaching experiences of online mentors, and the function of
the CSCL tools. This report presents in detail the data from the first two weeks, and
focuses on what helps or hinders getting started on an expedition in the iExpeditions
system. It then briefly describes a preliminary model of Youthsí Interest, Participation
and Outcomes in CSCL-mediated Project-based Learning (Figure 2), which is derived
from an analysis of the eight-week iExpeditions data.

Method

Participants

In this pilot of iExpedions (from April 28thóJune 15th, 1999), forty-five teenagers from
13 to 17 years old who responded to an invitation for the iExpeditions were selected to
participate. Selection was based on the youth having sufficient access to technology
(primarily a modern computer and Internet access). They were divided into 9 groups of 5
(labeled A to I), and approached the Expedition activities under the guidance of online
mentors from Brigham Young University.

Method and data collection

Data were collected in various ways: non-participant observation (online), electronic
surveys, questionnaires, interviewing (telephone and in person), chat room observation,
recording of discussions in the forum, and project artifacts collection. The primary
sources of data are the electronic logs and notes among youth and mentors as captured in
the iExpeditions tool.

The researchers' inspection of system use and interviews with the youth and mentors
were the primary instruments for data-collection. In addition, we used existing
instruments, tests, and self-designed questionnaires and surveys as supplementary
instruments for data-collection. The existing instruments used include: Collins Attitude
Towards Computer Scale (CACS) for measuring youthsí computer anxiety level,
Children's Nowicki-Strickland Internal-External Locus of Control Scale (Nowicki &
Strickland, 1973) for measuring level of personal agency; Kolb's learning style inventory
(Smith & Kolb, 1986) for measuring the individual learning styles, modified
Spielberger's Self-Evaluation Questionnaire about Computer Anxiety (Gaudry &
Spielberger, 1971) for measuring mentorsí attitudes toward computer. The researcher-
designed tools include: questionnaire on technology infrastructure for selecting youth
who had the potential to be successful participants, questionnaire on technology
experience, youths' weekly self-report challenge cards, and mentors' weekly evaluation of
youths' participation, such as persistence, enthusiasm, initiative and individual
contributions.
As soon as the online activities started, the iExpeditions system captured all participantsí
interactions, contributions, questions generated and the frequency of their participation.
Youth were required to complete a weekly self-report challenge card to reflect on how
they have progressed during the week. The challenge contains a link to a web-based
survey on youthís level of interest and motivation toward activities during the first and
second week, on the amount and types of support they received from mentors and
iExpeditions staff, and on the functions of the iExpeditions system itself. Mentors were
encouraged to kept open reflection logs on their well-facilitated moments, perceptions of
participant improvement, the improvement of their teaching and computer skills, and
their feelings of achievement.

Results

Parents-interviewing

Parentsí attitudes are considered one of the factors affecting youthís enrollment,
engagement and outcome of participation. Ten of the parents were interviewed about
their attitudes towards the iExpeditions project, what interested them about the project,
and what were their expectations of their children in participating in it. Most parents were
enthusiastic and supportive towards their childrenís participation in the iExpeditions, and
most of them realized the value of the use of the Internet, the benefits of team work, and
the importance of exposing children to problem-solving in the real world. Some of them
commented on the use of iExpeditions as a new way of communication, and as an
efficient information-gathering tool. To most people, the project is brand-new and
unique, and they were impressed with what they have seen up to that point in the
orientation. Most of them expected their children to achieve the aspects they valued about
this project. Two parents hoped this project could be a starting point for their children to
think about future careers. Three other parents hoped to learn from this project and apply
what they learn to their own work.

Youthsí motivation toward iExpeditions

Youth were motivated to participate in iExpeditions by one or two of the following
factors: telematics, teamwork, computers, Internet/Web-based, challenge, Motorola and
business, hands-on practices, learning activities online, and experience.

Youth who have high computer skills were more attracted to the concept of teamwork
and problem solving. Youth who were not satisfied with their computer skills found the
technology aspect of the project appealing. They considered this as an opportunity to
learn new software and computer knowledge. Among the 30 youth who completed the
"Technology Experience" survey during the orientation, nine expressed interest in
telematics technology; nine were interested in team work with other people; nine said
they were attracted to the project because of the use of computers; seven liked the project
because it is Internet-based; two were interested in the challenge; two wanted to learn
more about Motorola and business; two hoped to gain hands-on practices; two were
interested in the learning activities, "the learning type over the Internet." And one
expected that working with computers and other people would be a good experience for
her.

                 Figure 1: Youth's motivation toward iExpeditions

First two-weekís activities

From April 28th to May 12th, forty-five youth undertook their first and second week
Expedition activities led by their mentors. They needed to reach Milestone 1, which
contains 3 challenges. Challenge 1, "Meet your Team", was designed to have youth take
initiative to know their team members and mentors. In Challenge 2, youth checked out
the Motorola CEOís speech on telematics, which is the charge for the duration of the
Expedition experience. Youth were required to generate an initial "What to Do" list, and
categorize a list of "What We Know" and "What We Need to Know." They were then to
create a problem statement about telematics. In Challenge 3, youth were encouraged to
come up with a "first-cut" problem statement based on the telematics charge. In
Milestone 2 for the second week, youth started their information seeking activities to
solve their "first-cut" problem. At the end of each week, youth were sent a "Self-report
Challenge Card" to reflect on their activities. They were asked to reflect upon "How is
the team doing?" and "How are you doing?" A web-based survey was linked to this
document, in which youth gave feedback to the project team, about their level of interest
in the Expedition activities, the functions of the system, the availability of support from
mentors or technical staff, the effectiveness of teamwork, and their suggestions on how to
make the iExpeditions more enjoyable.
Most mentors sent welcome notes to their teams to arouse attention, and then sent out the
challenge files. Some followed up on the challenges and gave youth more instructions on
how to complete those challenges. At the end of each week, each team scheduled chat
sessions, and conducted evaluations on their activities and performance in the past week.
Mentors sent out chat agenda ahead of time, so as to have youth participate in the chat
with prepared thoughts.

The active group

Since the iExpedition program and the iExpedition system are new, we expected
numerous problems to surface during the pilot phase. The most significant has been the
number of youth who for one reason or another have not participated. At the end of the
second week there were 14 active youth, thirteen that had some level of participation, and
the rest was still inactive. The reasons for inactivity include technical problems with
iExpeditions, inexperienced mentors, insufficient home systems, busy schedules for the
youth, low interest, and perhaps others. This paper will report on the youth that were
active in the system.

Most of the 14 active youth (9 males, 5 females) attended the face-to-face orientation
meeting on April 23rd. Learning style is one of the main variables that may affect youthís
engagement in the project and the outcome of their participation. Youthís learning style
was measured by using Kolbís Learning-Style Inventory. Four youth of this group have
the learning style of an accommodator (good at concrete experience and active
experimentation). Three of them have the learning style of a converger (good at abstract
conceptualization and active experimentation). The common characteristic of the two
types of learners is an ability to do active experimentation. Their Attitude Towards
Computer (ATC) scores range from 109 to 119 (of a total 119), which indicates their high
positive attitudes and low levels of computer anxiety. Youth's locus of control was
measured to determine whether personal agency would make a significant difference in
their engagement and achievements. Most of their external scores on the locus of control
scale are lower than 10, which indicates high internality. Nowicki and Strickland (1973)
reported significant correlation between internality and higher academic achievement for
children from grades three through 12. Locus of control has been related to other
personality variables in a theoretically consistent fashion.

Most of active participants use computers daily, for school, fun or exploration. Although
the 45 youth as a whole all have proficient skills with computer software and technology,
the 14 active ones have more extensive computer experiences. Youthís experience with
software or computer technology was assessed on a scale of 1 to 4, with 1 being never
using, and 4 being using very often. Most of the active group rated themselves as 4 or 3
in using word, email, chat room, Web search engines, presentation software, spreadsheet,
Web authoring and multimedia authoring software.

Another noticeable commonality of the youth is their team consciousness and their
interest in team building. Three of them rated the activity in getting to know group
members as the most interesting part of the first-week Expedition. Being the only one
active in his team for the first week, Y005 was puzzled by the inactive status of other
members in his team, and sent a note asking, "Where is everybody?" Nevertheless, he felt
the iExpeditions was still interesting and he was looking forward to meeting his team
members. Below are beginning case reports of four of the most active youth. Three of the
successful participants shown in our case reports, Y001, Y002 and Y003, all have strong
team-consciousness. Their ideas on what team is and how a team should work together
were mature and insightful. Those ideas help explain their active participation and
initiative in team building.

Case study of 4 youth

Of the 14 successful participants from Team A, B, C, H, F, and I, three of those youth are
in Team I. By analyzing team I daily activities, we found that the mentor has played an
important role in getting team members engaged. At the beginning, team I mentor Mrs. C
sent a warm welcome note to each team member, sent a "Things to Do" list to remind
them to complete their personal profiles and challenge 1, and sent notes with encouraging
team-building messages, e.g.,

      "Here's a rule that I have as a mentor: There is only one stupid question
      and that is the question that is not asked. So don't be shy or feel
      embarrassed to ask. Each one of us has weaknesses as well as strengths.
      So, let's help each other without any reservations."

After sending out each challenge, she observed carefully what youth were doing, and
gave them step-by-step instructions on how to insert answers to a challenge. She also sent
reflections on each chat session, so as to keep team members updated about what has
been discussed, and what are the plans for the future. Importantly, she encouraged them
to keep up with their iExpeditions work. She even set up a "Stressssssss-Relief Corner" in
the team forum to solve youthís participation problems. In this way, Mrs. C has
established an enthusiastic, caring and patient mentor image.

Case 1 Y001

Y001 is a 16-year old, with a learning style of converger (good at abstract
conceptualization and active experimentation). He shows a very positive attitude towards
computers (a score of 116), and high internality on the locus of control scale (an external
score of 5). He uses computers daily for school, 2-3 times/week for fun, and daily for
exploration. His skills with word, email, WWW search engines, presentation software,
multimedia authoring and web authoring are all advanced. He indicates his major interest
is in the challenge and fun of working with a team over the web. Y001 completed the
Milestone 1 Challenge 1 and "Things to Do" challenge soon after he received them and
replied immediately to the mentorís inquiry for available times for chat sessions.

In his response to Challenge 1 on conceptions of teams, Y001 states that "teams should
strive to achieve a common goal and each person voice and state their opinions on how to
achieve their goals." He believes that teams can help produce success because multiple
people will bring different perspectives and ideas of how to solve a problem. Y001 also
completed his self-report challenge, in which he indicated his interest in the first week
Expedition activities was high (4). Things that have most interested him in the first week
were to meet team members and to anticipate the new challenge.

Mentor Mrs. C commented on Y001ís participation. "We contact each other frequently.
Very helpful (helped in General Forum), good computer knowledge, I like his fiery
picture frame. . . Very patient guy, On task with his challenges."

Case 2 Y002

Y002 is also a 16-year old boy, with a learning style of accommodator (good at concrete
experience and active experimentation.) His ATC score is high (110), and his external
score on locus of control is low (7). He uses computers once a week for school, daily for
fun and once a week for exploration. He is familiar with word, email, WWW search
engines, and presentation tools. What has motivated him in participation is "learning
about the world through the Internet." Before the project officially started, Y002 created a
reflective log in his logbook, titled as "Me", "This log is mostly about me and my
exploration log." His initiative of reflection is remarkable.

Y002 replied immediately to the Self-Report Challenge, in which he indicated his level of
interest in the Expedition was 5 (the highest). Things that most interested him were the
logs he could make. Tools that have worked well for him were the notes and challenges.
He, however, had some technical problems. He rated the difficulties of the iExpeditions
tools as 5 (the most difficult). That was why he hasnít completed any of the challenges. In
his suggestions for change, he hopes to have a bigger team. According to Mentor Mrs.
Cís record, Y002 was the first to contact her, and they frequently kept in touch with
notes. "I am proud of having him and Y001 on my team. They are a mature group who
don't give up easily but are anxious to help each other succeed."

Case 3 Y003

Y003 is a 16-year old girl. Her learning style is undetermined, but she holds a very
positive attitude towards computer (116 of 119). Her locus of control is internal (6). She
uses computers 2 to 3 times a week for school, 2 to 3 times a week for fun, but never for
exploration. The software she has used includes word, email and web authoring. She is
the only one who indicated her motivation for participation is to gain experience. "I enjoy
working with computers and other people and hope that this will be a good experience for
me."

Y003 completed her challenge 1 and Self-Report Challenge. Her answer to challenge 1
questions shows her deep insights into teamwork and team building:

      "I believe that working well with people is extremely important and thatís
      exactly what teams are for. Teams are consisted of numerous people all
      striving to achieve a similar/specific goal. Within the team many different
      perspectives are contributed and thoughts begin to feed upon one another.
      Others in the group can analyze the unique ideas and thoughts of their
      team members by providing positive/negative aspects and thinking of
      areas in which it can be improved. As a result there can be various
      sophisticated ideas within a group. Teams can then reach a solution and
      achieve their goals successfully."

Her level of interest in the past week was 3. Getting to know her team was one of the
activities that really interested her. She was also active in participating in the chat
sessions, and volunteered to send messages to the team, informing other team members
about the setup of another chat session. All of the Expedition tools and resources worked
great for her and she did not have any problem in using them. She learned to use the
system by playing with the system and referring to the CD tutorial when having
problems. Mrs. C commented on her as very consistent, helpful and a willing worker. She
was apt in computer skills and on task with her challenges. They kept frequent contacts
through notes and chat.

Case 4 Y004

Y004 is a 16-year old boy, with a converger learning style, a positive attitude towards
computer (115 of 119), but has the highest external locus of control score (16). He uses
computers daily for school, fun and exploration, and his experiences with word, email,
search engines, chat, web authoring and multimedia authoring are extensive. The major
reason he participates in this project is to learn about computer work and business. As
early as April 27th, we noticed that Y004 put a log of star wars movie in his logbook. As
his mentor Mr. C observed, he basically has participated in all activities except
completing the challenges. The fact that he was the only person active in Team H may
have frustrated him.

To keep active single-handedly is a challenge in itself. The mentor has tried to maintain
his interest. In the note replying to Y004ís inquiry about the chat time, the mentor sent
him a well-designed, movie-like banner, in which there is dessert, helicopters, and the
snapshot of a little boy, with a sentence beside him, "I HAD A DREAM I WAS An
Expeditioner." This banner successfully romanticizes iExpeditions and tries to engage the
youth emotionally.

Discussion

In the first two weeks, fifty percent of the 45 youth took some actions to participate.
Those were mostly from the 32 youth that attended the physical orientation. Youth were
engaged first because of their self-motivation, and their diverse interests in Expedition-
type projects. Most youth were slow in completing their challenges. But many were
active in contacting their team members and mentors by notes and emails. In this process,
mentors played important roles in maintaining youthís engagement by giving immediate
feedback, inviting them to chat sessions, and providing help as needed.

The 14 youth who have been most active and productive indicated that the Expedition
tools were easy to learn, and they either learned them intuitively, by playing with the
system, or by using the CD tutorial. The 13 youth who were active but havenít completed
some of their challenges experienced some technical difficulties. For the youth who have
not logged in to the system since the orientation, most were still motivated and interested
in participating.

Overall, technical problems and lack of team formation turned out to be the primary
reasons that have slowed down youthís participation. The iExpeditions tools are most
accessible for youth that are at a high level of expertise. Youthís individual differences in
technology infrastructure and technology experience need to be taken into consideration.
A longer orientation period may be needed for youth to learn the system, e.g., to give
youth the CD tutorial one-week before the formal iExpeditions start. As one youth
commented, "it is hard to get things done. The training provided was really nothing."

Teambuilding is an essential part of iExpeditions, but has only been successful for 2
teams. In most teams, there were only two or three youth being active. Many felt
frustrated because of the lack of interactivity among their team members. According to
one project stakeholdersí prior experience with face-to-face classroom Expeditions
(known as Explorations), youthsí willingness to work hard depends on their peers making
the same commitment. The first two-weekís Expedition activities were isolated
experiences for most youth, which explains youthís slow starting with the Expedition
challenges. For the next Expedition in Fall 99, instead of assigning youth to randomly-
established teams, we may have youth interact with each other online (an electronic
party), then have them form spontaneous teams, or to self-select the teams they join.

A descriptive model of the pilot iExpeditions was constructed from detailed, recursive
analysis of the eight-week iExpeditions data (see figure 2). This model of Youthsí
Interest, Participation and Outcomes in CSCL-mediated Project-based Learning describes
the major themes (constructs) that emerged from the pilot including youthsí personal
attributes, environmental context, youthsí attributions (the senses youth make out of
iExpeditions), interest and participation, team functioning, learning and performance
outcomes, and suggests how these constructs are or could be interrelated. The pilot data
and related literature suggested significant relationships between major variables within
one construct, and between constructs. For instance, personal attributes and
environmental context significantly affected youthsí perceptions and understandings of
the iExpeditions activities, which in turn affected their interest and participation patterns.
Youthsí individual functioning contributed to team functioning, which influenced their
learning and performance outcomes. Since the model was generated from the data
collected within a limited period of time and in a specific setting, it needs to be further
verified through an extended period of study. The model will therefore become a starting
point for continuing research efforts in validating the relationships among the variables.
Further investigations on the components of the model will help us better understand how
to create the best possible CSCL-mediated environment for project-based learning.
Figure 2 The Model of Youthsí Interest, Participation and Outcomes in CSCL-mediated
                           Project-based Learning

Bibliography

Blumenfeld, P., Soloway, E., Marx, R., Krajcik, J., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991).
Motivating project-based learing: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning.
Educational Psychologist, 26(369-398).

Gaudry, E., & Spielberger, C. (1971). Anxiety and Educational Achievement. Sydney:
Wiley.
Harasim, L. M. (1990). Online education: an environment for collaboration and
intellectual amplification. In L. M. Harasim (Ed.), Online education: perspectives on a
new environment (pp. 229-64). New York: Praeger.

Koschmann, T. (Ed.). (1996). CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm.
Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.

Nowicki, S., & Strickland, B. (1973). A locus of control scale for children. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 40, 148-154.

Roscelle, J. & Pea, R. (1999). Trajectories from Today's WWW to a Powerful
Educational Infrastructure. Educational Researcher, 28(5), 22-25.

Smith, D. M., & Kolb, D. A. (1986). The User's Guide for the Learning-Style Inventory:
A Manual for Teachers and Trainers. Boston, MA: McBer & Company.

Authorsí addresses

Minjuan Wang (wang@coe.missouri.edu)
Center for Technology Innovation in Education, 111 London Hall, University of
Missouri; Columbia, MO 65211. Tel. (573) 884-0155. Fax (573) 884-5158.
Jim Laffey (cilaffey@mail.missouri.edu)
Center for Technology Innovation in Education, 111 London Hall, University of
Missouri; Columbia, MO 65211. Tel. (573 ) 882-5399. Fax (573) 884-5158.
Tom Tupper (tom@coe.missouri.edu)
Center for Technology Innovation in Education, 111 London Hall, University of
Missouri; Columbia, MO 65211. Tel. (573) 882-6573. Fax (573) 884-5158.
Paul Wangemann (apw002@NAmerica.mot.com)
Motorola University, 1303 E. Algonquin Road; Schaumburg, IL 60196. Tel. (847) 576-
1603. Fax (847)576-8591.
Carl Harris (carl_harris@byu.edu)
McKay School of Education, Brigham Young University, 210-V MCKB; Provo, Utah
84602. Tel. (801) 378-4974.
