Supporting the Development of a National Constellation
of Communities of Practice in the Scholarship of
Teaching and Learning Through the Use of Intelligent
Agents
Darren Cambridge

American Association for Higher Education and the University of Texas at Austin,
Computers Writing and Research Lab

      Abstract: This paper describes the WebCenter, a CSCL tool being
      developed to support the Carnegie Academy for the Scholarship of
      Teaching and Learning Campus Program, an effort to strengthen local
      communities of practice performing the scholarship of teaching and
      learning and to create a national constellation of communities of practice
      that transverses them. The WebCenter provides a suite of groupware tools
      for the use of Campus Program participants. The WebCenter uses two
      analysis systems to act as social agents to stimulate activity. First, a
      collaborative filtering system is used to encourage national and cross-
      disciplinary collaboration between scholars of teaching and learning.
      Second, an automated peer-review and invitation system, based on the
      model of a consensus journal, is being developed for three purposes: to
      support the development of national consensus on the criteria for assessing
      the scholarship of teaching and learning, to stimulate the production of
      scholarship meeting these criteria, and to lend credibility to scholarship
      published on the WebCenter.

Keywords: agents, groupware, teacher professional development

Introduction

Colleges and universities have often inadequately rewarded excellence in teaching
because teaching has been primarily unexamined and private. Teaching has been
something confined within classroom walls. Higher education must better document its
most important work­helping students learn­by identifying and sharing its best practices.
Excellence in teaching must be complimented by the scholarship of teaching and
learning. The term "scholarship of teaching" was initially coined by Ernest Boyer, the
late Past-President of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching
(CFAT), in his groundbreaking book Scholarship Reconsidered (Boyer 1990). Lee
Shulman, CFAT's current President, has identified three requirements for transforming
excellent teaching into the scholarship of teaching and learning: We must make
documented teaching and learning theory and practice publicly accessible, open to peer
critique, and available for reuse (Schulman 1998, 5).
The work of faculty currently doing the scholarship of teaching and learning is largely
isolated and poorly disseminated. Communities of practice in the scholarship of teaching
and learning are primarily local and discipline-specific. Rather than being formally
supported by Universities and disciplinary societies, they are often interstitial to the
canonical practice of these institutions. The Carnegie Academy for the Scholarship of
Teaching and Learning (CASTL) is working to build what Etienne Wenger terms a
"constellation of communities of practice" on a national scale which transverses these
local communities while respecting the situated nature of knowledge within them
(Wenger 1998, 126). CASTL is being built collaboratively by its architects at CFAT and
the American Association for Higher Education (AAHE) and by hundreds of educators
across the country as what Daft and Weick term an "enacting organization" (Daft and
Weick 1984). CASTL, through its widely distributed constituents, is interpreting the
environment of higher education and stimulating strategic change in an ongoing, iterative
process.

This national effort to expand, value, and interconnect the scholarship of teaching and
learning faces many challenges. These include:

   ·  There is no national consensus on the definition of the scholarship of teaching and
      learning, what activities it includes, and how to evaluate them.
   ·  There is insufficient networking across campuses, disciplines, and types of
      institutions to build consensus.
   ·  In order to be credible, consensus must be formed through the rigorous process of
      national peer review.
   ·  In order to be useful, it must provide flexibility to adjust to local needs and
      emerge from a continuing diversity of local practices.
   ·  In order to be equitable, the conversation that leads toward consensus must be
      widely accessible and democratic.
   ·  Making space for selectivity, diversity, and a broad base of participation will
      require a massive volume of inter-institutional and interdisciplinary
      communication.
   ·  Tracking and recording the conversation is necessary for its examination and use.
   ·  Because the scholarship of teaching and learning crosses conventional academic
      dividing lines, patterns of scholarly interests shared between individual faculty
      remain undetected.

Although it cannot affect change alone, CSCL technology that utilizes the Internet
provides the only available means to fully address these challenges.

Building a National Constellation of Communities of Practice Through the Internet

To foster and reward the scholarship of teaching and learning, higher education needs
both a social and a technological support system. The CASTL supplies the social support.
In addition to aiding individual scholars of teaching and disciplinary and professional
associations, it features the Campus Program, directed by AAHE. The premise of the
Campus Program is that campuses need national support in developing, coordinating and
validating new ideas and new practices of teaching, envisioning them as examined and
shared work. Inquiry groups, consisting of both teachers and senior administrators, have
been formed on over one hundred and twenty-five participating campuses. These groups
are linked to each other through common activities, conferences, and the Internet. A more
complete description of the Campus Program is available on the AAHE web site at
http://www.aahe.org/teaching/Carnegie/academy1.htm .

To meet the challenges of national conversation that the Campus Program supports
through use of the Internet, more than a conventional web site is required. The
WebCenter offers solutions to each of the challenges previously presented in the
following ways:

   ·  The WebCenter provides a centralized, nationally visible forum and clearinghouse
      for the scholarship of teaching and learning. It employs the web not simply as a
      medium for publication, but as a venue for communication in which to develop
      both a common vocabulary of key terms to describe the scholarship of teaching
      and learning and a comprehensive database of the products of this scholarship.
   ·  Communication through the WebCenter allows teachers from diverse institutional
      and disciplinary settings to explore each others' scholarship in order to discover
      new connections. They are able to expand these insights into productive networks
      through annotating documents to make interconnections explicit and forming
      interest groups to make them stronger.
   ·  The WebCenter automates the process of peer review, matching newly submitted
      materials with the Campus Program participants best qualified to assess them and
      calculating consensus judgements from their reviews. This peer review system is
      described in more detail below.
   ·  While providing an index of quality through peer review, the system also makes
      every contribution to the database and discussion forums accessible, so that
      unconventional approaches which may be powerful in a minority of local contexts
      can still be located and put into use.
   ·  To promote broad participation, the WebCenter will allows users to contribute
      products of scholarship in virtually any electronic form and provides tools to
      make this diversity of formats accessible to as many participants as possible. All
      of the WebCenter's features operate through any standard Internet browser,
      software which virtually all participants will already have installed on their
      computers and feel comfortable using.
   ·  In order to allow participants to filter out information not likely to be of interest to
      them and to locate the most useful information with minimal time and effort, the
      WebCenter offers sophisticated and easy to use search and browsing capabilities
      and allows users to instruct the system to automatically notify them by email
      when new information of potential interest appears.
   ·  The WebCenter keeps detailed records of all participant activity and maintains a
      permanent archive of all discussions and documents. Participants will always
      have the option of anonymity to ensure that their legitimate concern for their
      privacy does not inhibit them from taking advantage of the system.
    ·      In addition to providing a rich source for research, the records of activity allow
           the WebCenter's collaborative filtering engine, the Recommendation Center, to
           recommend participants to other participants who use and rank highly similar sets
           of online materials. Similar usage may indicate shared patterns of scholarly
           interest that could lead to fruitful exchanges of knowledge and collaborations.

Functionality of the Web Center

Users enter the WebCenter on the core page, where they are asked to log in. If it is their
first visit, they are asked to register themselves to the People directory by providing some
basic information about themselves and the institution with which they are affiliated. On
the core page, they can read announcement from the Campus Program staff. They may
then choose to interact with a number of entities. (See Table 1.) They may perform one of
three actions in order to locate a particular instance of an entity with which to work.
Once they have selected an instance, they may perform one of five instance actions upon
it. All actions occur through simple forms within any web browser.

                                     Table 1: Functionality of the WebCenter

Entities             People             Groups             Reports            Messages             Resources          References          Drafts

                     Users of the       Groups of users    The formal         Messages in          Documents or       Bibliographic       Documents
                     WebCenter. A       who work           reports to be      ongoing              programs in any    references of       posted to the
                     variety of         together. Both     filed by campus    conversation of a    electronic         hyperlinks to       WebCenter for
                     information is     campus groups      groups as          variety of topics    format             external print or   comment and
                     collected about    and interest-      described in the   chosen by            contributed by     electronic          revision by
                     each new user.     based groups       Program            participants         users and staff    resources           other users or
                                                           booklet.                                to the                                 group members
                                                                                                   WebCenter

Actions

Add                  Self               New; Add self      Members of         New message or       Upload (with       Yes                 Upload
                                        (with              campus group       topic                permission)
                                        permission)

Browse               Hierarchically     Hierarchically     By campus          Threaded Topics      Hierarchically     Hierarchically      Hierarchically
                     by keyword         by keyword                                                 by keyword         by keyword          by keyword

Search               By directory       By topic and       Full text and by   Full text and by     Full text and by   Full text and by    Full text and by
                     variables          participant        type and           metadata             metadata           metadata            metadata
                                        variables          campus             variables            variables          variables           variables
                                                           variables

Instance Actions

Annotate             No                 No                 Yes                Reply                Yes                Yes                 Yes

Categorize           Self by            Keywords           Keywords           Threads              Keywords and       Keywords and        Keywords
                     keywords
                                                                                                   Review Status      Review Status

Update               Self only          Creator only       Campus group       Author only          Add a new          Author only         Tracked
                                                           members                                 version                                revisions by
                                                                                                                                          group
Rank                 No               No               By usefulness     By usefulness       By usefulness     By usefulness     By usefulness

Review               No               No               No                For accuracy and    For accuracy      For accuracy      No
                                                                         importance          and importance    and importance

Notify by email      By search        By search        By search         By search           By search         By search         By search
                     arguments or     arguments or     arguments or      arguments or        arguments or      arguments or      arguments or
                     keyword          keyword          keyword           threads             keyword           keyword           keyword

In addition to tools common to most groupware, the WebCenter includes two powerful
"intelligent" agents that analyze user behavior and act as social agents to promote the
ongoing development of the national constellation of communities practicing the
scholarship of teaching and learning. These are the Recommendation Center and the
Consensus Peer Review Server. Both systems perform statistical analysis of records of
activity of users to yield information which may then be transformed into knowledge
through discourse within the community (Hauser 1999). The Recommendation Center
uses collaborative filtering (Konstan et al. 1997; Maltz and Ehrlich 1995; Shardanand and
Maes 1995), while the Consensus Peer Review Server, which is still being developed,
will use the mathematical techniques for locating consensus within a community
developed by Romney, Weller, and Batchelder (Romney, Weller, and Batchelder 1986).
Entities­resources, references, people, etc.­remain on the server as they were submitted,
unchanged by either of the systems. Only the metadata that describes them in the
database is changed, giving users of the WebCenter better peripheral cues about how they
should classify and make use of the entities. Both systems work by manipulating the
borders within which the entities are enclosed in the WebCenter. These borders are
essential resources for users evaluating and selecting information resources (Brown and
Duguid 1994). The WebCenter is designed to deploy the heuristic power of these border
resources in order to encourage the cross-appropriation between the peripheries of
communities of practice essential to global innovation (Spinosa, Flores, and Dreyfus
1997).

All actions on entities performed by users of the WebCenter are recorded in a database.
This data is used by a collaborative filtering system in the Recommendation Center to
recommend entities of possible interest. The system calculates its recommendations by
comparing the user's history of use of the WebCenter with the histories of all other users.
The system selects a group of other users who have a similar history of use. They have
read and ranked highly many of the same publications, searched for resources in the same
categories or using the same set of search arguments, read some of the same messages,
etc. This list of people is returned to the user as people with whom they may want to
begin conversations to discover productive shared interests. Because these users may be
from different institutions and different disciplines, it is unlikely that the user would be
able to network with them through conventional means of scholarly communication. The
system also generates a list of resources, conversations, publications etc. that members of
the similar group of other users have used and rated highly at which the user has not let
looked. These entities are likely to be helpful to the user and may not have been
discovered by other means.
When users submit new messages, resources, or references to the WebCenter, they may
choose to enter them into the peer review process. The Server is currently being
developed based on the theoretical model developed by Stodolsky for a "consensus
journal" (Stodolsky 1995), although the computer-supported peer review process may
eventually take some other form if the model proves inappropriate to the tasks of
effectively distinguishing quality scholarship of teaching and learning, stimulating its
production, and assuring that faculty are adequately rewarded for their work. A consensus
journal is designed to combine the advantages of peer-reviewed and invitational journals.
The Consensus Peer Review Server automates the peer-review and invitation process.
First, it solicits anonymous reviews from participants with interests similar to the topic of
a newly submitted document. The reviewers composed prose reviews and also rank the
submitted piece numerically according to the six general criteria for excellence in
scholarship which have been identified through the research of Glassick, Huber, and
Maeroff: clear goals, adequate preparation, appropriate methods, significant results,
effective presentation, and reflective critique (Glassick, Huber, and Maeroff 1997, 25).
Second, after a two-week period, the server calculates a majority and a minority position
of consensus amongst the reviewers based on reviewers' numerical ratings of the article
being reviewed using the statistical methods developed by Romney, Weller, and
Batchelder. The review status of the document will be changed according to the results. If
a positive consensus is located, the document is given peer-reviewed status. If a negative
consensus is located, the author may choose to revise the document on the basis of the
prose reviews and resubmit it or to leave the document as is. If there is no consensus
identified, the author has the option to revise, and the reviewers are asked to rank the
document again after reading the reviews of others and noting any revisions. When a
document is given peer-reviewed status, the system will invite the reviewers closest to the
consensus positions to contribute new documents that build upon those reviewed. In this
way, the Server works as a persuasive technology by encouraging productive scholarly
activity by individuals that helps move the national community towards a stronger
consensus (Fogg 1998). The ascription of peer-reviewed status also gives the electronic
publication increased credibility that may be important to faculty going through the
tenure and promotion process.

Conclusion

The WebCenter is located at http://aahe.ital.utexas.edu . A prototype was built in the
Spring of 1999, and the Beta release, which includes all the functions discussed above,
with the exception of the Consensus Peer Review Server, was made public in late August
1999. We at AAHE and at the University of Texas are excited to begin the crucial work
of stimulating the use of the WebCenter by the Campus Program's participants and of
assessing the results of that use. The two intelligent systems we are implementing have
not been used on this scale before in the academy. We will need to identify appropriate
methods for evaluating their effectiveness in stimulating cross-appropriation,
collaboration and consensus-building spanning disparate local and disciplinary
communities of practice. We will need to determine to what extent these technologies
help to build otherwise unlikely relationships between educators and to what extent they
can encourage scholars of teaching and learning to produce reflective and rigorous
documentation of the practice of teaching well. From these results, we plan to further
develop the WebCenter to better achieve the goals of CASTL and AAHE, and we hope to
provide insights useful to other designers of CSCL software that supports the emergence
and maturation of informal constellations of communities of practice.

Acknowledgments

The author gratefully acknowledges the American Association for Higher Education, the
Institute for Technology and Learning and the Computers Writing and Research Lab at
the University of Texas at Austin, the Microsoft Corporation, and the Pew Charitable
Trust for their support of this project.

Bibliography

Boyer, Ernest L. 1990. Scholarship Reconsidered: Priorities of the Professoriate.
Princeton: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.

Brown, John Seely, and Paul Duguid. 1994. Borderline Issues: Social and Material
Aspects of Design. Human-Computer Interaction 9:3-36.

Daft, Richard L., and Karl E. Weick. 1984. Toward a Model of Organizations as
Interpretation Systems. Academy of Management Review 9 (2):284-295.

Fogg, B.J. 1998. Persuasive Computers: Perspectives and Research Directions. Paper
read at CHI 98, at Los Angeles.

Glassick, Charles E., Mary Taylor Huber, and Gene I. Maeroff. 1997. Scholarship
Assessed: Evaluation of the Professoriate. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Hauser, Gerald A. Vernacular Voices: The Rhetoric of Publics and Public Spheres.
Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.

Konstan, Joseph A., Bradley N. Miller, David Maltz, Jonathan L. Herlocker, Lee R.
Gordon, and John Riedl. 1997. GroupLens: Applying Collaborative Filtering to Usenet
News. Communications of the ACM 40 (3):77-88.

Maltz, David, and Kate Ehrlich. 1995. Pointing the Way: Active Collaborative Filtering.
Paper read at Human Factors in Computing Systems: CHI '95, at Denver, CO.

Romney, A. Kimball, Susan C. Weller, and William H. Batchelder. 1986. Culture as
Consensus: A Theory of Culture and Informant Accuracy. American Anthropologist
88:313-338.

Schulman, Lee S. 1998. Course Anatomy: The Dissection and Analysis of Knowledge
Through Teaching. In The Course Portfolio: How Faculty Can Examine Their Teaching
to Advance Practice and Improve Student Learning, edited by P. Hutchings. Washington:
American Association for Higher Education.

Shardanand, Upendra, and Patti Maes. 1995. Social Information Filtering: Algorithms for
Automating "Word of Mouth". Paper read at CHI95, at Denver, CO.

Spinosa, Charles, Fernando Flores, and Hubert L. Dreyfus. 1997. Disclosing New
Worlds: Entrepreneurship, Democratic Action, and the Cultivation of Solidarity.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Stodolsky, David S. 1995. Consensus Journals: Invitational Journals Based on Peer
Review. Information Society 11:247-260.

Wenger, Etienne. 1998. Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP.

Author's address

Darren Cambridge (d.cambridge@mail.utexas.edu)
Computers Writing and Research Lab; University of Texas at Austin; Austin, TX 78712.
Tel. (512) 799-4947. Fax (512) 495-4524.
