Learning Through Participatory Simulations:
Network-based Design for Systems Learning in
Classrooms
Uri Wilensky (1)

Center for Connected Learning & Computer-Based Modeling, Tufts University

Walter Stroup

Department of Curriculum & Instruction, The University of Texas at Austin

      Abstract: This project brings together two lines of researchóthe study of
      complex dynamic systems and the use of participatory simulations as a
      powerful way into systems modelingóboth of which can be enabled and
      advanced through emerging network technologies. The study of dynamic
      systems stands as a new form of literacy for all.. Participatory Simulations
      Activities can support new forms of classroom interaction and can serve to
      catalyze the engagement with dynamic systems modeling as a core feature
      of the education of all students. To accomplish these goals, we introduce a
      new architecture, HubNet. HubNet is an open client-server architecture,
      which enables many users at the "Nodes" (currently TI graphing
      calculators) to control the behavior of individual objects or agents and to
      view the aggregated results on a central computer known as the Hub. This
      network of nodes is integrated with a powerful suite of modeling, analysis
      and display tools that together give both the capacity to "fly' the system in
      intuitive mode, to reflect on the emergent result of their simulation and,
      also, to encode their strategies as rules which the system can then run
      independently. The HubNet system is being used in several middle and
      secondary classrooms. An illustrative example of classroom use is
      presented.

      Keywords: modeling, simulation, math education, science education,
      collaboration, graphing calculators, systems thinking, complex systems,
      computer-supported collaboration, emergent phenomena

1.0 Introduction

In this paper, we introduce and describe a new network-based architecture, HubNet,
designed for enabling students to engage in participatory simulations of complex
dynamic systems. Working together with a commercial partner, we are engaged in an
iterative design and test cycle to refine the HubNet system and its associated activities.
Early versions of HubNet are in use in classrooms in Boston, Ma and Austin Texas. This
work is being undertaken under the auspices of the Participatory Simulations Project
(PSP) ñ an NSF-funded collaboration between Tufts University's Center for Connected
Learning and The University of Texas at Austin.

In the following sections of this paper, introduce our project and give an example of its
use in school settings. We begin with a brief history of the use of participatory
simulations in math/science education, move on to describing the HubNet architecture
and an illustrative classroom activity, then outline future directions of the Participatory
Simulations Project.

2.0 What's a Participatory Simulation?

Students engaged in participatory simulations act out the roles of individual system
elements and then see how the behavior of the system as a whole can emerge from these
individual behaviors.

 Figure 1: In a Participatory Simulation Students Assume Roles in a Simulation and an
                             Emergent Behavior Results.

The emergent behavior (see Figure 1) of the system and its relation to individual
participant actions and strategies can then become the object of collective discussion and
analysis.

While such participatory role-playing activities have been commonly used in social
studies classrooms, they have been infrequently used in science and mathematics
classrooms. Our use of the term participatory simulations is intended to refer to such role-
playing activities aimed at exploring how complex dynamic systems evolve over time.
Our focus is primarily on learning in science and mathematics classrooms . For example,
each class member could play the role of a predator or prey in an ecology and engage in a
classwide discussion of the resultant global population dynamics. A wide ranging set of
sample content areas for participatory simulations include the spread of a disease, the
flow of traffic in a grid, the distribution of goods in an inventory system, the diffusion of
molecules through a membrane, or the emergence of an algebraic function from a set of
points

For us, a participatory simulation or emergent activity must draw attention to systems
dynamics and systems learning. This attention to dynamic structure, evolving state,
feedback, and the like is not so much a feature of the activity itself as it is in the focusing
of one's sense-making on the systems aspects the experience. Drawing attention to
systems dynamics and systems learning describes the quality of our relationship to a
participatory experience. Using this constraint on what we mean by a participatory
simulation ñ that attention must be drawn to systems dynamics and systems thinking ñ we
can now track a history of the development of participatory simulations.

3.0 Why do Participatory Simulations and Emergent Activities Matter?

A core commitment of this Project is to research the use of participatory simulations as a
way into systems dynamics and complexity learning for ALL students. During recent
decades, there has been a recognition of the importance of understanding the behavior of
dynamic systemsóhow systems of many interacting elements change and evolve over
time and how global phenomena can arise from local interactions of these elements. New
research projects on chaos, self-organization, adaptive systems, nonlinear dynamics, and
artificial life are all part of this growing interest in systems dynamics. The interest has
spread from the scientific community to popular culture, with the publication of general-
interest books about research into dynamic systems (e.g., Gleick, 1987; Waldrop, 1992;
Gell-Mann, 1994; Kelly, 1994; Roetzheim, 1994; Holland, 1995; Kauffman, 1995).

Research into dynamic systems touches on some of the deepest issues in science and
philosophyóorder vs. chaos, randomness vs. determinacy, analysis vs. synthesis. At the
same time, this new field has introduced new objects of studyóobjects that were barely
conceivable before the development of systems analysis tools and barely renderable
without computational media. These new media allow us to analyze not just laboratory-
based phenomena but also connect strongly to many patterns and phenomena found in the
everyday world. The problems our society faces are increasingly systemic in character.
The perspective of complex systems is rapidly infiltrating all areas of natural and social
sciences and is increasingly needed to make progress with these problems.

It is the stance of the PSP that the study of dynamic systems is not just a new research
tool or new area of study for scientists. Our stance is that the study of dynamic systems
stands as a new form of literacy for all, a new way of describing, viewing, and
symbolizing phenomena in the world. The language of the present mathematics and
science curriculum employs static representations. Yet, our world is, of course,
constantly changing. This disjunct between the world of dynamic experience and the
world of static school representations stands as one source of student alienation from the
current curriculum (Chen & Stroup 1994; Stroup, 1994; Wilensky, 1993; Wilensky &
Reisman, 1998).

Research in mathematics/science education and cognitive science (Mandianch & Thorpe,
1987; Mandinach & Cline, 1994; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974) has documented that
students have considerable difficulties in making sense of complex systems. In particular,
Resnick and Wilensky have documented the considerable difficulties people have in
making sense of emergent phenomena, global patterns that arise from distributed
interactions, central to the study of complex systems. This constellation of difficulties in
understanding emergent phenomena and constructing distributed explanations of such
phenomena has been labeled the "deterministic/centralized mindset" (Resnick &
Wilensky, 1993; Wilensky & Resnick, 1995, 1999; Resnick, 1996). Our aim in the PSP
and in developing the HubNet system is to be catalytic in helping secondary and post-
secondary students move beyond the deterministic/dentralized mindset and advance their
understanding of complex dynamic systems. We view the facility with systems thinking,
modeling and emergence as a new and necessary form of literacy for our citizenry.

The theoretical and computer-based tools arising out of the study of dynamic systems can
describe and display the changing phenomena of science and the everyday world. A core
conjecture of the PSP is that the affordances of participatory simulations, as supported by
networked modeling and analyses tools discussed below, provide a powerful way into
systems related sense-making that can help realize the vision of systems learning for all
students.

4.0 What's New in the Participatory Simulations Project?

The list of what is new about the PSP includes the development and use of innovative
networked classroom-based technologies to connect learners' evolving intuitions with
powerful tools for modeling and analysis; and the pursuit of fundamental research into
emergent learning through the use of network-based interactivity. Comparing Figure 2
below with Figure 1 shown earlier, these innovations are represented by the double-
headed arrow connecting learner intuitions with tools of analysis and modeling. These
advances are to be supported by new fundamental research into emergent learning and by
developing an innovative, networked technological substrate in close collaboration with a
commercial partner, Texas Instruments.

 Figure 2. What's new in this project is the use of an innovative technological substrate
  (HubNet) to support emergent learning based on the iterative interaction of student
               insights and tools for modeling analysis and re-enactment.

As Figure 2 suggests, by interconnecting the analyzable artifacts created from learner
activity with powerful tools of analysis and modeling the enactive aspects of participatory
simulations stand to be deepened and extended. Additionally, learners working in the
networked environment make overt and visible their strategies in relation to generating
different kinds of emergent behavior. In so doing, these strategies become increasingly
well-articulated and refined in ways that scaffold both learner understanding of dynamic
systems and the actual use by learners of the tools themselves. Through the participation
in and analysis of emergent activities, we expect learners to come to see the tools as
increasingly useful in helping them to further articulate their insights into the emergent
behavior of dynamic systems. These tools enable them to analytically understand these
systems, in effect working with the mathematics of change without needing to master the
formalisms of differential equations. From the research side of the PSP, the network-
based activity will help to make visible learners' ideas and ways of organizing their
experiences, which should significantly advance our understanding of these forms of
emergent learning.

5.0 A Brief History of Participatory Simulations

The first major instance of which we are aware where a participatory simulation was used
in the context of systems dynamics and systems learning was The Beer Game as
developed by Jay Forrester and his systems dynamics group at MIT in the early 1960's.
There is a significant literature related to The Beer Game and interest in this participatory
simulation has been recently revitalized as a result of its appearance in Senge's widely
read The Fifth Discipline (1990). The game does much to highlight the ways in which
costly unintended behaviors of a system (in this case beer inventory in a distribution
system) can emerge from participants attempting to act rationally in their localized role
(e.g., as beer retailer, wholesaler, distributor, or producer). A number of other such PSA
were developed at this time. One popular PSA, FishBanks (Meadows, 1986) was
developed by Meadows as an "interactive, role-playing simulation in which groups are
asked to manage a fishing company." Students try to maximize their assets in a world
with renewable natural resources and economic competition.

More recently, new classes of so-called "object-based" simulation activities have been
developed (Resnick & Wilensky, 1993; 1998; Wilensky & Resnick, 1995). In these so-
called "StarPeople" activities, participants typically play the role of "ants" in an anthill
simulation, moving around the room and exchanging "messages." After participating in
these StarPeople activities students observe the emergence of global patterns from their
local interactions. These pattern become the objects of reflection and discussion.

6.0 Participatory Simulations Activities and Computational Tools

Throughout much of the fifty-year history of participatory simulations computational
technologies have played a central role. The systems dynamics group at MIT developed a
class of computational "flight simulators" to be used by individuals and groups of
managers to gain experience flying a complex dynamic system like a modern business.
More recently, multi-player networked versions of the beer game have been implemented
(Coakley et al, 1995) and it is now even possible to immerse oneself in a multi-player
versions of the game on the internet (Powersim Corporation, 1998). Management trainers
have argued that there is a need for a tighter coupling between computer simulations and
user experience. In possibly the first known use of the term participatory simulations,
Diehl (1990) constructed systems that gave users more control over and participation
within the simulations by allowing users to input more real word decisions and view
output of familiar reports. These simulations were modelled using finite-difference tools
like STELLA

In contrast to the "aggregate" finite-difference computer modeling tools used to analyze
simulations like The Beer Game, these simulation activities have been designed to be
further explored using object-based parallel computer modeling languages (OBPML)
such as StarLogo and StarLogoT (Resnick, 1994; Wilensky, 1995; 1997b). Borovoy,
Colella and fellow researchers at MIT (Colella et al, 1998; Borovoy et al , 1996; 1998)
have developed wearable computational badges (or "thinking tags") that allow users to
move freely while communicating information between badges. Colella (1998)
developed, implemented and researched student learning with one of the first instances of
a participatory simulation supported by a thin layer of computing technology. Disease
propagation models are natural candidates for this kind of participatory simulation and
have been implemented by a number of researchers and curriculum developers (Colella et
al, 1998; Stor & Briggs, 1998).

A significant innovation in this project is a commitment to exploring the complementarity
of these two fundamental kinds of dynamical systems modeling ñ aggregate and object-
based approaches. This compels a careful attention to a) the relationships between macro-
and micro-levels of understanding a system (Chen & Stroup, 1994; Wilensky, 1993; in
press); b) thinking in levels (Wilensky and Resnick, 1999); c) systems thinking (Chen &
Stroup, 1994); and d) the analysis of systems like gases (Wilensky, 1994; Wilensky,
1999; Wilensky, Hazzard, and Froemke, 1999). Through the use of participatory
simulations and attention to the kinds of constructs learners articulate and extend in
relation to both the aggregate and object-based modeling environment, we expect to gain
deeper insights into how these kinds of distinct but inter-related forms of analyses
interact and complete one another.

6.1 The Gap between PSA and Computational Technologies

Despite this rich history of participatory simulation activities and the existence of
powerful modeling and analysis tools, by and large, PS activities have not made their way
into the science and mathematics curriculum. While there are several reasons for this
neglect, a major factor is the lack of close integration of the PS activities with
modeling/analysis technologies. Once the PS activity has been enacted in the classroom,
the major vehicle for benefiting from this activity is classroom discussion. The simulation
cannot be replayed, subjected to alternative scenarios and assumptions, presented through
different graphing lenses or analyzed with statistical tools. This limits the powerful
learning about systems that is potentially available.

A goal of the PSP project and the HubNet architecture is to fully address this gap and
connect PSA with powerful computational tools. Furthermore we want to ensure that
access to these tools and experiences to the widest possible student population. For this
reason in developing the HubNet architecture we partnered with Texas Instruments to
enable HubNet to run on standard graphing calculators such as the TI-83 and its
successors. There is a very large installed base of graphing calculators in secondary
schools and the HubNet architecture allows these to be leveraged (with a relatively small
incremental cost) for substantial explorations of PSA in the majority of classrooms.

A potential barrier to wide-spread adoption of networked activities is the difficulties in
authoring new PSA. Our Java-based development effort of N-Logo extends the object-
based modeling capabilities of StarLogoT by having the N-Logo language also serve as a
scripting language for the creation of HubNet-based participatory simulations. Just as
object-based models are extensible (Wilensky, 1997a, 1999), the network-based emergent
activities created in N-Logo will be extensible.

Absent the support provided by the network, the processes associated with implementing
a given participatory simulation can prove sufficiently cumbersome so as to present a real
barrier to its successful implementation in classrooms. For example, the beer game
simulation, like most of the simulations developed by systems dynamics groups, relies on
participants relaying their decisions through paper and pencil messages that propagate
through the gaming "system." This laborious, repetitive and error-prone process "begs"
for a computer-based implementation to free the participants to focus on the
consequences of their decisions and strategies. Similarly, for object-based participatory
simulations, the role-playing and computer-based modeling can shed light on each other
but they cannot share data or interact dynamically. The role-play cannot be saved, re-
analyzed, or compared with other role-plays except through a laborious hand-coded
process.

7.0 What is HubNet?

HubNet is the name we have given to a new architecture we have designed to give
students the experience of participating as elements in a simulation of a complex dynamic
system. HubNet is an open client-server architecture, which enables many users at the
"Nodes" to control the behavior of individual objects or agents and to view the
aggregated results on a central computer known as the "Hub". This network of nodes is
integrated with a powerful suite of modeling, analysis and display tools that, together,
give the capacity to "fly" the system in intuitive mode, to reflect on the emergent result of
the simulation and to encode student strategies as rules which the system can then run
independently.
 Figure 3.Students engaged in participatory simulation supported by HubNet calculator
 network. On the left each student sees her/his own calculator view. On the right is the
               projected classroom display of the emergent result.

The HubNet architecture is being developed in stages. At present, a workable minimal
subset of functionality is implemented. This subset consists of 1) a suite of networked
graphing calculators called Classnet (or HubCalc) developed in concert with our
commercial partner, Texas Instruments. 2) a server, which talks to the Classnet network
and 3) an object-based parallel modeling language, N-Logo, which is an enhanced port of
the StarLogoT language that enables users to build object-based models of systems
consisting of thousands of distributed elements. We call this three-component HubNet
sub-system ClassLogo. Future versions of HubNet will integrate aggregate modeling
languages, such as STELLA, facilitating a dialogue between object-based and aggregate
approaches. Many more analysis and display tools will also be integrated (through the
ESCOT Project (Kaput & Roschelle, 1998) and through internal development) as well as
hooks allowing a much wider array of node hardware including arbitrary Internet hosts.
            Figure 4: The HubNet Architecture: Now and in the Future

HubNet is designed with the assumption that the nodes have significant resident
functionality (at least that of a programmable graphing calculator). The network layer
implements flexible communication protocols that include the ability to upload and
download data sets, upload and download program (e.g., applets), monitor key-presses at
the hand-held level, support real-time interaction as in network computer games, and
form collaborative groups of various sizes (e.g., peer to peer, small groups, and whole
class modes). The HubNet hardware includes an up-front computer (the "hub") capable
of addressing the network of nodes and a display capability (e.g., a projection system)
that enables an entire class to view the simulation.

As described earlier, the current working subset of HubNet, ClassLogo, uses the
prototype TI Classnet system (2) consisting of a suite of networked graphing calculators.
The resident functionality of the calculator, including capabilities of interacting with real
world devices such as sensors and motors, CBLs and CBRs, allows for a wide range of
PSA to be implemented in the classroom.

ClassNet supports fully networked modes of interaction with and among learners. While
synchronization between the data on the hand-helds and the Hub is supported in this
model, the model can also support on-going, real-time interactivity and exchange. This
fully-networked HubNet system in intended to support a range of different topologies for
collaboration among learners including point-to-point, small group and whole class
interaction. This more inclusive range of interactivity and collaboration cannot be
supported in models based exclusively on the synchronization model.

8.0 HubNet in the Classroom ñ An introductory example

Participatory simulations stand to introduce fundamentally new and significant forms of
reasoning and insight to school-based curricula. They also have the potential to be
transformative of students' experience and understanding of the topics at the core of the
traditional curriculum. We present here an elementary example of an activity well
connected to the current curriculum that illustrates this potential ó the Function Activity.
The Function Activity has already been used in a number of different settings including
both an urban middle school and an urban high school. The Function Activity sequence
begins with a seemingly random collection of points visible on the up-front projection
system (see Figure 5a). The teacher begins the conversation by asking students if there is
any pattern in this collection of points. Although students will occasionally qualify their
comments with the observation that there "might" be a pattern, the general consensus is
that there is not an obvious pattern. The teacher then "hands out" one of these points to
each of the students using the network. A single point is then visible on each student's
screen (5b). The student finds the location of the point by moving the calculator cursor,
the "+" shown in Figure 5b, to the point and reading off its x and y-coordinate. The
teacher now gives the class a rule by which to move their individual points.

 Figure 5: The Function Activity sequence for the rule, "move until your y-value is two
                           times your x-value."

The rule illustrated in Figure 5c is, "move until your y-value is two-times your x-value."
When the students have found this location for their particular point, they press ENTER
on the calculator and the network software collects the points. Either before or after the
students move their individual points, the question can be asked, "What do you think will
happen if we now display all the points together?" Students will give a range of answers,
such as "a ëV' will form", or "some kind of line." Teachers can ask the students to
explain why they made these predictions. Initially students will usually say something
like "I just guessed" or "it is a hunch". The teacher can then display the results. Figure 5c
illustrates what appears if every student follows this rule.

Every time this activity has been run in a classroom, we have observed that students are
quite invested in locating their individual points. Initially, there have been a significant
number of points "off the line". If a particular student realizes that his or her point is "off"
the emergent pattern, s/he will sometimes offer an explanation for what happened. What
is encouraging to hear and observe in the video-tapes of the classroom interactions is that
consistently students are willing to try and make sense of other students' reasoning. Even
for points off the line, students will say something like "oh, that person must have just
switched his y and his x," or "she didn't multiply by the negative." Rather than simply
ridicule "wrong" answers, students will assume their colleagues had a reason for what
they did and that they can identify with these other forms of reasoning. One hears
comments like, "I almost did that but.Ö" The classroom discussion for both students and
teachers centers more on the reasoning the learners brought to the task, and less on
"right" or "wrong". Both the teacher and the students have a "snapshot" of how the entire
class's reasoning is working. The teacher can help shape the spontaneously generated
conversations that occur.

Figure 5d illustrates the power of carrying out these kinds of activities on top of devices ñ
in this case, graphing calculators ñ that have significant resident functionality. Using the
network, the collection of points can be handed out to all of the students. The TRACE
feature of the calculator allows the teacher or students to jump from point to point and
read off the values. Students can use this feature to locate "their point" in collection.
Some of the points start off with the same x value and different y values, so some of the
points that were separately visible at the beginning are on top of one another after
following a rule like "move until your y value is two times your x value." The students
will notice this by observing that there appear to be fewer points after the activity than
there were beforehand. Later they realize that all the points are still "there" but that some
of them are now on top of each other. Students will ask, "What happened to the other
points?" Using the TRACE feature students can find themselves but will still ask what
happened to some of the others. "They're on top of each other," answered one boy in a
high school class, but he wasn't sure why this would happen. A subtle aspect of the idea
of function is raised. A well-defined function must be one-to-one (injective) but is not
necessarily on-to (surjective).

The functionality of the calculators can also be used to explore the notation that is used
for these kind of function-rule situations. Each student can have the emergent collection
of points sent to his or her own calculator. The teacher can then ask the students to plot
five (traditionally notated, continuous) functions that go through these points. Not only
might students generate the function Y=2X, but in generating other functions that go
through these points they can also immediately start to make sense of equivalence in a
way that is all but lacking in traditional approaches to "simplifying functions". (3)

  Figure 6: Using the "burned-in" capability of the graphing calculator to explore what
  analytic function(s) might go through the points created by following the given rule.

Other function rules have been explored using this sequence (e.g. move until your y value
is five more than your x value or move until your y value is the absolute value of your x
value). In each case students are asked to predict before hand what pattern might emerge.
The link from the rule they used to move their own embodied point to the analytic
function can be explored. By using this participatory approach, cognitive scaffolding is
provided for moving from "my point" to big ideas related to the concept of a function and
to various analytic forms of expressing the functional dependency.
9.0 Future Directions

As indicated above, the HubNet architecture is in a preliminary stage. Significant project
resources are allocated to developing HubNet and completing the fully networked
architecture. Alongside this iterative design research, we will continue to conduct both
implementation and curricular research with successive versions of HubNet. We have
begun to design and test a set of PSA using ClassLogo that make use of sophisticated
new content domains. This fundamental research is being carried out in economically
challenged inner-city schools. Significant resources from the PSP Project are going
toward site-based support and innovation. We are working alongside the teachers in
targeting and implementing network-based participatory simulations that can transform
students' understanding of core concepts of the current curriculum (e.g. the concept of
function) even as fundamentally new systems-understandings and content areas are
introduced.

In this context, we seek to gain a better understanding of how a PSA can significantly
advance student understanding of the unfolding dynamics of systems. We hope to shed
light on how learners' intuitive understandings and ways of responding interact with rule-
based, embodied (e.g., StarLogoT, N-Logo) and aggregate (e.g., STELLA) modeling
environments. Through this design, implementation and curricular research, we hope to
further the goal of advancing systems related understanding for all students.

Acknowledgements

The preparation of this paper was supported by the National Science Foundation (Grants
REC-9814682, REC-9632612), The ideas expressed here do not necessarily reflect the
positions of the supporting agency. A longer version of this paper was presented at the
Annual Meeting of the American Education Research Association, in April 1999. Chuck
Shubert, Eamon Mckenzie and Geoff Hulette of Tufts CCL have been major contributors
to N-Logo, ClassLogo and the HubNet software. The Classnet team at Texas Instruments
are largely responsible for the HubNet hardware. Sarah Davis and Ed Hazzard have
developed many HubNet activities and flown them in their classrooms. James Early and
Yolanda Martinez have used some of the activities in their classrooms. Andy Begel, Rob
Froemke, Eamon McKenzie, Mitch Resnick and Brian Silverman played significant roles
in the development of the StarLogoT modeling language. We are grateful to Ed Hazzard
for constructive feedback on drafts of this paper.

Footnotes

(1) This work is a collaboration. There is no primary author.

(2) The ClassNet system is quite distinct from the ClassTalk network, now also owned by
Texas Instruments. ClassTalk enables classroom communication and management, but
does not draw attention to systems dynamics.
(3) For example, a middle school class came up with Y=2X, Y=4X/2, and Y=X+X. They
also could confirm that Y=X+2 was not equivalent, because the line Y=X+2 was not on
top of the set of student points.

References

Borovoy, R., McDonald, M., Martin, F., & Resnick, M. (1996). Things that Blink:
Computationally Augmented Name Tags. IBM Systems Journal, 35(3).

Borovoy, R. Martin, F. Vemuri, S. Resnick, M. Silverman, B & Hancock, C. (1998).
Meme Tags and Community Mirrors: Moving from Conferences to Collaboration.
Proceedings of the 1998 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Work.

Chen, D., & Stroup, W. (1993). General Systems Theory: Toward a conceptual
framework for science and technology education for all. Journal for Science Education
and Technology.

Coakley, James. R., John A. Drexler, Anna E. Kircher, and Erik W. Larson. "Using
Simulation Methods to Implement Multi-Person Role-Playing Board Games". submitted
to Journal of Management Education , Jun 95. Return in Aug 95 for revision.
http://www.bus.orst.edu/faculty/coakley/beergame.htm

Colella, V., Borovoy, R., and Resnick, M. (1998) Participatory Simulations: Using
Computational Objects to Learn about Dynamic Systems. Proceedings of the Computer
Human Interface (CHI) '98 conference, Los Angeles, April 1998.

Colella, V. (1998). Participatory Simulations: Building Collaborative Understanding
through Immersive Dynamic Modeling. Unpublished masters thesis, MIT, Cambridge,
MA.

Diehl, E. (1990). Participatory Simulation Software for Managers: The Design
Philosophy behind MicroWorlds Creator. European Journal of Operations Research 59
(1): 203-209.

Forrester, J. W. (1968). Principles of Systems. Norwalk, CT: Productivity Press.

Gell-Mann, M. (1994). The Quark and the Jaguar. New York: W.H. Freeman.

Giodan, A. (1991). The importance of modeling in the teaching and popularization of
science. Trends in Science Education, 41(4).

Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos. New York: Viking Penguin.

Holland, J. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity. Helix
Books/Addison-Wesley.
Jackson, S., Stratford, S., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (1996). A learner-centered tool for
students building models. Communications of the ACM, 39(4), 48-49.

Kaput, J. & Roschelle, J. (1998). ESCOT Project. http://wise.sri.com/escot/home.html.

Kauffman, S. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for the laws of self-
organization and complexity. Oxford: Oxford University Press..

Mandinach, E. B., & Thorpe, E. T. (1987). The systems thinking and curriculum
innovation project: Technical report, part 1. (TR-87). Educational Technology Center.
Harvard Graduate School of Education. Nichols House, Appian Way. Cambridge MA
02138.

Mandinach, E. B., & Cline, H. F. (1994). Classroom dynamics: Implementing a
technology-based learning environment. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates

Meadows, D. (1986). Fish Banks, LTD. In Durham, NH: Institute for Policy and Social
Science Research. http://www.unh.edu/ipssr/index.html/ipssr/lab/fishbank.html

Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York:
Basic Books.

Pea, R., Edelson. D., & Gomez, L. M. (1994). Distributed collaborative science learning
using scientific visualization and wideband telecommunications. Paper presented at the
160th. meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Powersim Corporation (1998).
http://www.powersim.no/demo/WebSims/Beergame/index.htm

Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1984). Order out of chaos: Man's new dialogue with nature.
New York: Bantam Books.

Resnick, M. (1994). Turtles, termites and traffic jams. Explorations in massively parallel
microworlds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Resnick, M., & Wilensky, U. (1998). Diving into complexity: Developing probabilistic
decentralized thinking through role-playing activities. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
7(2), 153-171.

Resnick, M., & Wilensky, U. (1993). Beyond the deterministic, centralized mindsets:
New thinking for new sciences. Presented at the annual conference of the American
Educational Research Association, Atlanta, GA.

Richmond, B., & Peterson, S. (1990). Stella II. Hanover, NH: High Performance
Systems, Inc.
Roberts, N. (1978). Teaching dynamic feedback systems thinking: an elementary view.
Management Science, 24(8), 836-843.

Roberts, N., Anderson, D., Deal, R., Garet, M., & Shaffer, W. (1983). Introduction to
computer simulations: A systems dynamics modeling approach. Reading, MA: Addison
Wesley.

Senge, P. (1990). The Fifth Discipline. New York: Doubleday/Currency.

Smith, D. C., Cypher, A., & Spohrer, J. (1994). Kidsim: Programming agents without a
programming language. Communications of the ACM, 37(7), 55-67.

Stor, M. & Briggs, W. (1998). Dice and disease in the classroom. The Mathematics
Teacher, v. 91, no. 6. Pp 464-468.

Stroup, W. (1995). Dynamics and calculus for the young learner. Teacher's Lab, 16-18.

Stroup, W. (1993). What the development of non-universal understanding looks like:
Results from a qualitattive calculus assessment. Technical Report. Educational
Technology Center. Harvard Graduate School of Education. Cambridge, MA.

Stroup, W. (1996). Embodying nominalist constructivism: Making graphical sense of
learning the calculus of how much and how fast. Doctoral Dissertation. Harvard Graduate
School of Education. Cambridge, MA.

Stroup, W. (1998). The Root Beer Game.

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Science, 185, 1124ñ1131.

Waldrop, M. (1992). Complexity: The emerging order at the edge od order and chaos.
New York: Simon & Schuster.

Wilensky, U. (1999). GasLabóan extensible modeling toolkit for exploring micro- and
macro- views of gases. In N. Roberts, W. Feurzeig, & B. Hunter (Eds.), Computer
modeling and simulation in science education. Berlin: Springer Verlag.

Wilensky, U., Hazzard, E & Froemke, R. (1999). An Extensible Modeling Toolkit for
Exploring Statistical Mechanics Proceedings of the Seventh European Logo Conference -
EUROLOGO'99, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Wilensky, U. & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in Levels: A Dynamic Systems
Perspective to Making Sense of the World. Journal of Science Education and
Technology. Vol. 8 No. 1.
Wilensky, U. & Reisman, K. (1998). Learning Biology through Constructing and Testing
Computational Theories -- an Embodied Modeling Approach. In Y. Bar-Yam (Ed.),
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Complex Systems. Nashua, NH:
New England Complex Systems Institute.

Wilensky, U. (1997a). What is normal anyway? Therapy for epistemological anxiety.
Educational Studies in Mathematics. Special Edition on Computational Environments in
Mathematics Education. Noss R. (Ed.) 33(2), 171-202

Wilensky, U. (1997b). StarLogoT. http://www.ccl.tufts.edu/cm/starlogoT/

Wilensky, U. (1996). Modeling Rugby: Kick first, generalize later? International Journal
of Computers for Mathematical Learning. 1(1).

Wilensky, U. (1995). Paradox, programming and learning probability: A case study in a
connected mathematics framework. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 14(2).

Wilensky, U. & Resnick, M. (1995). New thinking for New Sciences: Constructionist
approaches for exploring complexity. Presented at the annual conference of the American
Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.

Wilensky, U. (1994). GasLab. http://www.ccl.tufts.edu/cm/models/gaslab/

Wilensky, U. (1993). Connected Mathematics: Building concrete relationships with
mathematical knowledge. Doctoral dissertation, Cambridge, MA: Media Laboratory,
MIT.

Wilensky, U. (1991). Abstract meditations on the concrete and concrete implications for
mathematics education. In I. Harel & S. Papert (Eds.), Constructionism. Norwood NJ.:
Ablex Publishing Corp.
