Action Context and Target Context Representations:
     A Case Study on Collaborative Design Learning

                Henrik Artman                                    Robert Ramberg, Hillevi Sundholm,
        Dept. for Numerical Analysis                                    Teresa Cerratto-Pargman
              and Computer Science                          Dept. of Computer- and Systems Sciences
 The Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden                           Stockholm University, Sweden
               artman@nada.kth.se                                   {robban, hillevi, tessy}@dsv.su.se

Abstract. This paper focuses on the concept of representations produced in the context of collaborative design.
More  specifically, on   the interplay  between     collaborative  creation of  sketches  (design proposals),  and
argumentation and negotiation processes taking place in the design activity. The question raised in this paper is
how sketches produced during a design session reflect and mediate dialogues and argumentation in the design
activity and how the sketches feed into an envisioned use context or vice versa. The concepts of action context-
and target context representations are introduced and used to illustrate shifts of focus during a design session.
We have studied a group of students working on a design task in an interactive space for two weeks. The
purpose of the study was to investigate how an environment meant to support collaborative work and learning
support collaborative and creative learning of interaction design. The results indicate that students attending a
course on interaction design did not pay enough attention to target representations. Furthermore the results
suggest that "action context representations" to a large extent occupy student activities as a result of either
complex technology    or  as a  result of  the students   thrust to  do something  instrumental.  We  suggest  that
pedagogical programs for collaborative learning of design may relieve some of the mapping, or interplay, of
design proposals and the target context representation.

      Keywords: Design, Communication, Interactive Spaces, Learning, Representation

REPRESENTATIONS AS RESOURCES FOR ACTION
Collaborative design can be viewed as an activity driven by communicative practices and representations for
mediating ideas. In domains such as design, and interaction design in particular, learning goals are often difficult
(if not impossible) to define in a precise manner. In this sense, design, interaction design and learning of these
domains is often ambiguous and evolving rather than pre-defined. The need to propose, discuss and evaluate
different ideas, design proposals, etc. is therefore crucial to learning and practice of design. In professional
design, negotiation is a crucial part of the design situation and the student has to appropriate such knowledge to
be prepared for this. Designers must learn not only the skill to design visual design, and design that is in line
with some general aesthetic principle but also to learn how to negotiate the relation or the interplay between
some actual system design and design of use (Arvola & Larsson 2004). Especially, in the conceptual stages of
design, negotiations between different designers (system architecture, database designers, interaction design) are
important, but also when integrating designs it is important, particularly if the general design concept has not
been agreed upon or not been dealt with thoroughly to negotiate and mend the design proposal. In this paper we
pose the question of relations between physical sketches and conceptual design imperatives.
   In the study of complex situations the concept of representations for action has been suggested (Weill-
Fassina, 1993; Rabardel and Dubois, 1993). Representations for action refer to the representations that people
have of the situation they are part of and focuses on people's actions, how people act in relation to what others'
do and  say   with or without   artefacts. The  temporality of   the situation is very much   dependent  upon  the
communicative acts that people do, for example one might refer to the immediate context or to future or
historical situations. Design as an activity is often directed towards the future in that the designed system will be
used in some situation apart from the one the designer is in ­ that is the designer representation for action is, or
should be, oriented towards the future. To learn to design is as much of building and communicating a repertoire
of motivations  for the  future use-context   as it is to actually   build something that fulfils more  immediate
construction. Interaction designers    must  have   some  understanding,    or representation if  you like, of the
interactions that the users will do. Thus the problem a team of designers who design a common object face is on
the one hand to coordinate a common representation of the future use situation, and on the other hand a smooth
mapping of mediated representations for actions within the context of design activities. We call these contexts
target context and action context respectively.

                                                          
    Sketching, drawing, thus representing design ideas and learning to represent ideas have been found to be
crucial to the design process and also to development of design ability (Löwgren & Stolterman, 1998). This is
what the general design research has focussed on and what we call action context representations, i.e. the use of
supportive tools within the design environment and those skills a designer must have in order to make good
design proposals in action (Gedenryd, 1998; Lawson, 1997; diSessa & Cobb, 2004). Generally, the arguments
are  focused on the   solitaire designer  with   much   creativity   and  talent,   rather than collaborative efforts and
accomplishments within designer teams. We will instead focus on communicative practices which designers use
in order to convey ideas and negotiate design (see Sundholm, Artman, Ramberg, 2004; Sundholm, Ramberg,
Artman, 2004 where we have discussed creativity         in collaborative design). This means that we do not focus on
some general mental mechanism, talent or other trait, but rather how team members communicate and negotiate
different solutions to an envisioned use situation. We are in this paper especially interested in describing how
design can be viewed upon as an oscillation between different forms of design contexts, and how different forms
of representations support or undermine collaborative design activities. This motivates a focus on the interplay
between collaborative creation of sketches (design proposals), argumentation and negotiation, and how sketches
that are  created mediate   discussions   and      argumentation    and   feed  into  new    ones, and  to what   degree
characteristics of artefacts in the environment that are used in the process permit coming to discussions of the
target use situation.
    Engeström & Escalante (1996) presented a case where the designers fell in love with their design, the action
context representations they created.    The design became an idealistic vision, supported by suggestive design
proposals  and  argumentation,      which resulted     in   neglecting  practicalities  of   use.  A hypothesis  is   that
inexperienced interaction designers may be immersed in action context representations resulting in that target
context  representations are    not attended to    or even   ignored.  Ideally,   a design  environment   should support
designers and design activities to focus on target context representations.

ILOUNGE ­ AN INTERACTIVE SPACE
At the Royal Institute of Technology in Kista, Sweden, there is an interactive space called the iLounge designed
and built to support collaborative work and learning. The room has two large touch-sensitive displays known as
Smart boards built into a wall. In front of this wall there is a table with a horizontally embedded touch sensitive
plasma screen. This interactive table is large enough for 6 to 8 people to sit around. In one of the corners of the
room a smaller table and three chairs are placed in front of a wall-mounted plasma display, enabling a part of the
group  to work  separately.  In  short,  iLounge    supports  collaboration    through;    Large  screens that can  show
material that can be viewed and discussed by a whole group of people; The contents of the screens can be
shared by the participants ­ documents can be edited by the participants; The screens are interactive ­ the
participants can edit material on the shared screens through their own keyboards or directly using the touch
screens; Multiple screens: several wall screens and a large horizontally embedded plasma screen (a table) are
used instead of just one permitting the participants to work in more flexible ways, e.g., the participants can
easily shift between working in groups or working individually on a subtask; Multiple computers: apart from the
computers in the room, people can also bring their lap-tops and connect to a wireless LAN. This allows for
flexibility (bringing documents and other work related information) and the possibility to work on a familiar
platform. Also, more people can actively contribute to the ongoing work rather than having one person taking
control of events. Figure 1 shows a plan of the room. The room has a wireless network and keyboards and mice
in the room are also wireless, using Bluetooth technique.

                                                      Interactive
                                                      table

                                                                   Smartboards
                                            Corner
                                            area
                                                           Backstage area

                         Figure 1.   Plan of the room. The working areas are shadowed.

                                                             
To facilitate and support work in the iLounge, services that help and support the user to move data between the
devices present in the room have been developed. The services include Tipple1 (allows users to open files on
another computer), Multibrowse (allow to move web content on different displays) and PointRight 2(allow one
pointing device on several computers). PointRight together with iClipboard makes it possible for the user to cut
or copy text between computers in the space. The text is placed on a clipboard that is shared by the computers
running the service.
  Finally, the iLounge contains high quality audio and video equipment that for instance can be used when
having videoconferences, or during user studies.

METHOD AND DATA COLLECTION
Five female and four male students in the ages of 21 to 45, divided in two groups, participated in the study. One
group consisted of three men and one woman, and the other group of one man and four women. Some of the
students in the groups knew each other from before. The students attended a course in design of interactive
systems. The students' task was to design a digital, multimedia guide for an exhibition "4, 5 Billion Years - The
History of Earth and Life" at the Swedish Museum of Natural History. The two groups were responsible for
designing the multimedia guide describing "from Big bang to first life", and "pre-historical mammals". The
target group was children about twelve years old. We followed the students during the conceptual design phase
of their assignment. The conceptual design phase lasted two weeks and consisted of brainstorming, sketching of
scenarios and the multimedia product, and information search. During this time the groups had four and five
sessions, respectively, in the iLounge. Prior to this, they received an introduction to the environment and the
specific services introduced in the section "iLounge" above.
  Data   were   collected through observations,   pre- and   post-study questionnaires, and       ended with semi
structured group interviews. Both the work sessions and the interviews were video taped. The recordings consist
of four angles to cover the whole workspace (see figure 2), and one channel for sound. Altogether the data
material consists of 21, 5 hours of video data. As a tool for our analysis we have used interaction analysis
(Jordan & Henderson, 1995), and more specifically, certain foci for analysis, namely spatial organization of
activity, participation structures, artefacts and documents, turn-taking, and trouble and repair.

                          Figure 2. The view of the video recordings with four angles

THE    INTERPLAY           BETWEEN         TARGET            REPRESENTATIONS               AND          ACTION
REPRESENTATIONS
As pointed out by Löwgren & Stolterman (1998), representing design ideas and learning to represent ideas
through sketching and drawing have been found to be crucial to the design process and also to development of
design ability. In the case accounted for  here   however,   instead of using  paper and   pencil    to sketch the
participants worked on one of the two interactive screens for making sketches or for showing information found
at the Internet to each other. While producing a sketch, one of the group members usually stood in front of the

1 Tipple is developed by the FUSE group, Stockholm University/ Royal Institute of Technology, and can be
 downloaded at http://www.dsv.su.se/fuse/downloads.htm
2 Multibrowse, Pointright and iClipboard are part of the iWork package and are developed by the Interactive
 Workspaces      at    Stanford   University.     The     iWork      services   can     be        downloaded    at
 http://iwork.stanford.edu/download.shtml.

                                                        
screen, and the other participants were sitting around the table. The person in charge of drawing the sketches
alternated. For instance, one participant could be using the touch functionality of one of the screens, another
using the keyboard and mouse working on the same document, and a third using PointRight and iClipboard to
insert a piece of text, and together they created a sketch.
    Excerpt 1 illustrates that although the group had become acquainted with and used the interactive screens
during the first session they still felt somewhat uncomfortable in using these during the second session.

Excerpt 1. Group 2, session 2. Using the interactive screens to sketch3
 Time 0.12.55       Person    Transcript of interaction                                  Characteristic of action
 1                  #3        "We  can   also  put    some    pictures  here  [in  the   Sits  down.   Looks    at  the   right
                              Notebook]".                                                interactive screen
 2                  #1        "You mean, when we draw the proposals we can do it         Looks at #3 sitting next to #1.
                              with the interacti..."
 3                  #3        "Mmm, but we can draw now. We have written down            Looks   at   the   right  interactive
                              some things  about     what we   want.   I don't  know     screen
                              exactly what we are going to do now."
 4                  #1        "Mmm... We can do that."                                    Looks at #3.

    An obvious drawback in using the interactive screens to sketch is that the interactive screens and the tools
that support sketching and drawing makes very raw and clumsy sketches as compared to using paper and pencil.
A positive outcome is that discussing around the interactive Smartboard is a collective act directed towards the
team and put issues up front.
    In the above excerpt, line 1, person #3, starts the episode with drawing attention to the use of pictures in
order to start the design, which person #1 quickly follows with a question of how to use the interactive screens.
Then in line 3 #3 is referring to a target representation of the use situation, but at the same time he is articulating
his hesitation towards how clear this representation is for making a design proposal. Person #1:s response is
focused on doing something by using the representational means i.e. the interactive screens.                            The two team
members seem not to be synchronized in their endeavor to articulate visions and means. This kind of discussion
is of course  to be expected  and   in   a sense     constitutes     a fruitful   oscillation   between     the   different     forms of
constraints to the design proposal. At the same time it may not be fruitful since the unfocussed discussion might
stand for an anxiety of articulating either means or goals. However, the communication serves as a driving force
for the team ­ each communicative initiative directs the team to consider new aspects of the design.
    Interesting to note is also the transition between private and public, where drawing and sketching on a piece
of paper followed by an attempt to translate or copy that onto the interactive screens allow the rest of the group
members to see and react on the design ideas. In Excerpt 2, the continuation of the previous excerpt, we will see
how going public and exposing ones sketches to the rest of the group produces dissatisfaction. This directs the
communication and the actions towards the appearance of the action context representations they are creating.

Excerpt 2. Group 2. Continuation of excerpt 1.
 Time 0.21.05       Person    Transcript of interaction                                  Characteristic of action
 5                  #3        "But if one draws something under here [shows with         Points  with  the   pointer   in  the
                              the pointer]. Or to make some more space.                  Notebook, on the right interactive
                                                                                         screen.
 6                  #4        "Hm..."                                                    Looks   at   the   right  interactive
                                                                                         screen.
 7                  #3        "Some screens or something or... [refers to the design     Looks at the Notebook.
                                of the multimedia guide]"
 8                  #4        "Yes. Is anybody good at this, to draw?"                   Looks at #3.
 9                  #3         "I am very bad..."                                        Works with the Notebook.
 10                 #5        "So am I."                                                 Looks at a Word document on the
                                                                                         left interactive screen.
 11                 #4        "There are others..."                                      Looks at #3.
 12                 #1        "On  where?  There?     [points to the right interactive   Points  at   the   right  interactive
                              screen] It is just to go there and draw with the hand."    screen.
 13                 #4        "Yeah, right! If... Is there anybody with some talent of   Looks at #3.
                              drawing?"
 14                 #5        "We don't care about what the animals look.like"           Looks first at #3, then at the left
                                                                                         interactive      screen.       Talks
                                                                                         simultaneously to  #1, line 12.
 15                 #5        "What are we supposed to draw?"                            Looks   at    #2   and    #3.  Talks
                                                                                         simultaneously to #3, line 13.

3 The transcriptions below are divided with resemblance to the work of Pomerantz & Fehr (1997). But in our
   case "Characteristic of action" describes the actor's action, not the abstraction of the utterances.

                                                                 
 16                #2        "Draw pictures of a screen with       all the animals,   Looks at #5.
                             maybe. It is just to make some dots."
 17                #4        "Someone with some talent of drawing?"                   Talks at the same time as #2, line
                                                                                      16. Talks to #1.

    Here the interactive screens seem to be more inhibiting, than supporting coming to creative expressions. In
line 14 person #5 tries to redirect the discussion away from the appearance of the design proposal that they are
to create, but the team is stuck on the appearance and holds on to the discussion. We interpret this as person #5
is trying to include the issue that the appearance is mainly of interest when they have an idea of the use of the
system. That is, person #5 tries to direct the issue of target context- rather than the action context representation.
In line 16 person #2 seems to adhere to this shift in focus in pointing out that they simply have to "make some
dots". Still, as the target context representation is not clearly articulated and shared the issue is dragged back to
an issue of the here and now of making design sketches, where the focus is shifted again towards a more
instrumental action context perspective. Although it seems that no one is willing to take on this instrumental
perspective and actually do something. The problem was resolved by ripping pictures from the Internet and by
using simple representations such as squares and circles, to signify animals. This was done using two interactive
screens in parallel, one for using the Internet and one for using the drawing program. This is interesting since it
illustrates the interdependence of two seemingly independent processes, and the relation of how the workspace
layout is supporting creative solutions and creative use of representations in collaborative activities. Internet
becomes an important source for them not to get stuck in the design process and action context representations.
And  also, the digital representations give    the users the       chance    to re-negotiate and       re-represent the   design
proposals. This discussion is facilitated by an easy access to the Internet, digital representations of animals as
well as a shared surface for projection. This creative use of the artifacts gives an opportunity for the team
members to re-focus on the use of the multimedia guide. It is a good example of the oscillation between action
context discussions and target context discussions as well as of how technology can and should support these
oscillations. More experienced designers often have learned different repertoires of design solutions to test and
choose among    that  can help accomplish      smooth   oscillation,       while inexperienced      designers  seem      to need
transparent and ready-to-hand support to be able to do this. However, as Lawson (1997) has shown, such design
repertoires are very fragile and may easily break down when facing new use situations, which require new
design solutions. Therefore we think that design studios should be designed with both action context- and target
context representations in mind.

RE-INTERPRETING AN IDEA COLLABORATIVELY
The interactive screens were mainly used in two different ways. Mostly to present rudimentary sketches, often
visual, to other team members as illustrated in figure 3. Individual sketches on paper sometimes preceded this.
The other way to use the screens was to present web pages from the Internet, in order to discuss the information
that was found, the design or other issues coupled to the project. In both cases the goal was to make information
available to others in order to discuss (which makes it open for re-interpretation or disputing of the idea). In this
way the team gets the "raw" information, rather than some pre-processed summary prepared by another team
member.

                            Figure 3. A group discussion regarding design sketches

    Excerpt 3 shows how the interactive screen is used to present an idea. The excerpt is taken from an early part
of session 3, where the group still has not decided or agreed on the concept of the multimedia guide. Before the
excerpt below begins the members of the group have discussed what children would like to know, and how
deeply they should go in to particular details. While other group members try to solve some practical issues, #1

                                                          
stands up, and starts to make a sketch of a proposal of a game on the left screen. The theme is a competition,
"like a boxing game", between animals.

Excerpt 3. Group 2, session 3. Presentation of ideas
 Time 0.23.07         Person    Transcript of interaction                                   Characteristic of action
 1                    #2        "As one of the games, or...?                                Sits down. Looks at #1.
 2                    #1        "Yes, but you can.., like this [pointing]... eh, I mean     Stands   in   front    of   the   left
                                   to eat or to be eaten, but you can choose, so you in     interactive screen. First looks and
                                   one way or another, or maybe not like this. But you      points at the sketch, then looks at
                                   present the information about them, and then you         the group   around    the table,  and
                                   can... or even if one might go here. But maybe also      finally points at the sketch again.
                                   like this. "
 3                    #1        "You might go like this in the forest somewhere. Here       Opens a new page in the Notebook
                                   you have..."                                             and  starts to    visualize   how #1
                                                                                            thinks by drawing with the finger.
 4                    #3        "But if you think we are going to do this in a real way,    Sits down. Looks at #1 and #5. #3
                                then we need to know what they sound like, and how          sits on the opposite side around the
                                they use their body, and knock, and..."                     table.
 5                    #1        [Mumbles something inaudible]                               Sketches in the Notebook. Nobody
                                                                                            pays attention.
 6                    #5        "It is built upon research [inaudible]..."                  Sits down. Looks at #3
 7                    #1        "Then you can have different animals."                      Looks   at  the   interactive screen,
                                                                                            and start to draw with the finger in
                                                                                            the Notebook. Nobody listens.
 8                    #3        "Watch Jurassic Park [the movie]."                          Looks at #5.
 9                    #1        [Mumbles something about "a cave"]                          Sketches   first, then turns  around
                                                                                            and looks at the group.
 10                   #5        "Mm..."                                                     Looks at #3

    As we can see the idea is forming as it is successively formulated and represented. The team members are
partly open   to the  idea,   partly  developing     the   idea  but       also tend  to take    the    idea   to  a  practical    level of
implementing it. This is one of the few instances where we have found the team formulating and pursuing ideas
about the target context, that is, where the discussion in the group is more about the use of the multimedia guide
than of the technology and the representations surrounding them. It seems as if having come to the solution of
ripping pictures   from    the Internet relieves     the   group   from         having to   focus    on  graphical        details  but can
concentrate on the use of the guide. This gives witness to the group having found a meaningful use of the
interactive screens   and    their functionality     resulting  in  a      stronger   focus  on    target     context     representations.
Learners  of  interaction    design   need      support that   facilitates   and   highlights      the  important       relation   between
immediate actions carried out in the environment and a vision of actions and use in the target environment.
Another way to say this is that learners need a support that helps them to shift between action- and target context
representations, respectively.

DISCUSSION
If tools are not appropriated both to individual and team needs these tools will be a nuisance rather than a
support. The nuisance steals attention, concentration and energy from the individual and in turn from the team.
The tools become present-at-hand rather than ready-at-hand. This may sound like a renaissance cognitive idea of
a given mental capacity, but our argument is rather that the communication among the team members is directed
away from target context representations to action context representations. We certainly see that students of
Human-Computer        Interaction  in general      and    interaction      design  in  particular,     must    have     some    training in
attending to  and  creating    target context     representations,    be     visionary   if you    like,   in  order    to  proceed    with
becoming skilled designers. This repertoire should both include a repertoire of using different tools, but also an
empathetic    repertoire of  high-lighting      use situations.  The       latter is unfortunately      often   forgotten,      ignored  or
plainly not seen as an important repertoire as it can be explored at hand or after the fact. Our understanding and
belief is the opposite.
    One known problem with supportive representational environments is that each and every representation on
their own may be supportive but when something goes wrong, or when the different representations are not
mapped, much of the users work is to match the representations by handling the mismatch manually (Garbis &
Artman,   2004).   In this   study we   have     found    that the students       oscillate between      action      and   target   context
representations but also that an unclear target context representation does not guide the process resulting in that
mapping     action context     representations      take   over    the     design    process.      Problems       with    action    context
representations may further hinder to articulate such use contexts. This is very problematic if one considers

                                                                 
interaction design to be the design of use, rather than product design. One crucial problem appears to be how to
share and communicate ones idea of the target context as well as to keep it alive while attempting to formulate
and represent the idea in the action context. In this study we have observed students performing a task in
collaboration but without any larger chunks, or vivid discussions about the context of the future use of the
artefact being designed. In spite of this, students managed to come to creative solutions in handling artefacts in
the action   context  subsequently  resulting  in  the students  being   able to  focus more   on  target      context
representations. At the moment we are designing pedagogical programs that structure the students work. The
programme includes the division of labour into a design- and critique team. These teams work in parallel and
meet on a continuous basis to discuss the design proposals from any angle. Our intention is to force the design
learners to represent and motivate their design proposals to an outsider who is getting more and more involved
in the design work. Furthermore, we are experimenting with design patterns in terms of user interface and task
flows. One important intention with presenting design patterns, apart from providing students with concepts to
practice on how to use, elaborate, etc., is to motivate the students to make conscious choices or combinations of
alternatives as well as to relieve the students from only focussing on the action context representations and raise
their perspective to the use situation i.e. the target representations. Learning the practice of interaction design
includes much    more    than only making   an appropriated  design.  It also involves  practicing to make       vivid
presentations of the future use of the interactive system, thus training in attending to and creating target context
representations. It is the use that should direct the design rather than design directing use, or is it not?

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was sponsored by the Wallenberg Global Learning Network through the iSpaces Project as well as
the DeKaL-project (The Swedish Science Foundation). We would also like to thank Maria Croné and Johan
Mattsson  at DSV,    who  participated  as systems designers  and  in conducting   the study, and  Ann        Lantz for
comments on an early draft of the paper.

REFERENCES
Arvola, M., & Larsson, A., (2004). Regulating Prominance: a design pattern for co-located collaboration. In:
      Darses, F., Dieng, R., Simone, C., & Zacklad, M., (Eds.) Cooperative systems design: Scenario-based
      design of collaborative systems. IOS press, Amsterdam.
diSessa, A., & Cobb, P., (2004). Ontological Innovation and the Role of Theory in Design Experiments. The
      Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), pp. 77-103. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Engeström, Y., Escalante, V. (1996). Mundane Tool or Object of Affection. The Rise and Fall of the Postal
      Buddy.     In B.   Nardi  (Ed.), Context  and   Consciousness   -  Activity Theory  and  Human-Computer
      Interaction. Cambridge Massachusetts: MIT Press
Garbis, C., & Artman,H. (2004). Team Situation Awareness as Communicative Practice. In S. Banbury and S.
      Tremblay (Eds.), A Cognitive Approach to Situation Awareness: Theory and Application. Aldershot, UK:
      Ashgate & Town.
Gedenryd, H. (1998). How Designers Work. Thesis nr. 75. Lund University Cognitive Studies. Lund: Jabe
      Offset AB.
Jordan, B. & Henderson A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practice. The Journal of the Learning
      Sciences 4(1). 39-103. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 1995
Lawson, B. (1997). How designers think. Butterworth-Heinemann, UK.
Löwgren, J. & Stolterman, E. (1998). Developing IT design ability through repertoires and contextual product
      semantics. Digital Creativity 9(4), pp. 223-237.
Pomerantz, A. & Fehr, B.J. (1997). Conversation Analysis: An Approach to the Study of Social Action as Sense
      Making Practices. In: van Dijk, T. A. (Ed) Discourse as Social Interaction. London: Sage Publications,
      pp. 64-91.
Rabardel, P., & Dubois, D., (1993). Microgénèse et fonctionnalité des représentations dans une activité avec
      instrument.   In:  Annie  Weill-Fassina, Pierre  Rabardel et Danièle    Dubois (eds.) Représentations       pour
      l'action Toulouse, Octarès Éditions, 1993.
Sundholm,    H., Artman,    H.,  &  Ramberg,   R.,  (2004).  Backdoor    Creativity: Collaborative  Creativity       in
      Technology Supported Teams. In: Darses, F., Dieng, R., Simone, C., & Zacklad, M., (Eds.) Cooperative
      systems design: Scenario-based design of collaborative systems. IOS press, Amsterdam.
Sundholm, H., Ramberg, R., & Artman, H., (2004). Learning Conceptual Design: Activities with Electronic
      Whiteboards. In: Proceedings of CADE04 (Computers in Art and Design Education).
Weill-Fassina, A.   (1993). Formes des représentations fonctionnelles et contrôles des actions dans le diagnostic
      de  panne   ­  In: Annie  Weill-Fassina, Pierre  Rabardel et Danièle Dubois (eds.)    Représentations pour
      l'action . Toulouse, Octarès Éditions, 1993.

                                                          
