       Making a Mesh of It: A STELLAR Approach to
                   Teacher Professional Development

     Sharon J. Derry                      Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver                            Joan Feltovich
  University of Wisconsin-                    Anandi Nagarajan                        Institute for Human &
            Madison                          Ellina Chernobilsky                          Machine Cognition
derry@education.wisc.edu                       Rutgers University                         jfeltovich@ihmc.us
                                          chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu                             Brad Halfpap
                                         annagara@eden.rutgers.edu                    University of Wisconsin-
                                         ellinac@eden.rutgers.edu                               Madison
                                                                                   halfpap@wiscmail.wisc.edu

       Abstract. We propose a model for Internet learning grounded in a theoretical analysis of transfer
       and embodied within a general tool called STELLAR (Socio-Technical Environment for Learning
       and Learning-Activity Research). STELLAR supports creation and management of online courses
       that systematically integrate collaborative design with study of text and video. The objective of
       STELLAR is to help learners develop "meshed" cognitive representations that support transfer of
       course  knowledge    to  professional   practice. Using   STELLAR,       we created   experimental  online
       courses  in  the learning  sciences1    for pre-service  teachers.  Our   research  produced    substantial
       evidence    supporting  our  approach    and    a body    of empirically    tested online   materials   and
       collaborative activities for teacher education.

       Keywords:     Teacher   education,    transfer, online   learning, instructional   design, problem-based
       learning, design-based learning, video cases

INTRODUCTION
There is substantial evidence, summarized in publications sponsored by the US National Academy of Education
(Bransford, Derry, & Berliner, in press) and US National Academy of Science (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking,
2000), that   when  educators   base instructional     decision making    in  discipline-appropriate   learning sciences,
students of   all  ages   and  abilities are   more    likely to  acquire    deeper,  more   meaningful,   more    useful
understandings. However, although virtually every program of teacher education "covers" learning-sciences
subject matter in one or more courses, research shows that knowledge acquired during teacher preparation is
used by  teachers   in  limited and    naïve   ways    (Darling-Hammond       &  Sykes,   1999; Weiss,    Pasley,  Smith,
Banilower, & Heck, 2003). Moreover, evidence from multiple disciplines shows that transfer of training from
classroom to practice is very difficult to achieve (Gick & Holyoak, 1980; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Salomon &
Perkins, 1989). Thus, an important question motivating our work is how to design learning environments that
can  feasibly be   implemented   on  a   large scale   and that  will help   teachers acquire   useful learning-sciences
knowledge from their teacher education programs.
    We are especially interested in learning how to exploit the power of Internet technology for "scaling up"
good professional   development.    Instructional   approaches   with  new    media   can enhance    transfer,  accelerate
learning (Spiro,   Collins, Thota,  &    Feltovich,  2003;  Spiro,  Feltovich,   &  Coulson,   1992),  and  create  more
seamless    connections   between  formal     learning   environments     and   professional practice  (Fischer,   1998).
Although    online graduate   programs   for  educators  are  proliferating,  we  believe most    current models   fail to
address the changing demands of professional practice. Like Fischer (2003), we argue for educational programs
that encourage students to be life-long, reflective learners who employ new media to conduct research and
collaborate with others to solve problems. Unfortunately, most Internet educational programs too closely mimic
traditional instructional forms;  that   is, they  are technologically    "gift wrapped"   (Fischer, 1998)   versions   of
traditional knowledge-delivery systems, too removed from professional practice.

1 Learning    sciences  refers to  current   scientific  and  theoretical  knowledge    about   students'  learning  and
  development in formal and informal learning settings.

                                                           
  Our alternative to technology "gift wrapping" is a method embodied in a system we have built to support
online  course  design, development    and management.   Called   STELLAR       (Socio-Technical Environment   for
Learning   and  Learning-Activity   Research),  this system   contains tools  to build and  manage    courses  that
systematically integrate study of text with study of digital video cases of student work and teacher professional
practice, and with activities in which teacher-learners collaborate in creating and critiquing designs for their own
practice. The types of assessments that STELLAR courses are intended to impact are evaluations of authentic
teacher work, such as justified lesson designs.
  In the next section we will elaborate further on the theoretical basis for our instructional design approach,
including its connection to and difference from other instructional design theories. Next, we will describe a
course that was built and managed in STELLAR and offered over several years in two different university
settings. We will show empirical evidence regarding course effectiveness. Finally we will discuss the new
directions in collaborative learning research that our future work will address, including some reflections on the
future of CSCL as a field of study.

THEORETICAL RATIONALE
The STELLAR approach can be framed in terms of what Salomon and Perkins (1989) and other cognitively-
oriented researchers (e.g., Schwartz & Bransford, 1998) call the transfer problem. STELLAR courses attempt to
scaffold students in developing transferable representations of course ideas -- learning-sciences concepts and
skills in this example.  An   important  stage  of transfer occurs when,  during   professional  practice, there is
spontaneous and situation-appropriate activation and use of complex knowledge systems that incorporate course
ideas. We call those knowledge systems schemas, in the tradition of (Bartlett, 1932). The goals of STELLAR
courses include helping students develop schemas that will promote spontaneous transfer of course ideas and
that will  serve as a   basis for "professional  vision" (Goodwin,     1994), future professional  discourse,  and
continued learning.
  We    believe  that the  schemas  that   STELLAR     online learning  environments   help  students acquire  are
characterized by a high degree of mesh (Glenberg, 1997) among the concepts and skills taught by a course,
perceptual visions associated with cases of practice, and plans for acting in the professional setting. Although
the concept mesh is very important to our theory, there is not space in this presentation and it is not the purpose
of this paper to develop a model of the specific cognitive processes underlying mesh. We will state only that we
use the term in two ways: 1. we see mesh during the learning process if there is evidence in work or discourse
that students make connections between two or more ideas or perceptual experiences; and 2. we assume that
repeated meshing of ideas and perceptions during learning promotes cognitive representations that reflect that
mesh. So, we speak of seeing mesh in classrooms and on line (Hmelo-Silver, Derry, Woods, DelMarcelle, &
Chernobilsky, this volume), and of learning outcomes as cognitive representations (e.g., schemas) that mesh
perceptions and ideas.
  STELLAR courses are "high-mesh" courses. They attempt to engineer mesh among forms of knowledge
(concepts, skills, perceptual encodings of cases, and plans for doing). This is accomplished through carefully
designed learning activities that scaffold students as they systematically and repeatedly bring together course
ideas garnered through text study, visions of practice gained from video case study, and planning knowledge
gained from facilitated collaborative lesson design. The point is to create meshed memories that automatically
and flexibly activate one another, in professional settings that are similar to (but not exactly alike) those that are
encountered through problem solving and case study in college courses.
  However, transfer to future practice is not just spontaneous and automatic activation, for practitioners must
also adapt to situations and continue to learn from resources available in their professional environment. Thus
teachers must not only spontaneously activate previously learned course ideas and plans in response to events in
their practice, but they also must respond by using course knowledge to help them take an evaluative and
reflective stance on their work. Thus STELLAR courses also aim to help future teachers develop skills and
tendencies needed to consider different situational interpretations, and to recognize when situations are in some
sense new and thus require additional knowledge and alternative plans of action.

Relationship to other instructional design theories
  Our     view of transfer is  related to  Cognitive  Flexibility Theory  (CFT)   (Feltovich,  Spiro, Coulson,   &
Feltovich, 1996; Spiro et al., 2003; Spiro et al., 1992; Spiro, Feltovich, Coulson, & Anderson, 1989; Spiro,
Vispoel,  Schmitz,  Samarapungavan,     &  Boerger,  1987).   A CFT    analysis  suggests that teaching is  an ill-
structured domain in which practitioners must learn to flexibly assemble a multiplicity of concepts, including
pedagogical concepts (how to teach), disciplinary concepts (e.g., biological concepts such as adaptation), and
learning-sciences concepts (e.g., how students learn through collaboration) as appropriate in different situations.

                                                        
  Our approach also shares connections with case-based reasoning (Kolodner & Guzdial, 2000). We build on
the notion that, in many ill-structured domains without a strong causal, mechanistic underpinning, knowledge is
organized around cases. A case representation includes a problem, the solution, and the evaluation of that
solution. One can reason about cases that represent both successful and unsuccessful solutions. Case-based
reasoning suggests that when we have a problem, we use our knowledge of previous cases to help point us
toward helpful solutions and to help avoid ineffective solutions. Similarly, we suggest that for transfer to occur
from the  college classroom  to   the  teacher's own classroom,   the   teacher needs  a  foundation  of conceptual
knowledge that is meshed to a base of case knowledge.
  Our view of transfer is also consistent with Schwartz and Bransford's (1998) notion of preparation for future
learning, the idea that transfer includes the capability to adapt and learn from new situations. When actions
produce outcomes, teachers must determine if outcomes were the desired ones and what actions to take next. If
outcomes are unexpected or problematic, a "breakdown" has occurred that requires creative problem framing
and a search for relevant knowledge (Fischer, 1994). Thus teachers must be reflective practitioners and a course
should help them become that. That reflection is an important stage in professional learning is the basis for the
well-regarded  reflective practitioner model  (Schön,  1983)   and  all  major  cognitive models   of self-regulated
learning (Azevedo, Guthrie, & Seibert, 2004; Pintrich, 2000; Winne, 2001).

Differences from other theories
  Our thinking has evolved beyond CFT in several respects. For one, we have been explicit regarding some
specific forms of knowledge    that   should be  meshed together    into schemas  during   instruction.  For teacher
preparation in the learning sciences, these include: 1) both declarative (e.g., what is scaffolding?) and procedural
(e.g., how do you scaffold instruction?) knowledge of the learning sciences; 2) perceptual visions of classroom
practice that represent general cases that are likely to be seen in future; and 3) planning knowledge, both
component instructional activities and general planning skills. The planning approach we have taught in our
STELLAR courses are strategies for goal setting, assessment, and instructional activities (Wiggins & McTighe,
1998).
  Our theoretical position also differs from case-based reasoning in important ways. Regarding knowledge
representation, we do not believe cases are maintained intact in memory; rather, we believe that memories of
particular cases fade with use and over time and that case memories become meshed together with other similar
cases. We believe that experience with many cases over time can build on the schemas developed in courses,
shaping and updating and abstracting them in important ways (Derry, 1996). A purpose of professional courses
is to develop foundational schemas that will evolve during future learning.
  Finally, as we plan our future work, our theoretical position is evolving away from reflective practitioner
models that focus primarily on developing the individual, self-regulated learner. Learners in STELLAR courses
not only work and learn as individuals, but also are scaffolded to engage in and acquire reflective collaborative
practices within socio-technical environments that distribute knowledge over people and technology-based tools.
We have more to say on this topic in the last section of our paper.

AN EXAMPLE COURSE ACTIVITY
  The STELLAR system provides tools for helping course developers and researchers create and manage
online student-centered collaborative learning activities that intertwine text and video case study with design
activities. Although many different course and activity designs are possible, one example of a course activity
built with STELLAR is provided. This activity was part of the eSTEP (Elementary and Secondary Teacher
Education Project) course, a teacher preparation course in learning sciences that has been offered at both UW-
Madison   and  RU  since  spring, 2001.  The  eSTEP   course   materials  are   housed in a website   (created with
STELLAR) that integrates three components: a Knowledge Web (an online learning-sciences hypertext book); a
video case library that is thematically intertwined with the Knowledge Web; and PBL online, a collection of
facilitated small-group lesson design activities that follow a PBL format (Barrows, 1988; Hmelo-Silver, 2002).
A typical eSTEP course consists of several 2-3 week segments in which participants intensively study video
cases and text to acquire "perceptualized" conceptual knowledge about learning sciences. They also engage in
instructional design activities that integrate this knowledge with planning for future practice.
  For instance, in Fall Semester 2002 at UW-Madison, pre-service teachers were guided through an eSTEP
instructional activity by the toolbar presented in Figure 1.

                                                         
Figure 1. eSTEP task bar

In Step   1, participants signed  on  and read   their PBL  problem,   a group assignment  to   design   a "bridging
instruction" lesson for a mathematics concept of their group's choice. "Bridging instruction" is a complex
pedagogical idea taught in the eSTEP course. To prepare, the pre-service teachers first read about bridging
instruction in the Knowledge Web and studied an online video case depicting a bridging instruction lesson
taught by an experienced teacher. As students studied the case, they followed links into the Knowledge Web that
provided guidance in case analysis. In Step 2, participants used online personal notebooks to develop a case
analysis and an initial lesson idea. This work was shared and discussed with group members in Step 3. In Steps
4­6, groups used a backwards-design strategy (Wiggins & McTighe, 1998) to complete a lesson design, an
activity supported online by a STELLAR tool, the group whiteboard (Hmelo-Silver et al., this volume), which
facilitates group design and decision-making (Figure 2). In Step 7 and 8, students submitted individual critiques
of their group design and reflected on their learning, collaboration, the design of the lesson itself, and the
usefulness of their designs for their own practice. As instructional designs evolved over the course of the PBL
activity, they were reviewed by online facilitators, who offered ongoing formative help to individuals and
groups. An    analysis of the  online  PBL  process is  found  in Chernobilsky, Nagarajan   &   Hmelo-Silver   (this
volume).

FROM ESTEP TO STELLAR.
    Although    the UW    and Rutgers  implementations   of eSTEP   share  many   similarities, each course   serves
different populations of preservice teachers and must be adapted to work in their respective contexts. These
differences  provided   a reason   and opportunity  to   build STELLAR,     a general system    that embodies   our
theoretical principles and can be adapted to different contexts and teaching subjects. STELLAR provides tools
to support instructional designers, facilitators and researchers. For instance, course designers can use STELLAR
to select and adapt tools and interfaces (e.g., the group whiteboard, Figure 2), and combine them into new
activity structures, such as the PBL activity for math education students. STELLAR facilitates uploading of and
presentation of videocases in multiple instructional formats, such as contrasting cases formats (e.g., Schwartz &
Bransford, 1998). Hypertext environments can be developed within STELLAR and can be integrated with the
video case library. This flexibility allows researchers to create and manipulate instructional designs and test
theories about cognition and instruction. Likewise, STELLAR has an interface for online facilitators, which they
use to access all participating learners' work, and to interact with individual learners or entire groups. This
provides opportunities for powerful and frequent formative assessment. Once a course is complete, researchers
can use   STELLAR      interfaces to access summaries    of student work   and to retrieve a    variety of log files,
including statistical summaries of Likert-scale feedback on the tools and activities used in a course. STELLAR
products are extensible as well, so eSTEP materials can be added to and used in other professional development
contexts.

RESEARCH STUDIES

Data sources and scoring
    In addition to students' ratings of tools and activity steps, our experimental eSTEP course offerings have
typically produced the following categories of data: 1) Group instructional plans developed online during PBL
activities;  2) Online group   discourse  during each   PBL  activity; 3) Individual reflections, adaptations,  and
analyses from PBL activities; 4) Pre- and post-course analyses of teaching/learning video cases; 5) Pre- and
post-course self-reports of beliefs and attitudes related to teaching and learning; and 6) Log data that can be
analyzed to determine individual patterns of use of Web-site tools and learning resources.
    To evaluate the work in Items 1­4 above, we developed concepts-in-use rubrics for judging and scoring pre-
and post-video analyses and other student products in order to measure the level of sophistication manifest in
students' spontaneous (students were unaware of rubrics) embedded uses of target learning sciences concepts,
such as understanding, metacognition, and transfer. All rubrics in our research are being designed for use across

                                                          
multiple types of learner products, documents, and classroom performances. All include features to help coders
determine what to focus on when judging learners' work, and all are calibrated to a single scoring scale. The
psychometric properties of the rubrics are being assessed and improved through validity and reliability studies.

        Group Whiteboard Tool

                                                                                          Voting
                                                                                          Utility

                                                                                       Configurable
                                                                                       Spaces    and
                                                                                       Prompts

                                                                                          Feedback

Figure 2. STELLAR whiteboard

  As an example, the features of our rubric for the concept understanding and the scoring scale to which it is
calibrated are shown in Tables 1 and 2. Inter-rater reliabilities for this rubric in repeated uses have consistently
exceeded .90.

Table 1
Features considered in judging ability to use the concept understanding in planning and analyzing instruction
Points are not awarded for use of the term     understanding.  Judge  whether products or explanations
explicitly or implicitly represent knowledge that:
           1.  Understanding is actively constructed knowledge.
           2.  Understanding builds on prior knowledge.
           3.  Understanding in   context is       an active process of  comprehension  that  involves
               constructing a situation model.
           4.  Understanding supports the making of inferences and/or application in new contexts.
           5.  There are different depths or forms of understanding.
           6.  Understanding involves grasping the underlying principle, theme or big idea.
           7.  Understanding is socially negotiated and distributed in communities of practice (broadly
               defined to include classrooms and groups).

                                                         
Table 2
Scoring scale
0 "Knows nothing." Observations or products contain no evidence that any aspect of the concept is understood
     or attended to, or there is evidence that the concept is rejected or not understood. The concept is very
     unlikely to be used correctly in planning or implementation unless the student teacher receives and is open
     to intensive assistance.
1  "Needs substantial scaffolding." Observations or products indicate that there is some limited understanding
     and acceptance of the idea and that a limited range of acceptable implementation of the idea is occurring.
     However, there are major omissions, weaknesses, or misunderstandings in relation to the idea and the
     student teacher will probably need substantial assistance to help him or her use the idea successfully.
2  "Demonstrates early expertise." Observations or products indicate the idea is likely understood with some
     range and depth and is being implemented with at least moderate success as conceptualized. However, there
     are some weaknesses or omissions that should be addressed, and this part of the student teacher's work
     could be improved in important ways with some assistance.
3  "Expert." Observations or products provide evidence that the idea is well conceptualized in depth and detail
     and over  a range of     uses and is being    implemented successfully  and reflectively   with sophisticated
     understanding, even though improvements might still be possible. Encouragement and positive feedback
     but little assistance would be appropriate.

Study 1: Evaluation of 2002 course offerings at two campuses

Student evaluations
   Students' evaluative ratings of the online activities overall, specific steps in the activities, and the system
tools used in implementing the activities online, were generally positive, ranging from 3.78 to 4.52 on a five-
point scale. The data indicated that students favored collaborative over individual steps in the learning activity.
     Although a few students' comments reflected a struggle with technology (this type of comment is becoming
less common    with increasing     availability of high-speed Internet connections), characteristic  quotes   from
students, taken from their reflections about the experience (steps 7 and 8), were positive.
         x   . . . this lesson that we have designed as a group is definitely something I could see myself using
             down the road when I have my own classroom. I feel it is a well thought out lesson that can be
             easily modified to meet the needs of whatever type of class "make-up" that I may have.
         x   The plan that we made up as a group will be something that will be extremely useful for me as a
             teacher. I also learned the value of input from others' viewpoints on the same unit because you are
             able to see different perspectives that can give you some new and different ideas.
Learning outcomes and correlates.
   Table 3 shows mean scores from students' pre- and post-course video analyses, based on the `understanding
of understanding' rubric previously described. Essentially, these means reflect gains in the college students'
abilities to apply their psychological knowledge about the cognition of understanding to carry out a critical
analysis of videotape of classroom teaching and resulting student performance. This is an important outcome
variable, and the gains made in the eSTEP courses were substantial and meaningful in two contexts.

Table 3
Pre- and post-course "understanding in use" means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for UW & Rutgers
                                          UW                                         Rutgers
        N                               N = 60                                        N = 33
Course Level        Learning Sci taken in last year of Teacher      Ed   Psy prerequisite   for entering Teacher
                    Ed                                              Ed
Pre-course score                   Mean = 0.65 (.46)                             Mean = 0.42 (.55)

Post-course                        Mean = 2.09 (.63)                             Mean = 1.56 (.63)
score

   We conducted exploratory stepwise regression analyses with these same data to help generate hypotheses
about possible relationships between college students' experience in the online environment and their actual
learning outcomes (based on the understanding score), as well as their perceptions about how much they learned

                                                          
(based on an overall self-report rating). In the first analysis, the "understanding of understanding" score was the
dependent variable. Predictor variables allowed to enter into the regression equation were various "successful
tool use" indices, which included students' ratings of system tools and other data on system use, such as number
of times a student logged on. The set of independent variables that best predicted successful performance on the
video analysis, scored with the understanding rubric, were: a) entering pretest performance; b) site (Rutgers
versus UW); c) positive ratings of the group whiteboard for collaborative online design; d) positive ratings of
links between video cases and the KWeb, which scaffolded video viewing; and e) overall number of Web hits
(R2 = .38). However,   when  self-reported  perceptions   of learning  (e.g., students' ratings  of   how much   they
believed they learned)   was the   dependent variable,   the best predictors  were  success    scores with tools  and
resources that were designed for individual study (R2 = .42). A strong predictor was successful experience with
the KWeb, which was designed in accordance with cognitive flexibility theory (Spiro et al., 1992) and was often
used by individual students to explore personal interests.
    We also conducted a factor analytic study in which items from a pre-course questionnaire were factored with
the understanding   score. At   both sites,  "understanding   of   understanding"   loaded   negatively   with  items
comprising a factor that seemingly measured a belief that the cause of learning is primarily external context.     A
person holding this `contextualist' point of view would tend to respond "strongly agree" to an item such as
"teachers (or the home environment) are the main determinants of student learning." From this finding, which
was consistent in separate analyses across two sites, we hypothesized that helping college students develop an
appreciation of the role of cognitive processes in teaching and learning may require challenging strong incoming
beliefs that only contexts external to the child are responsible for success in school. We hope that teacher-
learners leave our course with an alternative view, that learning environments are complex systems involving
coordination of both internal and external factors.

Study 2
    A study conducted at Rutgers in 2004 compared performance and gains in the eSTEP course to performance
and gains of students drawn from multiple traditionally-taught lecture courses of approximately the same size
and student population. (Because the eSTEP course at UW-Madison is taught as an advanced course to the
entire secondary education cohort, no similar comparison course for the same student population exists at UW-
Madison.)   Since the  instructors differed  for these   two courses,  results must    be interpreted  with caution.
Nevertheless, based   on scores  derived from    a  video analysis   task and the  understanding   rubric  previously
described, there was a statistically significant difference in final performance and performance gains, favoring
the eSTEP course (ANCOVA F (1, 67) = 69.62, p<.001). Results are displayed in Table 4.

Table 4
Comparison of eSTEP with traditional course

                                                    N          Mean                Std. Dev
                Pre        eSTEP                    32         .97                 .55
                           Comparison               37         .93                 .50
                Post       eSTEP                    33         1.92                .77
                           Comparison               37         .78                 .48

CONCLUSIONS
In summary, we have accomplished the following:
         x   Developed a theory-based model that is feasible for online instruction on a large scale and that
             addresses a continuing major problem: the failure of most college classrooms to teach conceptual
             content in ways that insure its use in students' future professional lives. Our approach integrates
             text-based instruction with video study and authentic problem-based learning (PBL).
         x   Developed   extensive  online  video,  text  materials, instructional activities, and  online  tools for
             supporting this instructional model to teach learning sciences to future teachers. The materials and
             tools are available through eSTEPWeb.org (a password protected site because of human subjects
             regulations regarding online uses of classroom video). They include the eSTEP Knowledge Web,
             an online multimedia    textbook on    learning science,  an  integrated  (with   hypertext) video  case

                                                         
             library, and a system for setting up and managing collaborative problem-based learning activities
             on line.
         x   Using  the resources   above,   we designed,     offered, and   tested innovative,  experimental   online
             learning science courses for pre-service teachers, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach
             in  variations  adapted  to    two  contexts.    This  entailed   developing    theoretically  valid  and
             psychometrically sound rubrics for scoring student work collected from eSTEP courses, which can
             be generalized to evaluation of teaching beyond the current project.
  In addition, we believe the following:
         x   STELLAR designs produce significant increases in teacher-learners' abilities to think deeply about
             student understanding in analyses of realistic video cases of teaching and learning.
         x   A   STELLAR     "high-mesh"    course was  more    effective   at producing   transfer than  a traditional
             lecture-based approach covering the same material, although the non-experimental nature of this
             research requires a conservative interpretation.
         x   The STELLAR suite of online instructional tools can be combined in designs to produce effective
             instruction. The group whiteboard, which was configured to scaffold collaborative online lesson
             design, was an effective tool.
         x   In STELLAR courses, performance on a targeted instructional goal was moderately correlated with
             variations in site context and with successful use of tools that scaffold collaboration. However,
             students' perceptions of how much they learned were more dependent on successful use of tools
             that aided individual exploration.

  We     acknowledge   that there are some   limitations   in the  work    we  have   reported here. There  are many
improvements to interface design that might be accomplished given adequate time and funding. We recognize
that we have not conducted experimental studies to prove the effectiveness of our approach. And although we
have developed some authentic assessments, we have not studied the impact of our course design on actual
teaching practice, much less on how that practice affects K-12 student learning.
  And yet our work so far represents a pioneering step in an emerging science of web-based course design that
is informed by cognitive theory and that blends online video case study with collaborative problem solving. We
continue to improve our general tool (STELLAR) that will allow researchers and developers from any discipline
to design, offer, and monitor "high-mesh" courses and activities representing variations on our model.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND REFLECTIONS ON THE FUTURE OF CSCL
  We envision a socio-technical future for teachers, one that helps empower them as professionals and as
agents for social change (Gutiérrez, 2002). Developing teachers who can move into that future is part of our
agenda now. Developing new theories of learning, new models for teacher professional development (TPD), and
new socio-technical environments that support teachers as lifelong learners within communities will be major
themes in our future work.
  In the US, teaching is one profession where there is little opportunity for collegial interaction during the
typical workday (Ball & Cohen, 1999; Lieberman, 1996). Yet situative theorists conceptualize individuals' use
of knowledge as an aspect of their participation in social practices (Greeno, 1998; Lave & Wenger, 1991).
Putnam   and  Borko   (2000)  argue that  professional development     must    attend  to both individual   teachers as
learners and  as participants  in professional  communities.    It is  not  surprising that collaborative   Web-based
technologies and professional Web sites are increasingly embraced by teachers as important forms of support for
building professional community.
  Online community approaches to continuing TPD, including graduate education, are often founded by non-
profit groups with  particular agendas.   An  example   in  the US     is Wisconsin's   Mathline  (now   Teacherline).
Mathline was initially funded in 1995 through a Department of Education grant to the Public Broadcasting
System   and in  Wisconsin   grew  over  the intervening   10  years   into a  PK-16   statewide teacher   professional
development network. Mathline followed what Smith (2001) and others call a practice-based model of TPD
(Ball  & Cohen,  1999;  West   &   Staub, 2003).   In this model,   online   dialog among    participating  teachers is
grounded in concerns of professional practice, and discussion of the organizing group's objectives occurs after
teachers are comfortable discussing their own work (Grossman, Wineburg, & Woolworth, 2001). Trust is a
crucial ingredient, and creating such trust is not easy. Mathline's strategy was to find facilitators who were
recognized by their peers as master teachers, and to support these master teachers with extensive training in
online facilitation (Collison, Elbaum, Haavind, & Tinker, 2000; Fullan, 1999; Lieberman, 1996). An initial
study of Mathline dialogue suggested that fully half of the community's discourse was unplanned by facilitators

                                                         
and driven directly by the immediate needs of practicing teachers. Professional learning communities integrate
the day-to-day concerns of teachers with the course's main themes.
  Given existing models to build on, it does not require a giant leap of faith to envision a future in which TPD
communities might operate as self-sustaining socio-technical systems that integrate formal, informal and work-
related concerns and that engage in meaningful collaboration, social creativity, and problem framing around
socially important  issues (Fischer,  2002).  Achieving  this vision   and developing   theory   to support     this
achievement are goals we embrace for our future work. Our approach will involve building on existing success
models in an attempt to design new STELLAR graduate courses that will seed facilitated online professional
communities for teachers and that will continue to attract them as participants beyond the life of the course. In
the socio-technical communities we envision, teachers will continue to work and study together to further their
knowledge and involvement in the very themes (for example, teaching mathematics for social justice) that
attracted them to enroll. However, it is not only our vision that counts, for what we hope will emerge from this
effort is a co-evolving system: a reflective community that is capable of deciding for itself what it is, including
the ability to adapt its socio-technical environment to meet its changing needs. The socio-technical environment
and organization  must  itself support this, incorporating strategies  to encourage   continuous reflection     and
problem solving. This is one version of what Fischer and others have called the science of meta-design (Fischer
& Giaccardi,  2004), a  process  that involves "seeding" communities    using basic   "reusable" socio-technical
designs that are adapted to each community's needs. We think this is an important concept for our future work
with teachers and an interesting topic for the CSCL research community to address.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was made possible by NSF ROLE grant #107067 and a grant from the Joyce Foundation. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations do not necessarily reflect views of the funding agencies.

REFERENCES

Azevedo, R., Guthrie, J. T., & Seibert, D. (2004). The role of self-regulated learning in fostering students'
         conceptual understanding of complex systems with hypermedia. Journal of Educatonal Computing
         Research, 30(1), 85-109.
Ball, D. L., & Cohen, D. (1999). Developing practice, developing practitioners: Toward a practice-based theory
         of professional education. In L. Darling-Hammond (Ed.), Teaching as the Learning Profession:
         Handbook of Policy and Practice (pp. 3-32). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Barrows, H. (1988). The tutorial process. Springfield, IL: Southern University Press.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge: The University
         Press.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience
         and school. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Bransford, J. D., Derry, S. J., & Berliner, D. C. (in press). Theories of learning and their roles in teaching. In L.
         Darling-Hammond & J. Bransford (Eds.), Preparing teachers for a changing world.
Collison, G., Elbaum, B., Haavind, S., & Tinker, R. (2000). Facilitating online learning: Effective strategies for
         moderators. Madison, WI: Atwood Publishing.
Darling-Hammond, L., & Sykes, G. (1999). Teaching as the learning profession : handbook of policy and
         practice (1st ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Derry, S. J. (1996). Cognitive schema theory in the constructivist debate. Educational Psychologist, 31, 163-
         217.
Feltovich, P. J., Spiro, R. J., Coulson, R. L., & Feltovich, J. (1996). Collaboration within and among minds:
         Mastering complexity, individually and in groups. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice
         of an emerging paradigm (pp. 25-44). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fischer, G. (1994). Turning breakdowns into opportunities for creativity. Knowledge-Based Systems, 7(4), 221-
         232.
Fischer, G. (1998). Making learning a part of life--beyond the 'gift wrapping' approach of technology. In E.
         Kammler (Ed.), Lifelong learning and its impact on social and regional development (pp. 435-462).
         Bremen Germany: Donat Verlag.
Fischer, G. (2002). Beyond "couch potatoes": From consumers to designers and active contributors. First
         Monday, 7(12).

                                                       
Fischer, G., & Giaccardi, E. (2004). Meta-Design: A Framework for the Future of End User Development. In V.
       Wulf (Ed.), End User Development -- Empowering people to flexibly employ advanced information
       and communication technology (pp. (in press)). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
       Publishers.
Fullan, M. (1999). Change forces: The sequel. Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Glenberg, A. M. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20, 1-55.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
Greeno, J. G. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53(1), 5-26.
Grossman, P., Wineburg, S., & Woolworth, S. (2001). Toward a theory of teacher community, Teachers College
       Record (Vol. 103, pp. 942-1012).
Gutiérrez, R. (2002). Enabling the practice of mathematics teachers in context: Toward a new equity research
       agenda. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 4(2&3), 145-187.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2002). Collaborative ways of knowing issues in facilitation. Paper presented at the
       Proceedings of CSCL 2002.
Kolodner, J. L., & Guzdial, M. (2000). Theory and practice of case-based learning aids. In S. M. Land (Ed.),
       Theoretical Foundations of Learning Environments (pp. 215-242). Mahwah NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
       Associates.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate perpheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.
Lieberman, A. (1996). Creating intentional learning communities. Educational Leadership, 54(3), 51-55.
Pintrich, P. R. (2000). The role of goal orientation in self-regulated learning. In M. Boekaerts, P. Pintrich & M.
       Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 451-502). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Putnam, R. T., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research
       on teacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29(1), 4-15.
Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1989). Rocky roads to transfer: Rethinking mechanisms of a neglected
       phenomenon. Educational Psychologist, 24, 113-142.
Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practioner: How professionals think in action. London: Temple Smith.
Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 475-522.
Smith, M. S. (2001). Practice Based Professional Development for Teachers of Mathematics. Reston, VA:
       National Council of Teahers of Mathematics, Inc.
Spiro, R. J., Collins, B. P., Thota, J. J., & Feltovich, P. J. (2003). Cognitive flexibility theory: Hypermedia for
       complex learning, adaptive knowledge application, and experience acceleration. Educational
       Technology, 43, 5-10.
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, P. J., & Coulson, R. L. (1992). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism, and hypertext:
       Random access instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains. In T. M. D.
       D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Constructivism and the technology of instruction: A conversation (pp. 57-75).
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, P. J., Coulson, R. L., & Anderson, D. K. (1989). Multiple analogies for complex
       concepts: Antidotes for analogy-induced misconception in advanced knowledge acquisition. In A.
       Ortony (Ed.), Similarity and Analogical Reasoning (pp. 498-531). New York: Cambridge University
       Press.
Spiro, R. J., Vispoel, W. P., Schmitz, J. G., Samarapungavan, A., & Boerger, A. E. (1987). Knowledge
       acquisition for application: Cognitive flexibility and transfer in complex content domains. In S. M.
       Glynn (Ed.), Executive Control Processes in Reading (pp. 177-199). Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
       Associates.
Weiss, I. R., Pasley, J. D., Smith, P. S., Banilower, E. R., & Heck, D. J. (2003). Looking inside the classroom: A
       study of K-12 mathematics and science education in the United States. Chapel Hill, NC: Horizon
       Research, Inc.
West, L., & Staub, F. C. (2003). Content-focused coaching: Transforming mathematics lessons. Portsmouth,
       NH: Heinemann.
Wiggins, G., & McTighe, J. (1998). Understanding by design. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and
       Curriculum Development.
Winne, P. H. (2001). Self-regulated learning viewed from models of information processing. In B. Zimmerman
       & D. Schunk (Eds.), Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: Theoretical perspectives (pp.
       183-189). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

                                                       
