        Designing Collaborative Learning Systems:
            Current Trends & Future Research Agenda

                                        Angelique Dimitracopoulou
                   Learning Technology & Educational Engineering Laboratory
                                      University of the Aegean, Greece
                                          adimitr@rhodes.aegean.gr

       Abstract. The research community, in order to support learning as well as collaboration, has
       designed   systems,   which,    distinctive  from    common    web-based     ones  (simply   enabling
       collaborative activities), constitute new cognitive and meta-cognitive tools. The paper proceeds
       with  a  categorization  of the main   tools and  functions  that characterise collaborative learning
       systems (designed for primary/ secondary/ higher/ education) in order to discuss the current trade-
       offs. It proposes a design framework for collaborative learning systems that are addressed to
       primary   & secondary    education. This framework     is derived   from considerations  of  cognitive
       psychology, science education, and CSCL community research results. The paper concludes by
       presenting  the main    themes  of the  actual research   agenda, which  is  intended to help   design
       systems that can be integrated into primary and secondary education contexts.

       Keywords: Collaborative learning systems, primary / secondary education, trade-offs, framework

INTRODUCTION
The Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) community works on theoretical frameworks, tool and
artifact design, appropriate architecture and development approaches as well as various methods for a significant
qualitative and   quantitative  evaluation  of collaborative   situations. The   community    also  deals with    the
implementation of actual educational systems, collaborative learning activities and new pedagogical approaches,
while  seeking   new roles  for various   implicated  agents (i.e. students, teachers). Ultimately, it aims   at: (a)
producing tools and systems, (b) developing our understanding of learning processes and (c) finding the best
ways to implement new approaches and tools into actual educational systems. The reader may find significant
review papers    exploring the  evolution  of  research  on  collaborative learning (Dillenbourg   et al 1996),   the
meaning of collaborative learning (Dillenbourg 1999), the epistemological foundations of CSCL (Lipponen
2002; Paavola et al, 2002) and learning effects and best practices (Lehtinen et al, 1998). All of these topics have
been the subject of theoretical reviews and foundation papers.
  However, many questions remain unanswered.            "What are the main design achievements of this research
field?" "What are the current trade-offs and what are the various designers' choices concerning significant
design aspects?" "What are the main actual design questions that preoccupy researchers and form the research
agenda for upcoming years?" The exploration of these general questions serves as the objective for the present
paper.
  There     are many   ways to  promote    collaborative learning:  gathered  around  the computer,    through  new
technological gadgets, through a balanced combination of the various tools existing on the web, etc. In this
paper, we have based our analysis and discussion of collaborative systems on those that have been explicitly
designed for learning purposes and concern a wide range of learning activities for primary, secondary or higher
education. The paper proceeds to present a categorisation of the main tools and functions that characterise
collaborative learning systems so as to discuss the current trade-offs. In order to synthesize the new design
trends of collaborative learning systems that are addressed to primary or secondary education, a framework of
analysis is proposed. This framework is derived from considerations of cognitive psychology, science education,
and the CSCL community research results, while also taking into account the social context of the school.
Finally, the main axes of the actual and future research agenda are pointed out.

TRADE-OFFS ON COLLABORATIVE LEARNING SYSTEMS DESIGN
Before discussing the means for supporting collaboration, it would be useful to categorize collaborative learning
systems according to the kind of collaborative activities that they each support, given that the main means of
dialogue and actions that students dispose depend on the learning activity itself. In general, existing systems can
be divided into two main categories:

                                                         
   (a) Action-oriented collaborative systems: Some collaborative systems are based on the idea of starting from
a student's actions,    expressing   and   capturing    the student's emerging      knowledge    and  then   making  this
knowledge-representation itself a subject of artifact-centered discourse. This is the case, for instance, of action-
oriented systems based on disciplinary representations, including those of C-CHENE (Baker & Lund, 1997),
COLER    (Constantino-Conzalez      &    Suthers, 2001),  COMET      (Soller 2002),  Cool-Modes      (Hoppe   & Gabner,
2002),   Algebra-JAM     (Wu     et al.  2002),   CoLab,    (van  Joolinger,    et  al., in  press),  MODELLINGSPACE
(Dimitracopoulou & Komis 2004), as well as Convince Me (Ranney et al, 1995) and SenseMaker (Bell, 1997).
In most of these systems, the underlying learning activities are mainly based on synchronous communication.
   (b) Text-production    oriented   systems:   This category  of collaborative    systems   invites students  mainly to
produce a written text or report in a collaborative or cooperative way. For instance, in Knowledge Forum
(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994; Hakkarainen & Lipponen, 1998), CoVis (Pea et al, 1994) or Fle3 (Leinonen &
Kligyte, 2002), students have to create text-based files presenting their point of view on a topic or report on a
whole activity. This constitutes the principal activity addressed to wide groups that are focusing on building
their shared knowledge and developing into a community of learners. Also belonging in this category are those
systems supporting collaborative argumentative writing, such as COSAR (Erkens et al, 2002). In most of the
systems of this category, the underlying learning activities are mainly based on asynchronous communication.
   An analysis of the existing collaborative systems shows that a number of tools and functions are designed
and implemented in order to facilitate or better support the collaborative learning process. In order to discuss
these in a brief way,    we   have  viewed  them    through  the lenses  of  their  support  for the  specific high-level
functions that should be performed during collaboration:
  (A) The appropriate means for dialogue and action: They provide the essential means for the collaborative
      learning activity itself.
  (B) The functions for workspace awareness: They are related to up-to-the-minute knowledge about partners'
      actions in a closed collaborative scheme or in a wide community of collaborators.
  (C) The  functions   for supporting     students'  self-regulation  or guidance:    They    support or  directly guide
      students' reasoning on a metacognitive level.
  (D)  The  facilities related   to teachers'   assistance:  They  are   essential, especially   when    the systems  are
      addressed to students of primary and secondary education.
  (E) The functions related to community level management: They provide significant tools and functions for
      management of the activities and material produced amongst a wide community.
   One central aspect of work in CSCL involves concerns over design trade-offs. Anything designed is, usually,
only one choice among many possibilities that were considered as well as even more possibilities that were
never considered. Therefore, why is a focus on trade-offs important? Because much of the critical discussion
centering around collaborative learning takes an extreme position on one or two dimensions of the design trade-
off, overemphasizes those dimensions at the cost of acknowledging the most basic point that trade-offs are
inevitable in design.
   Let's  consider some     important    trade-offs  in thinking  about  the  design     of collaborative environments.
Currently, the main trade-offs (that is to be) considered by designers are related to the principal functions of
CSCL systems mentioned above:
  (1) The means of dialogue (an always-crucial aspect in collaborative learning) deals with at least the following
      three specific trade-offs: (i) between free and structured dialogue, (ii) between parallel and embedded
      communication tools (iii) and that between text-based and oral dialogue tools;
  (2) The trade-off related to the coordination of action versus dialogue (influencing the students' freedom);
  (3) The trade-off between metacognition support for self-regulation and teacher support;
  (4) The  more  general   trade-off    related to  designing  an action-based     system   or a  system  based  on  text
      production (that could influence the new tendencies of a system's main features).

Trade-offs Related to the Means of Dialogue
Systems, either action-based or text-based, and even if they dispose a shared workspace to the collaborators, all
provide one or more dialogue tools. These means are considered crucial not only for collaboration but also for
learning. Externalization achieved through written dialogue that is conducted during collaborative activities may
have significant effects, especially for conceptually rich learning activities (e.g. those related to science or
mathematics). Interactive     linguistic exchanges   among    people  play   an essential   role in  the elaboration and
perpetuation of scientific concepts, while the primary use and mechanism for acquisition of these concepts is the
result of social interaction.
   In designing the means of dialogue in a learning environment that supports synchronous collaboration, one
has to deal with at least the following three specific trade-offs between: (i) free and structured dialogue, (ii)
parallel and embedded communication tools, (iii) text-based and oral dialogue tools.

                                                            
The Trade-off Between Free and Structured Dialogue
The related discussion mainly concerns the eventual choice between conducting a free chat or a structured one
in synchronous collaboration mode and it is also related to the possibility of design-threatened forums or chats.
    Let's consider the case of synchronous collaboration. A principal-related designer's question is highlighted
by  the choice  between     a  free chat  interface  and a structured    dialogue interface. Such    a question  must   be
examined by looking at what conditions and for what task users may need each function. Research results show
(Baker & Lund, 1997) that pairs who use the `free' communication mode more than the `structured' one produce
more `off-task' statements than those who prefer the `structured' mode. However, we could hypothesize that the
appropriateness of a free versus structured interface is not independent from the type of content being uttered.
For  example,   the  free   chat  interface  that allows   unstructured,    synchronous   dialogue,   seems  to  be  more
appropriate during the initial brainstorming phase of problem-solving, the discussion on problem-solving or
modeling strategy, eventual decisions regarding task distribution among different members, etc. It seems that
management of the problem-solving process or of a project elaboration is more often expressed by using the free
section, while the structured one more often expresses task and strategy contributions. In all cases, the interest of
the designers of dialogue tools aimed at promoting collaborative learning is deepening the space of debate and
producing   epistemic   interactions  (Baker  et  al, 2001).  This ultimately   feeds   argumentation,  particularly  that
which occurs at a conceptual level and can stimulate reflection on subjective explanatory systems           (Baker et al.
2003).
    Related to the appropriateness of structured chats, there are objections that we must have in mind when
designing   CSCL    environments:    (a)  Practitioners  believe that if the  participants  of  a collaborative  learning
situation could choose between a structured communication mode and a `free' communication mode, they would
definitely choose the latter. But, some experiments (Jermann, 1999; Baker & Lund, 1997) have shown that the
structured section of the interface was more frequently used than the free section. (b) Requiring learners to select
a sentence opener before typing the remainder of their contribution may tempt them to change the meaning of
the contribution to "fit" one of the sentence openers, thus changing the nature of the collaborative interaction.
For this reason, it is critical that the sentence openers enable the widest possible range of communications with
respect to the learning task (Soller, 2002). (c) Finally, it is to be noted that, besides the gains that learners may
have achieved    through    a  structured   dialogue, this dialogue   is also   crucial for realizing  the  benefits of a
significant meta-analysis     of collaborative activity,   constituting  another  advantage  of   a  structured interface.
However, the sentence openers are not always used as intended, resulting in subsequent contributions that would
not necessarily correspond to the discussion skill represented by the sentence opener (Dillenbourg, 2002). This
is something that we must have in mind if the corresponding data is processed for analytic purposes.
    In the case of asynchronous or even synchronous dialogue, another kind of structured dialogue tool to be
considered is a threaded discussion, or tree structure, that may be viewed in a summary form. This kind of
structure is created just after each dialogue statement (e-mail, chat, forum) is entered, thus there's no need to
intervene in the students reasoning during conversation.
    Up  to  the  present,   a  number    of  dialogue  tools have  been     developed,  forming   a   broad spectrum    of
possibilities, from  the  unstructured    to the  structured  and  onto  the  abstract  (e-mail,  chat, threaded  forum,
structured chat, post-it annotations, concept maps, specific representation formalisms, etc.). Recent research has
explored the differences between students working only with an on-line chat and those working with a chat and
a graph dialogue tool (Baker et al., 2003). The results showed that students who had both a chat and a graph
dialogue tool at their disposal produced more arguments than their counterparts.
    The trade-off, in terms of design, can be resolved by the simultaneous support of a wide range of dialogue
tools offered to users. We consider that it is important to provide students with multiple tools of dialogue, to
assure  flexibility of  use for  different  instances  and  according    to the apparent  needs   of  different phases  of
collaboration as well as according to the needs derived from the specificity or the complexity of the task.

The Trade-off Between Parallel and Embedded Representations and Tools for Dialogue
A recent trade-off has appeared between the "parallel tools" and the "embedded tools" for dialogue, especially
apparent when users work in action-driven systems. Most of the existing systems offer shared artifacts and
discussion tools on entirely separate windows. This seems to lead to a disjointed discourse about the artifacts,
even if one can work around this problem by placing the discussion tools next to the artifacts under discussion
(Reeves & Shipman, 1992).        D. Suthers refers to these as parallel communication tools: defined as tools that do
not assure any coordination between the discourse and disciplinary representations (Suthers, 1999). In cases of
separate artifacts,  there  is a  greater   distance  between  the object    of the discussion    and  the corresponding
dialogue, hence the cognitive load in processing them. Thus, the questions to reflect on concern whether it's
possible and,   if  so, how   to support  `embedded     discourse  representation,' a   process  that  embeds   comments
directly into the display of the artifact under discussion. In informal and formal studies, students appear to prefer
embedding their discussion directly into the artifact      window (as comments) rather than switching between that
window and the chat window (Wojahn 1998; Suthers, 1999). Because the discourse always takes place in the

                                                            
context of the artifact, embedded communication tools have the advantage of making it easier to refer to parts of
the artifact and to recover the portion of the discussion that is concerned with a given part.
    Some embedded communication tools, designed to establish and carry on a discussion in the context of the
visual artifact include: (a) Annotation tools (sticky notes) that allow the embedding of comments directly into
the display  window  of    the artifact  under   discussion  (Dimitracopoulou     & Komis,   2004); (b)   Drawing,   the
disclosing or indication of a representation or a part of a representation (e.g. diagram) under discussion; and (c)
Highlighting parts of a diagram under discussion. In reality, this final option supports `gestural deixis' (Suthers
et al., 2003), enhancing the deistic value of the cursor by making its location more visible.    If the user passes the
cursor over an object, the object will be highlighted in a particular color and if the user deliberately selects an
object with the cursor, this object is then highlighted in another color. In fact, all three of these design options
are metaphors for the actions undertaken by pupils when working in the traditional paper-pencil mode.
    Some   disadvantages   are that  the record    of  discourse is fragmented    across the artifact, making  it   more
difficult to get a sense of the whole discussion or to notice relevant relationships between discussions about
different parts of the artifact, and the possibility that the artifact becomes cluttered with comments. It would be
beneficial, therefore, to be able to recover chronological versions of the discourse and perhaps to index the
discourse in ways other than those done so by artifact components or chronology.
    The trade-off between parallel and embedded communication tools could be resolved by conceiving of a
system of linked dialogue representations tools, which would provide a logical link between tools that could
then be viewed in virtually embedded ways if needed. It would also be useful to be able to switch between
parallel and embedded representations (create a note in one representation and view it in another) (Suthers et al,
2003). This approach could resolve the conflict between the typically linear structures of parallel discourse tools
and the contextual indexing of embedded discourse representations.

The Trade-off Related to the Coordination of Action and Dialogue
Related to the question of the coordination of action during synchronous collaboration, we consider that two
interrelated trade-offs have   emerged:      (a) the  existence  or not  of  specific coordination  protocols,  (b)  the
specification or not of the `rights' on collaborator contributions.
    (a) Restricted collaboration protocols vs free ones: During collaborative learning, a common final product is
expected from the participants, making a shared workspace and a shared point of reference necessary. In the
case of synchronous collaboration, the question that arises is whether or not the production of the final product
must be coordinated or better left free. This question is applied for action-driven systems as well as text-driven
ones.
    An  implication of  a  restricted protocol    (applied  using,  for instance, the metaphors  of    a `key or  pencil
exchange,' or even `traffic light') is that deadlocks can be created in cases where one partner cannot proceed
with  problem-solving   alone  and   at  the  same    time refuses  to  pass the  key over to the  other   partner. The
advantage, however, seems to be that the protocol maintains clear semantics of a participant's actions and roles
in the shared workspace (Soller et al. 2002; Feidas et al, 2001).
    Currently, there is also an interest in examining the possible need for communication protocols in the case of
oral dialogue. Is the application of an oral dialogue coordination system needed or should there be a free one,
where participants are invited to regulate their oral discussion by social agreement? In the `Lyceum Project'
(Bunkingham et al. 2001), using a videoconference system without imposing a control (i.e. anyone can speak
anytime), adult participants `learn' to take turns and maximise flexibility for different kinds of `meetings.' In
such a case, interactional fluidity is a useful and important skill for newcomers to learn. Another approach could
require the use of metaphors such as conjuring up `microphones' that would either be `passed' among group
members themselves or by a `chairperson/group leader.'
    It is to be noted that coordination protocols were eventually applied in all the early systems, making them
easier to implement. However, where both approaches are technically possible, there's a need to re-examine the
necessity of a coordination protocol (Dillenbourg, personal communication, May 2002), and specifically, to take
into account the preferences of users themselves.
    (b) Rights on partner contribution modification and the identification of ownership: In fact, the question of
coordination protocols is also related to the concept of "workspace awareness" and the `ownership' of parts of
the collaborative construct. What are the rights that each partner has on the contributions of the other partner?
Some designers have left this free (e.g. in `Modeler Tool,' Koch et al., 2001), without utilizing any locked
mechanism, while others prefer to lock them to all other persons than the object's owner (e.g. `Representation,'
Komis,  et al., 2002).  In order  to  answer     this question, an  experiment   was  organised using    two  alternative
collaboration   protocols  (Feidas, et   al. 2002).    Groups   "A"  had  no  ownership   control,  while  groups   "B"
maintained ownership of introduced objects, so partners were not allowed to modify objects introduced by their
peers. In the case of groups "B", every time a partner needed to modify an object of different ownership, a
negotiation phase had to be initiated in order to convince the object's owner on the need for the proposed
modification. By contrast, the groups without ownership control, displayed instances of disagreement during

                                                            
collaboration.   We could argue, therefore, that eventually students need a clear indication of `ownership' (with
direct or indirect indication of the names of the owners of each item) in order to regulate their activity and avoid
this kind of conflict. Instead of locking mechanisms, however, we propose the addition of optimistic, concurrent
control by supporting awareness, a process indicating exactly who currently uses which component. This could
give the student more freedom and foster teamwork.

The Trade-off Between Metacognition Support for Self-Regulation and Teacher Support
This is a trade-off that actually arises simultaneously with an increasing research interest in the production of
tools and functions for student and/or teacher support (Muhlenbrock         & Hoppe, 1999; Jermann et al, 2001,
2002; Barros et al, 2002, Avouris et al, 2003; Martinez et al, 2003; Morch et al, 2003; Fessakis et al, 2004).
   Let  us first examine   the actual  possibilities, tendencies and  new   requirements   for the   self-regulation of
student support. The skill of self-regulation is referred to as one of the meta-cognitive skills that allows a learner
to concentrate on his/her own thinking process, successfully controlling it in order to independently achieve
his/her goals (Brown, 1987). Systems that contribute in this direction are not those that reflect interactions
("mirroring systems," according to Jermann et al., 2001), but those that monitor the state of interaction by
providing collaborators with literal information (Barros et al., 2002) or visualizations that can subsequently be
used to  self-diagnose   and self-regulate  interaction. Visualizations  typically   include a set   of indicators that
represent  the state of  interaction, possibly  placed   alongside a set of  desired   values  and   metrics for those
indicators. Different kinds of appropriate visualizations have been produced, including graph-like visualizations,
such as bar charts, pie charts, etc. that are used in problem-solving activities (Jermann et al, 2002, Fessakis et al,
2004), `nested boxes' used in forum discussions, (Simoff, 1999) and even social networks used in cases of wide
community exchanges (Martinez et al, 2003). The hypothesis is that the visualization structures of student
discussion and actions, conducted through a suitable representation, can assist students in developing meta-
cognitive mental activity and subsequently self-regulate their collaborative activity.
   In general, examining current interaction analysis as related to literal or numerical information, or better,
implemented visualization tools that are intended to function as meta-cognitive tools, we can distinguish that: (a)
information may concern the whole group or each member of the group, (b) analysis may be based only on the
actions of collaborators or their dialogues, (c) analysis may concern only the collaboration quality or the content
of the activity, and (d) analysis may be based on either basic indicators (e.g. participation rates) or higher order
indicators (e.g. related to collaboration modes or the quality of the solution).
   It is to be considered that, for instance, in collaborative problem-solving, meta-cognition is not only related
to the interaction itself but  also to  the strategic reasoning  linked  to the  task.  There  is the assumption   that
regulation of the interaction and regulation of the task are closely related mechanisms and their co-occurrence
facilitates coordination. Instead, however, the existing meta-cognitive tools for collaborative activities are based
on statistical indicators of  participation   and collaborator actions  or  messages    rather than   on higher  order
qualitative indicators. These aspects are further discussed in Avouris et al. (2003) and Jermann et al. (2001).
   The whole question of the design of appropriate meta-cognitive tools must be further investigated by the
research  community   and  in  relation to: the category  of students'   activity (e.g. a  game   or  a high cognitive
demanding task), the collaboration mode, the age of pupils, and the kind of group (e.g. small, large group).

   Up to the present, researchers have focused more on student self-regulation, while they have neglected
teachers. Yet, students naturally seek the teacher's help when they realize that more information is needed to
profitably continue an interaction. Therefore, we consider that most of the existing collaboration systems present
limitations when used by young students in real school settings.     Some of these limitations are attributed to the
fact that the teacher, who is in charge of several students, fails to interpret the enormous number of complex
interactions that can take place simultaneously. Two crucial questions are, "How could we help teachers fulfill
those responsibilities in computer-based collaborative situations?" and "How can teachers be supported with
appropriate tools to help students?"
   There has not been enough research done on the significance of the teacher's role during network-based
collaborative learning and the fact that teachers can derive useful knowledge from observing or participating
with their students in CSCL environments (Lund & Baker, 1999). While some research has focused on the kinds
of teacher interventions, there haven't been any looking at how we could support teachers to proceed to these
interventions and what their needs are during the coaching of collaborative students.
   In order to examine the needs of teachers during synchronous collaboration and determine corresponding
requirements, experimentation was conducted (Petrou & Dimitracopoulou, 2003). The question was to examine
teacher behavior during synchronous problem-solving with known and currently accepted learning activities
(not innovative   ones).  Teachers    applied two  complementary     scenarios   for their interventions:  (a) on-line
supervision   of a group   collaborating in   a synchronous    mode,  and   (b)  off-line  analysis  of the  preceding
intervention.  Here, each teacher studied the students' interactions, then during the next session intervened in
order to discuss some concepts or to propose new problems. The analysis of individual and panel interviews

                                                          
with teachers concluded that there is a need to design and develop better tools or partial functions, including (a)
supervising tools and facilities, (b) elaborated and linked history of the whole interaction and (c) tools that
produce an automated assessment of students' interactions. It appears that the most difficult requirement to
accomplish would be the third one: How to provide a rich variety of analysis output to assist teachers or
facilitators?
   Actually, the underlying design and research work is in progress and is merely at a premature stage. We
consider that the existing approaches (regarding the support of students' self-regulation and guidance from the
system or support for the teacher in order to assist his/her students) are all valuable. However, it would be much
more so if these approaches could be combined in a single learning environment allowing control or the self-
regulation to be divided among the involved agents (collaborators, teacher, system).

The Trade-off related to the different kinds of collaborative learning environments
Up to the present, most designers and researchers have focused their work on one of the two dominant kinds of
collaborative learning systems: (i) systems that promote collaborative problem-solving and work with a small
number   of collaborators,  such as  action   or argument-oriented systems  (e.g. COLER,     C-CHENE),    and   (ii)
systems that are directly addressed to a wide community, usually aiming at collective knowledge-building and
understanding through text production (eg. CoVis, Knowledge Forum). The design of the first category of
systems puts more stress on the tools for shared action, dialogue and meta-analysis, while the design of the
second category focuses on the shared document repository, the structure and the multiple visualization of the
material created from the community, the discussion forums, etc. The first category uses more synchronous
communication tools, while the second one is mostly based on asynchronous tools.
   Nowadays, the trade-off between these two general categories does not seem to be so relevant. On the one
hand, researchers on the community-based systems, have recently recognized that it is worthwhile to incorporate
some tools and functionalities for synchronous communication and collaboration (Lethinen, 2002), allowing
students to organize their work, clarify ideas and enhance social awareness. On the other hand, systems for
collaborative problem-solving, when used in a school environment, can enrich learning objectives when they
support exchanges between students in a class. This includes the exchange of materials, ideas and difficulties,
fostering an inquiry learning process. In this sense, we consider that every collaborative problem-solving system
needs to be accompanied by a community support system and, therefore, incorporate tools and features used by
the latter. Thus, repositories, group formation and off-line/social awareness functions are important features in
any environment. Currently, this approach started to be adopted by some collaborative problem solving systems,
such as Cool Modes and MODELLINGSPACE.

TRENDS IN NECESSARY TOOLS AND FUNCTIONS
Synthesizing   the aspects  presented in the   previous analysis  on the  design  trade-offs related to  tools  and
functions,  and remaining faithful to our central aim of designing advanced systems that support collaborative
learning in real school contexts in an essential way, we propose a design framework consisting of the following
four fundamental considerations:
   (A) A vision of all agents and cognitive systems involved in collaborative learning settings: The agents that
seem to be considered in some collaborative environments are often seen from a one-dimensional point of view.
In reality, during collaboration the main actor is neither only the individual-member of a collaborative team nor
only the team as a whole.      Both of these `aspects' are important, but equally so is the case of the whole
community formed of individuals and groups collaborating in various modes. On the other hand, a learning
process (at least in the frame of primary/secondary education), involves both learners and teachers. The learner-
centered design approach, being dominant during the last decade, has positively influenced designers, but has
also presented the following drawback: by focusing in principle on the individual learner, it takes the other
agents  involved   out of the cycle (Dimitracopoulou,   2001). These    agents  may form   one or more   cognitive
systems, in the sense of distributed cognition theory (Salomon, 1995). Consequently, all agents involved in the
process must be considered important and may need to have specific tools at their disposal. Thus, we need to
consider each actor: (a) the individual, (b) each specific team, (c) the whole learners' community that is formed
and (d) the teacher(s).
   (B) A complete view of the necessary tools and functions supporting collaborative learning: In the ideal
case, each agent and each cognitive system needs some basic tools to fulfill five general functions that allow and
support  collaboration  for achieving learning   progress.  These  five functions are: (a) Action and    discussion
functions, leading to action or text production tools, as well as dialogue tools; (b) Course Management, leading
to tools for  the  management    of the  learning  material (e.g. repositories, group  formation  tools, etc.); (c)
Workspace awareness' functions, leading to functions related to immediate workspace awareness as well as to a
larger social awareness of all the events that happen in the wider learning community; (d) Analysis and meta-
analysis tools   supporting   self-regulation and   metacognition  for  students,  including  teachers'  tools  for

                                                         
supervising and analyzing collaborative interactions either in an on-line or off-line mode; (e) Help and Advising
functions leading to simple help systems or more advanced advising systems for students and teachers.
  (C) A vision of a mixed category of collaborative learning systems: Analyzing what kinds of tools are
developed per category of systems, it is determined that there are two dominant systems' categories: (a) systems
that focus on the collaboration between a small group of learners and (b) systems that are addressed from the
beginning to a wide community of learners. These two categories are actually sufficiently developed, given the
specific focus of each kind of environment (problem-solving or exchanging ideas). Therefore, it is currently
possible to develop systems that draw from both of these categories, presenting mixed features.

                                                              Interaction    Data
                                                                 data       Process
                                             Action data                                   Model of
                                               collection                                 Interaction

                        c                                                                                     
                      Individuals                                                                           System

                                        Action -
                                       Dialogue                                               Advising
      cc        v                        Tools                                                 & helpWorkspaceActivityawarenessAnalysis
          Collaborators                    (a)
                                                                                                   Advising
                                  Repositories                                                      & help
              y                                           Social             Activity &WorkspaceCollaboration
          Teacher         Group                        functions              Analysis
                        Formation                                                                        Help
                             Management
                                 Tools              Supervision              MetaAnalysisToolsTools
                                (b)                   (c)                      (d)                         (e)

               Figure 1. System processes during collaborative activity that offer tools and functions
                                                 to the involved human agents
   (D) A vision of the control of the collaborative process as distributed to all the agents:                   In our point of view,
it would be fruitful to work on the direction of expanding the management of the collaboration to all the agents:
`individual,' `collaborators,'    `teacher'      and  `system.'       This  expanded      collaboration     management     would   be
possible, according to an approach based on a number of general principles, allowing for determining the need
for an agent (human or artificial) to intervene as well as dictating the specific sub-role that this agent should
undertake. The current approach is often based on a well-defined desired state, according to which the system
advises the collaborators. This approach does not seem to be the most appropriate, given that it is valid only in
very specific cases of activities, problems, conditions and student profiles. Generally, knowledge construction
activities are open and flexible, while such a model is quite restrictive.
  According to these fundamental considerations, we could examine now, how a generic collaborative learning
system functions, how it processes the whole interaction, what functions it assures and to whom it is addressed
(see Figure 1). The individual user has available the tools for action and dialogue in order to function in a
private workspace or interact and collaborate through a shared workspace. In order to manage production, users
have also access to specific tools (e.g. repositories). The collaborative learning system internally collects the
data of each user's actions as well as that of the interactions among all participants and then processes this data,
eventually constructing a model of actions and interactions. This system assures the continuation of the five
main functions that are necessary to support collaboration. However, according to the first consideration, we can
argue that there exist at least three simultaneous processes that correspond to the three main agent profiles:
individual, collaborators and teacher. Thus, in order to fulfil individual needs the system may advise, offer
information   (visually or verbally)     based     on     activity  analysis  or    support other      basic   functions such  as  the
assurance of workspace awareness. In order to support the group of collaborators, it may produce advice,
present information derived from high-level indicators through a meta-analysis of collaborative activity or raise
social awareness. Similarly, help functions addressed to teachers may be assured and supervision tools as well as
individual, collaborative  or     even  comparative        information     may      be  presented,    based    on  an analysis  of all
interactions.

                                                                   
CONCLUSIONS:              RESEARCH             AGENDA         TOWARDS              MORE         APPROPRIATE
SYSTEMS FOR REAL SCHOOL SETTINGS
There   are many   ways   to   promote    collaborative learning:  gathered   around   the  computer,    through   new
technological gadgets, through a balanced combination of various existing tools on the web, etc. In this paper,
we  have based    our analysis  and discussion    on collaborative   systems  that have   been designed  for learning
purposes and a wide range of learning activities. In all these systems, collaborative learning is viewed as a
pedagogical method that can stimulate students to discuss information and problems from different perspectives,
to elaborate and refine these in order to re-construct and co-construct (new) knowledge or to solve problems. In
such  situations, externalization,  articulation, argumentation    and   negotiation   of multiple  perspectives   are
considered the main mechanisms that can promote collaborative learning (Dillenbourg et al., 1999; Baker et al.,
2001; Veerman, 2000). These systems have allowed for new learning settings and have managed to develop new
cognitive and metacognitive tools to support learning and collaboration.
   The evolution of research on the design and development of collaborative learning systems have had an
effect on the emergence of some significant trade-offs related to the means of dialogue, the coordination of
action and dialogue, the self-regulation/metacognition support of students and the analysis and meta-analysis
tools for teachers as well as recognition of the differences between `problem-solving oriented systems' and
`wide community systems'.
   In conclusion, we argue that the research design agenda of the immediate future needs to be focused on the
following axes:
   i) Accentuation of the effort to produce rich systems: The unification of designers' efforts working on
different collaborative system categories and under an open vision of all the possible `human cognitive systems'
formed  during   various  collaborative  modes,   could produce   richer systems,   which  are more   appropriate  for
various collaborative settings, conditions and contexts.
    ii) Elaboration of powerful analysis methods of collaborative interactions: Researchers are in the process of
developing methods that have the potential to derive rich analysis and meta-analysis results, taking into account
a number of aspects: (a) the whole content of the activity with both actions and dialogues, (b) the collaboration
modes and quality, (c) the context of the collaboration and (d) each cognitive system's (individual, group, wide
community) needs.
    ii.a) Development of visualized meta-cognitive tools addressed to students: For this purpose, research has to
     focus on the investigation of appropriate visualization modes that could produce metacognitive tools that
     are able to support young students in both learning and the collaboration process.
    ii.b) Development of visualized tools addressed to teachers:     It has just recently been acknowledged that one
     actual new research direction should be related to how we could take profit from the traces/transcriptions
     of students  in  order to facilitate the teacher's  analysis task   allowing him/her to apply diagnosis and,
     thereafter,  scaffolding. This  is needed  to   provide appropriate  analysis    and meta-analysis  results with
     appropriate  visualizations   that could  support  teachers  when   needed    to intervene   during or  after the
     interaction.
    iii) Production of flexible and negotiable environments that respect the sustainability and reusability of the
elaborated work: Lessons learned from technology-based learning environments in schools suggest that we need
to consider the school as a community of practice, creating systems that allow people to perform as well as they
are able to and then to amplify, transform, and extend their work to new or additional outcomes. Brown (2000)
argues that information-driven technologies and their implementation need to be grounded in the social life of
the school. Given that most of the schools do not have a long history in the exploitation of these environments, it
is important  to  provide flexible  architectures and   customisable   tools, studying  how    they work  in schools,
particularly in different cultural and educational contexts. Research often concludes after a short period of
implementation time, without working with the possibility that students and teachers can adapt and negotiate the
use of tools for their perceived needs (Baker et al. 2001; Dimitracopoulou, 2001). Additionally, it is crucial to
assure the sustainability and reusability of the work done in a software development perspective, designing
interoperable systems that are open and easily extendible (Hoppe & Gabner, 2002).
    iv) Collaborative learning activities and tasks regarding various collaboration modes: We need to always
keep in mind that it is not only the features of the technology used but especially the way technological artifacts
support collaboration in real settings (Lehtinen, et al 1999). A crucial parallel research agenda concerns the
design of appropriate collaborative learning activities and modes for different learning purposes and student age
levels (Dimitracopoulou & Ioannidou, 2003). The effort to elaborate on the semantics of collaborative scripts is
promising and assists in raising the awareness of a rich range of choices (Dillenbourg, 2002).
    (v) Exploration   of  the  new  possibilities  offered by  ubiquitous     computing   and  wireless  devices:  As
technology evolves, new design and research possibilities are revealed. Specifically, the ubiquity of computing
and  handheld  computers    offers new   physical media,   different from those    of traditional computer-supported
collaborative learning applications (Roschelle & Pea, 2002). Subsequently, what is needed is an investigation of

                                                          
many of the new functions and interfaces of these promising devices, assuring their corresponding usability. As
well, research must look at how such devices open up a world of new powerful learning activities.

REFERENCES
Avouris  N., Dimitracopoulou     A.,   & Komis    V. (2003).  On   evaluation  of    collaborative problem  solving:
      Methodological issues of interaction analysis. Journal of Computers in Human Behaviour., Vol 19, No 3,
Baker , M., Quignard, M., Lund, K. & Sejourne A. (2003). Computer-supported collaborative learning in the
      space  of debate.   In  B.Wasson,    S. Ludvigsen   and U.  Hoppe   (eds): CSCL:     Designing  for Change   in
      Networked Learning Environments, CSCL 2003 congress: 14-18 June 2003, Bergen, Norway, pp.11-20
Baker M., de Vries E., Lund K., & Quignard M. (2001). Computer-mediated epistemic interactions for co-
      constructing scientific notions: Lessons learned form a five-year research program. In P. Dillenbourg, A.
      Eurelings & K.Hakkarainnen (Eds). Proceedings of European Perspectives on CSCL, Maastricht.
Baker M., & Lund K., (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a computer-supported collaborative learning
      environment, Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 13(3),175-193.
Barros, B., Verdejo M.F., Read, T., Mizoguchi, R., (2002), Applications of a collaborative learning ontology,
      MICAI'2002 Advances in Artificial Intelligence.       In C. A. Coello, A. de Albornoz, L. E. Sucar, O. C.
      Battistutti, (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science     2313, Springer-Verlag pp. 301-310
Bell, P. (1997). Using argument representations to make thinking visible for individuals and groups. In Proc.
      Computer Supported Collaborative Learning '97, pp.10-19, Toronto.
Brown A. (1987). Metacognition, executive control, self regulation and other more mysterious mechanisms. In
      F. E. Weinert & R.H. Kluwe (eds). Metacognition, motivation and understanding. Hillsdale, LEA.
Bunkingham S., Marshall, S., Brier J. & Evans T. (2001) .Lyceum; Internet Voice groupware for Distance
      Learning. In P. Dillenbourg, et al. (Eds). European Perspectives on CSCL, Maastricht, pp.139-147
Constantino-Gonzalez,     &  M., Suthers,  D.,  (2001).   Coaching  Collaboration    by Comparing      Solutions and
      Tracking Participation, In P. Dillenbourg,    et al. (Eds). Proc. of EuroCSCL, Maastricht, NL, pp.324-331.
Dillenbourg P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
      design.   In  P. A.    Kirschner (Ed).  Three  worlds   of CSCL.   Can  we  support   CSCL?,    Heerlen,  Open
      Universiteit Nederland, pp. 61-91.
Dillenbourg P. (1999). What do you mean by collaborative learning ? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed) Collaborative-
      learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches, Elsevier, pp. 1-20,
Dillenbourg P., Baker M., Blaye A., & O'Malley C. (1996). The evolution of research on collaborative learning.
      In Spada E. & Reiman P. (Eds), Learning Human and Machine: Towards an interdisciplinary learning
      science, Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 189-211.
Dimitracopoulou A. & Ioannidou E. (2003). Design of distributed collaborative activities for young children
      related to map use and construction. IASTED International Conference, 30/6/2003, Greece, pp.511-521
Dimitracopoulou,   A.  &  Komis,  V.   (in press 2005)  `Design   principles for an  open   environment   supporting
      education actors during modelling, collaboration and learning' Special Issue on the "Role of ICTs in
      Science Teaching and Learning. Int. J. Continuing Engineering Education and Lifelong Learning.
Dimitracopoulou A. (2001). Learning environments and Usability: Appropriateness and complementarity of
      evaluation   methods,   In P.  Manolopoulos    (ed). Proc.   8th Conference    on Informatics,   "Towards    the
      Information Society", Nicosia, November 2001.pp. 545-554.
Erkens, G., Kansellar G., Prangsma M, & Jaspers J. (2002). Using tools and resources in computer supported
      collaborative writing., In G. Stahl (ed). CSCL 2002 congress, Colorado, pp.389-398
Feidas, C., Komis, V., Avouris., N. (2001). Design of collaboration-support tools for group problem solving, In
      N. Avouris, & N. Fakotakis (Eds.), Advances in HCI, Typorama, Greece, pp.263-268
Fessakis G., Petrou A., Dimitracopoulou A., (2004) Collaboration Activity Function: An interaction analysis'
      tool for CSCL activities, In Kinshuk et al, (Eds), 4th IEEE ICALT 2004,, Joensuu, Finland, pp.196-200.
Hoppe U.  &   Gabner,     K. (2002). Integrating collaborative   concept  mapping    tools with group   memory   and
      retrieval functions. In G. Stahl (ed). 4th CSCL 2002 congress, Colorado, January 7-11 2002, pp. 716-725
Jerman P., Soller A. & Muhlenbrock M. (2001). From Mirroring to Guiding: A Review of State of the Art
      Technology for Supporting Collaborative Learning, In P. Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings, & K. Hakkarainen
      (Eds). Proc. of EuroCSCL, Maastricht, NL, pp.324-331.
Jermann  P.  (2002)   Task   and Interaction   regulation in  controlling a  traffic simulation,   in G.  Stahl  (ed).
      Proceedings of CSCL 2002 Congress, Colorado, pp. 601-602
Koch J., Schlichter   J., Trondle P.   (2001).  Munics:   Modeling  the  flow of  information   in  organisations. P.
      Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings, & K. Hakkarainen (Eds). Proc. of EuroCSCL, Maastricht, NL, pp.348-355
Komis V., Avouris N., and Fidas C., (2002). Computer-supported collaborative concept mapping: Study of
      synchronous peer interaction, Education and Information Technologies vol.7, 2, pp.169-188.
Lehtinen, E., Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M., Muukkonen, H., (1998). Computer Supported
      Collaborative Learning: A Review, Report, [http://www.cscl.org] [last visited Oct.2004]

                                                          
Leinonen  T.,   Kligyte., G.  (2002)   Future Learning  Environment  for Collaborative    Knowledge    Building  and
      Design. "Development by Design' Conference DYDO2, Bangalore, India, 2002.
Lipponen L., (2002). Exploring Foundations for Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. In G. Stahl, (Ed),
      4th CSCL: Foundations for a CSCL Community, (CSCL-2002), Colorado, LEA, NJ. USA, pp.72-81.
Lund,  K.   &   Baker,  M.J.   (1999).  Teachers'  collaborative  interpretations  of  students' computer-mediated
      collaborative problem-solving interactions. In S.P. Lajoie & M. Vivet (Eds). International Conference on
      Artificial Intelligence and Education, Le Mans, July 1999. Amsterdam ; IOS Press, pp. 147-154.
Martinez A., de la Fuente P., Dimitriadis Y., (2003), An XML-based representation of collaborative interactions,
      In B.Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Eds) Computer Support for Collaborative Learning: Designing
      for Change in Networked Learning Environments, (CSCL 2003), Bergen, Norway, pp. 379-384
Morch A., Dolonen J., Omdahl K., (2003). Integrating Agents with an Open Source Learning Environment. In:
      Chee Y S, Law N, Lee K-T, Suthers D, (Eds). Proceedings of International Conference on Computers in
      Education 2003 (ICCE 2003), Dec. 2-5, Hong Kong: AACE Press, 393-401.
Muhlenbrock M. & Hoppe U. (1999). Computer Supported Interaction Analysis of Group Problem Solving. In
      C. Hoadley & J. Rochelle (Eds). Proceedings of 3rd Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative
      Learning, Stanford, December 12-15, 1999.
Paavola S., Lipponen, L., Hakkarainen K. (2002). Epistemological Foundations for CSCL : A comparison of
      three modes of innovative knowledge communities. In G. Stahl, (Ed), 4th CSCL: Foundations for a CSCL
      Community, (CSCL-2002), Boulder, Colorado, January 2002, pp.24-32, LEA, NJ. USA.
Pea, D., R.,  Edelson,    D., and  Gomez,  L., (1994).  The CoVis   Collaboratory:    High   school science  learning
      supported   by    a broadband    educational network  with   scientific visualization, videoconferencing   and
      collaborative computing, Northwestern University.
Petrou A. & Dimitracopoulou A. (2003). Is synchronous computer mediated collaborative problem solving
      `justified' only when by distance? In B.Wasson, S. Ludvigsen and U. Hoppe (Eds) Computer Support for
      Collaborative Learning, CSCL2003 congress 14-18 June 2003 Bergen, Norway.
Ranney , M., Schank, P. & Diehl, C. (1995). Competences versus performance in critical reasoning: Reducing
      the gap by using Convince Me. Psychology Teaching Review, 4(2).
Reeves   B.  &  Shipman,F.     (1992). Supporting    Communication   Between      Designers  With   Artifact-Centered
      Evolving Information Spaces, Proceedings of the ACM Conference on CSCW, pp. 394-401
Roschelle, J. and Pea R. (2002). A walk in the WIDE side: How wireless handhleds may change CSCL. G. Stahl
      (ed). Proceedings of Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, CSCL 2002, Colorado, pp. 601-602
Salomon   G.    (1995).   Distributed  Cognitions:   Psychological  and  educational    considerations,  Cambridge,
      England: Cambridge University Press.
Scardamalia, M & Bereiter C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-buidling communities. The Journal of
      the Learning Sciences, 3, pp.265-283
Simoff S. (1999). Monitoring and Evaluation in Collaborative Learning Environments. In C. Hoadley & J.
      Rochelle (Eds). Proceedings of 3rdCSCL, Stanford, December 12-15, 1999.
Soller A., Wiebe J., Lesgold A. (2002). A machine learning approach to assessing knowledge sharing during
      collaborative learning activities. In G. Stahl (ed). CSCL 2002, congress, Colorado, pp.128-137
Suthers  D., (1999).  Effects  of  Alternate  Representations  of Evidential  Relations  on  Collaborative   Learning
      Discourse In C. Hoaley & J. Rochelle (Eds). Proceedings of 3rd CSCL, Stanford, December 12-15.
Suthers, D., Girardeau, L & Hundhausen C. (2003). Deistic roles of external representations in face-to-face and
      online    collaboration. B.Wasson,   S.  Ludvigsen  &   U.  Hoppe  (Eds),   CSCL:  Designing   for    Change in
      Networked Learning Environments, CSCL2003 congress, 14-18 June, Bergen, Norway.
van  Joolingen W.  R.,    de  Jong T., Lazonder   A.W., Savelsbergh  E.  R.,  and  Manlove    S. (in press). Co-Lab:
      Research    and   development    of an  online learning  environment    for collaborative  scientific discovery
      learning. Computers and Human Behavior.
Veerman,    A., (2000).   Computer     Supported  Collaborative   Learning    Through  Argumentation,    Proefschrift
      Utrecht
Wojahn P.G., Neuwirth C.M. & Bullock, B. (1998). Effects of interfaces for annotation on communication in a
      collaborative task. In Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '98). ACM Press, pp. 456-463.
Wu,  A.,  Farrell  R.   &    Singley  M.  (2002).  Scaffolding  Group   Learning    in a Collaborative   Networked
      Environment, in G. Stahl (ed). Proceedings of CSCL 200,2 Colorado, Jan 7-11 2002, pp.245-254

                                                          
