   A   Study           of   the        Foundations                   of     Artifact-Mediated
                                        Collaboration

                                    Nathan Dwyer, Daniel D. Suthers
                            Laboratory for Interactive Learning Technologies
                           Department of Information and Computer Sciences
                                            University of Hawai`i
                               ndwyer@hawaii.edu, suthers@hawaii.edu

       Abstract. The premise of this work is that, like language, the meanings of written representations
       are contextual and their affordances are appropriated in sometimes-unexpected ways. This situation
       presents a dilemma for   designers   of  collaborative   learning technologies:    there   is a   need for
       representational and   interactional tools that guide and   support  learning   through    cognitive   and
       social activities, but predefined mappings between interface elements and functionalities may be
       too rigid. The study reported in this paper attempts to address this dilemma by identifying the
       strategies that people communicating     via flexible written representations      use to  manage     their
       interaction, and how they appropriate the affordances of media to carry out these strategies. We
       analyzed   how   people  appropriated    paper-based    tools  for  collaboration      under     conditions
       approximating   online  interaction.  Regularities   were   observed   in   the    use  of    limited  but
       polymorphic repertoires for communication and expression of attitude, functional and coordinative
       use of space, the   presence of simultaneous    threads, and  strategies   for interruption   and  context
       setting. The results suggest a new generation of collaborative technologies that include support for
       multi-faceted   and  parallel interactions,  lightweight    tools  for expressing      attitude,  context
       representations, and scaffolding for automatically detecting and supporting emerging conventions.

Keywords: Descriptive Studies, Video Analysis, Interactional Practices, Representational Affordances, Shared
Workspaces

INTRODUCTION
Studies of spoken language have established that the meanings of utterances are contextual and negotiated only
to the level  of agreement  needed   to support   action.  The  premise  of this  work    is that the   same  is  true of
nonlinguistic representations. Meanings  of  representations   are not fixed  in  advance,    but change     according to
context. Efforts to provide users with a visual language for reasoning or argumentation have often encountered
difficulty creating a functional notation (van Bruggen & Kirschner, 2003) and in getting people to adopt such a
notation (Conklin, 2003; Selvin, 2003). Also, users resist the very idea of categorizing their thinking, although
they do seek representational aids in organizing ideas (Shipman & McCall, 1994). People make flexible use of
representations, and the perceived affordances (Norman, 1988) of representations are appropriated in sometimes-
unexpected ways. For   example,  Dillenbourg    &   Traum  (1999)   had  participants  use   synchronous     chat  and an
electronic white-board in a MOO environment while solving a murder mystery. They expected that the white-
board  would  be  used  for disambiguating     spatial references  through    its two   dimensionality     and    drawing
affordances.  Instead, the most important   affordance  of  the white-board   for  participants   turned   out to  be  its
persistence: information that had to be recorded permanently was written in the white-board.
   This situation  presents a dilemma   for  designers  of computer    supported   collaborative  learning   (CSCL)    or
collaborative work (CSCW) systems, or indeed computer-mediated communication (CMC) in general. (We will
refer to these collectively as collaborative technologies.) There is substantial work on replicating the properties
of face-to-face (FTF) communication by using high bandwidth video and audio, and techniques such as clever
placement of cameras and screens for accurate conveyance of gesture and       gaze    (e.g., Kato    et al., 2001). Yet,
others believe that collaborative technologies offer unique opportunities (Dillenbourg, in press) and should go
"beyond being there" (Hollan & Stornetta, 1992) by exploiting the special properties of computational media in
ways that make distance interaction more effective. This message resonates with educators' recognition of the
need to guide and scaffold learning. Whether the application is intended for learning or work, it is not enough to
simply attempt to provide a channel of communication as rich as face-to-face communication. We truly realize
the potential of these technologies only if we use them to guide and enable more effective learning and problem
solving practices. This  point applies  equally   well to  face-to-face interaction.   If the  richness   of  FTF   were
sufficient to solve problems of learning and collaboration, we would not see interest in technologies that support
these activities specifically in FTF contexts.
   The dilemma manifests when designers try to build representational and interactional tools that guide and
support cognitive and social activities. User interfaces tend to define rigid mappings between GUI elements and
functionality. Software tools that are easy to build with typical GUI toolkits are not a good match to the flexible

                                                         
nature of   human    communication,      nor  do  they   adapt    to the  changing     needs   of   the  user.  Constrained
representational tools may guide learners in their enculturation to a new field, but must be kept simple for this
learning  period and   this simplicity   may  soon   become     too  constraining.  Conversely,     a set  of   tools that  is
sufficiently complex for supporting experts in a field can be daunting, and dissuade novices
    The  present   study  attempts  to   address  this  dilemma      by identifying   how     people   appropriate    flexible
representations to meet their needs--essentially, to identify what Garfinkel calls "member's methods" (Garfinkel,
2002)   for synchronous     collaboration  via   written   representations--so    that  we   can  build    CMC   tools   with
affordances that support the kinds of flexibilities observed. Like Sacks, we are "trying to find the machinery"
(Sacks,  1984) of  a kind  of  social interaction. Whereas    Sacks    focused  on  conversation    in   naturally  occurring
interactions, we are focusing on the mechanisms of intentional collaboration via written media. Despite these
differences, we claim that it is valid to treat these interactions as locally-managed and socially constructed. We
want to answer such questions as: When people communicate via written means, what strategies do they use to
manage the interaction? How do they appropriate the affordances of media to carry out these strategies? How can
our CMC tools provide those affordances while also offering task-specific guidance? This paper addresses the
first two questions empirically and discusses implications for the third.
    We cannot adequately answer such questions with studies of CMC, nor of FTF interaction alone. A third
strategy is  needed  and  taken  by this  study. We   cannot  effectively   conduct   the  study  with   an  existing  CMC
technology   since any  CMC    technology    we  chose  would   carry   with it the   very  assumptions     of  collaborative
technology design    that we   are questioning.   Exploratory   development     of collaboration    technology     is another
alternative, but comes    with a high  cost   of implementing     each  iteration  of the  software.    It would    also be a
mistake  to conduct  the  study  with unrestricted FTF     interaction  because there  are too many     differences   between
FTF  and  communication technologies       to create a reasonable    mapping from     one  to the   other.  FTF  interaction
includes many subtle cues that are difficult to replicate online, and we want to find the special advantages of
artifact-mediated  communications     that might  not   be evident   in FTF    interaction.  Therefore   we   take  a middle
road. Our strategy is to start with FTF, but restrict or remove some of its features that are especially hard to
replicate online and add other features such as persistence that are advantageous online. We require that people
communicate    with  written   representations,  but  do   so using  very   familiar  and  flexible   tools  -- paper    office
supplies--so we can get a sense of which affordances of flexible representational tools participants take up, and
for what  communicative functions.     Many   attributes   of the tools were   varied  so  as  to   highlight   invariance  in
communicative functions across different permutations. In this paper we report on the range of ways in which
the tools were   exploited  and  on   the mapping    between    actions  on  tools and    communicative      functions,   and
discuss implications for design.

METHOD
The purpose of this study was to discover strategies or methods that people use to collaborate through shared
written  representations.   This   understanding     is sought    both  independently      of  and    in   reference to    the
representations  used:    We   want to   know    what   kinds of  communicative       or  coordinative     functions   people
consistently attempt  to  implement   independent    of the representation   used,  and   we  want  to   know   how    people
appropriate the affordances of specific representations for these purposes. Our methodological strategy is to vary
the representational tools provided and look for invariants across the different situations. This differs from an
experimental design, which attempts to control as many factors as possible and show there is a difference
between experimental groups correlated with the one thing that varies between those groups. We are not making
comparisons between experimental groups, and the variation in participants and materials between the sessions
is desirable, as it strengthens claims of generality. Our method also differs from the micro-analysis of typical
Conversation     Analysis.    This  study    focuses    on    identifying   interactionally    constructed      mechanisms.
Understanding the details of how the mechanisms are actually constructed is left for later work.

Participants
The study involved six pairs of friends recruited from community college and university students. Their ages
ranged from 18-24, with an average of     20.9.  They   had a  diverse  set of  majors,  including    Digital  Art, Nursing,
Environmental Studies, and Computer Science. Every pair except one had known each other for multiple years
and all had  consistent   social contact.  An  additional   six pairs   were recruited   for  pilot studies.    Unless   noted
otherwise, the observations below do not include data from the pilot studies.

                                                            
Environment
A large table was prepared with a screen suspended above it such that
participants  seated  on opposite   sides  of the  table  could not  see   each
others' faces  (see   Figure  1).   The    seating was   arranged such     that
participants could reach and therefore manipulate the entire workspace.
    A video camera was placed above and to the side of the participants,
positioned  in the same plane    as the screen  to   minimize   the  extent   to
which  the  screen  blocked   the  camera's   view   of  the workspace.    The
camera captured both participants and the entire workspace, except for a
thin line blocked  by the screen. Digital  video   output   was streamed   to a
hard drive in real time.

Materials
In all cases, the table was covered with a secured sheet of butcher paper.
All pairs  had access    to tape,  rulers, scissors, string,  paperclips,  and
sticky labels, dots and  stars, and all pairs were   provided   with the  same
collection of  various writing   utensils, including    red, green,  blue, and
black white    board  markers   and  ball-point pens,   and   blue  and  black
permanent markers.
    Different pairs were provided with different kinds of paper products.           Figure 1: Study Environment
Three pairs of participants were given unrestricted amounts of office
supplies such as varying sizes and colors of paper, multiple sizes of index cards, and multiple sizes and colors
of Post-It(tm) (sticky) notes. One pair was only given 3x5 inch index cards. Two pairs were given a single, large
sheet of 2x3 foot unlined paper. The original intent was to have two pairs for each condition, but after the first
study session using only 3x5 cards, the data from the unrestricted office supplies appeared more promising.
    Office supplies were chosen partially for their familiarity. It was assumed that participants would not need
time to learn their affordances. Also, office supplies have a demonstrated history of versatility and effectiveness.
The three sets of materials were chosen for the specific affordances they provided. Individual pieces of paper and
index cards can be moved around and repositioned is relation to each other, and Post-It(tm) notes can be attached
and detached from other materials. The index card only condition removes the attachment affordance, while the
large sheet of paper disallows repositioning the participant's contributions.

Procedure
Pairs of participants were given discussion topics, and asked to brainstorm ideas, discuss them, and come to
some kind of final agreement. The pairs were given three topics chosen from a pool of five "wicked" (Rittel &
Webber, 1973) problems, such as: How do we preserve Hawai'i's environment? Space aliens are coming; how
should we respond when they arrive? What is the appropriate relationship between science and religion? Wicked
problems are typified by the lack of clear evaluation metrics for any answer as well as the lack of a well-specified
process   for  approaching    them.  This   required    the  participants  to    collaboratively develop  processes  for
collaboration and evaluation, and to negotiate when they had come to the end of the interaction. The order and
selection of topics assigned to the pairs were permuted to create the greatest variability.
    Every effort was made to support the greatest amount of flexibility in the representational medium. One the
other hand,   several restrictions were  placed  on  the  participants in  order  to approximate   limitations of online
communication. Since current online communication is predominantly text-based, we chose to limit visual and
verbal channels. Participants were required to communicate entirely through the use of the pens and materials,
and because   of the  screen, participants  were   unable to communicate      using  facial expressions. They  were  also
asked to remain silent while working on the assigned problems. The participants' hands and arms were visible to
each other. Given that deixis is so fundamental to communication, and since tele-pointers and avatars are viable
CMC tools, this seemed to be a reasonable allowance.
    Problems were printed on sheets of paper and given to the pairs one at a time. Pairs were allowed to ask for
clarification about the problems before they began each session. They were told that they should collaboratively
analyze the problem in as much detail as possible, and that they needed to come to a final conclusion they both
agreed  on.  Pairs were   given   30 minutes    to  work    on  each problem.     The experimenter  kept   notes  on his
observations during the study sessions. After each problem the pairs were interviewed on their conclusion, what
they thought of the interaction, difficulties or issues with the procedure, and any other reaction to the session.
The experimenter also used this time to verify his interpretations of the session activities.

Analysis
The video data was analyzed in multiple passes. We approached the video with no predefined theory or system,
and made every effort to let the data guide the analysis. A custom application was developed to support variable

                                                             
speed review of the video and a simple annotation system. Initial review of the video was done at normal speed,
to reinforce awareness of    the contents,  and   then  at  double   or  triple  speed to get  a  sense of  the larger-scale
recurring   patterns.  Initial   reviews   of  the  video     identified  several   of  the   most   obvious      interaction
patterns--generally those that dealt with use of the space and interaction structure. Successive reviews looked
specifically for these patterns and identified several more. The entire collection of video (approximately 8 hours)
has been reviewed multiple times, and several interesting segments have been studied in more detail.

OBSERVATIONS
With the exception of one pair, all the participants reported that while it was constraining to communicate with
only the written  word,  they  still felt they were  able   to communicate      successfully. One  participant  in the  pilot
study reported that he actually preferred the written format in some ways because it was harder to be interrupted
by  the other participant. The   S5*  pair was  an   exception.    This   pair  evidenced a  high  degree   of interpersonal
conflict, and didn't come to agreement on any of their three topics. The observations reported below exclude the
S5 pair. A summary of their interactions is provided later.
    In this analysis, we were specifically looking for patterns related to the mechanics of collaboration, and not
the content of the interaction   nor the  practice  of  sense-making    (which   may   be considered  in  future   analyses).
After some general comments about the structure of the interactions, we describe six categories of specific
mechanisms    that we  identified:   Functional   Spaces,   Simultaneous     Threads,   Placement,   Interruption,   Setting
Context, and Repertoire.

Structure     of   Interactions
The  interactions all resembled    informal   conversations.   Topics   and  ideas  introduced   by  each   participant were
explored  only  to the  point  where   the two  participants       agreed on   either the topic's  relevance   or  a general
conclusion.   Few  topics  were   revisited,  and   usually    only  to   verify agreement    before the  information    was
incorporated into the final product.
    The content displayed a topically episodic structure. The participants moved back and forth between
simultaneous   individual    work  and    collaboration.   Collaborative    interactions  were   usually  initiated  by  one
participant, and consisted of contiguous contributions (possibly in parallel with other activity) until the topic
was resolved. The resulting artifacts reflect this structure. On a single large sheet of paper, areas can be identified
for each topic addressed. Pairs who used 8.5x11 pages generally confined each topic to a single page, and pairs
who relied on smaller materials almost always introduced a new post-it or 3x5 card to start a new topic.
    There  was no  evidence    of complex     information     management.    For   example,   the physical    nature  of the
materials was  not exploited   to  investigate connections     between    ideas  or to  propose   categorical  groupings  or
inclusions.

Functional      Spaces
Every pair  used  some  mechanism     to  separate  the text
of the argumentation from the text of the conclusions.
Once    these spaces   were    designated,    participants
resisted altering their purpose. In several cases the pair
continued to squeeze the argumentation         text  into  a
constrained area long after this stopped being possible
without interfering with the prior record. One pair in
the single  large  sheet  of paper   condition    split  the
paper into a "Work Area" (~30%) and a "Plan" (~70%)
area (see Figure 2). When the "Work Area" had been
completely  filled with  text, the "Plan"  area   was   still
almost  completely    unused.  Rather    than  re-designate
space from the "Plan" area, the participants used larger
markers  to write  over  the top  of the  existing  text  in
the "Work     Area".  This   behavior  was    not   unique.        Figure 2: Functional Spaces--the work area is full,
Many    pairs constrained    their   contributions   to   an       while the area for conclusions remains unused.
impractical   writing area   while   leaving   large areas
designated for results unused.

* The sessions and participants are identified by codes. S5 identifies the fifth pair to participate. S5L and S5R
 respectively  identify  the participants  sitting  on  the   left side and  right  sides of  the table  in relation  to the
 camera.

                                                              
                                                                                    Simultaneous           Threads
                                                                                    The nature of the materials afforded
                                                                                    simultaneous       contributions    from
                                                                                    each participant.    The large  sheet  of
                                                                                    paper provided ample space for both
                                                                                    participants    to write   concurrently.
                                                                                    Smaller,   individual   pieces  of  paper
                                                                                    allowed    each    participant  to   have
                                                                                    their own writing area.
                                                                                       In  all but  one    pair, there   were
                                                                                    frequently two concurrent threads of
                                                                                    contribution.      When      participants
                                                                                    used    materials      that  could     be
                                                                                    positioned (i.e. sheets of paper, 3x5
                                                                                    cards,  etc.)   each   piece   of  paper
                                                                                    usually  represented     a  single  topic
 Figure 3: Simultaneous Threads--The participants used different pen                thread.  The    pair  would   alternately
 colors. These cards were exchanged repeatedly.                                     write on the paper and then pass it
                                                                                    across the  table  to  their partner  (see
Figure 3). This had the added benefit of indicating when each person was done writing, and produced a spatially
coherent   artifact oriented   to  the topic.  Participants  using   a single large   sheet   of  paper   tended    to group
contributions  to a  thread, but    occasionally  participants in this  condition   carried  on  synchronous     threads   by
alternately writing on the   paper  as  close  to  their partner as  possible (i.e. on   the  far side   of the  table  from
themselves). This resulted in several topic threads that were not at all spatially coherent, but this didn't appear to
interfere with the interactional coherence of the exchange. More often, though, topics were confined to a specific
area on the paper, and there are easily observable spaces between the areas for each topic.
   Pair S3 was an exception. Each maintained their own material to write on, and would alternately write and
then read  what  their  partner had  written.  They  didn't reorient their material   so  the  other   could   read it--they
consistently read the other's text upside down. The S3 pair consisted of members of the deaf community, and
while this use of the materials resembled a common practice in that culture, the participants reported that the
usage was not a conscious choice. This use of the materials produced interactions consisting of a single thread,
with each contribution alternating between separate pieces of paper.
   Pairs   using mobile  materials     tended  to  keep  related  information  on   a  single  piece    of  paper.  When    a
participant made a contribution to an existing thread, he/she did so by adding the contribution to the piece of
paper that contained that thread. On the single large sheet of paper, text ran in all directions, and while related
contributions were usually added near the related text, there was occasionally no space to add a contribution. In
this condition,   pairs made    use of  lines  and   arrows to   connect their contribution      to previous     text. These
connecting arrows were sometimes used even when           the contributions were    in proximity     to   each  other  or the
connection was obvious.
   Pairs   displayed  no cognitive     difficulty in managing     multiple topics.    The   simultaneous     topics    on the
different  3x5   cards  remained    coherent,  and   the   participants  displayed    no   difficulty    keeping    track  of
conversational threads. On the large sheet of paper, participants had no difficulty being interrupted during an
individual contribution to focus on their partner's topic. The interrupted party went back to his/her individual
work with no problem.

Placement
The  pairs  using    multiple   materials   made
remarkably consistent    use    of  position   and
placement. The tabletop workspace allowed
objects to  be moved    around  and    overlapped.
Unsurprisingly, every pair in these conditions
consistently contributed    to  the current  topic
using  the  space directly  between    the two  of
them.  Objects   that   were no    longer  current
were set to the side.
   More      interestingly,         participants
positioned objects between     themselves   so  as
to mediate   access.   Individual   contributions
were  consistently  made   with the  object  close
to the writer. A  standard  pattern  was   for the
writer to  position a  card  close  to his  or her    Figure 4: Placement--the participant on the right is adding
self, write a contribution, and then move the         to the conclusions, while his partner is starting a new topic.

                                                            
card to  the other  participant's  side of  the table. The   position  also  regulated   the contributions     of  the writer's
partner. When a     material was   in  the center  of  the table, both   participants  would   regularly   write   words    and
complete sentences on it. When the material was close to one participant, however, the other participant limited
their contributions to pointing or tapping or writing individual symbols, most often a question mark.
  The more collaborative interactions took place nearer the center of the table (see Figure 4). When the two
participants were engaged in negotiating an agreement, the interaction often took place on a single piece of paper
positioned   in the center of the  table.  The  shared  paper  was   turned  repeatedly  so  each   participant   could   write
easily, but participants tended to orient the paper sidewise, allowing each participant the same ability to read and
contribute, and rarely moved the paper closer to their own side of the table. Papers used to record conclusions or
final results also often stayed near the center of the table and usually remained oriented sideways. This sideways
orientation of the shared conclusion was also used in one of the large sheet of paper conditions.

Interruption
All the pairs used a similar protocol for interruption. To get the other's attention, a participant would touch the
other person    on  the arm,  or  tap  repeatedly  on  some    text. These  interruptions    were   often  not  responded    to
immediately. Participants were able to queue the request for attention until they were done with their immediate
task. This usually meant that the person would finish writing a sentence or conclude a thought. Usually, the
person making the interruption did not insist on an immediate response from their partner. After a participant
had requested their partner's attention, they would often go back to work until the partner finished their task and
changed focus.

Setting      Context
When the members       of a pair were   working    individually,  and  one   of them   wanted    to  engage   the  other,   two
specific behaviors were used for setting the current topic.
  When a new topic was introduced, a participant would usually write an initial sentence and then bring it to
the attention of the other participant before continuing. With materials that afforded positioning, this generally
involved the writer moving the material to their partner's side of the table. Several mechanisms were used to
negotiate when materials could be exchanged or moved. Either the participants would wait until they were both
done writing and then swap materials, or the writer would place the material on their partner's side of the table,
sometimes    intentionally obscuring    the partner's  current work.   With  a  single sheet  of    paper, the  writer   would
produce  the    introductory  sentence,   get their  partner's attention, and   then tap  the  new   text.    This was    often
followed by the writer running a finger under the text, indicating what the partner should read.
  When a participant wanted to return to a previous topic, the order of actions was reversed. The participant
would indicate previously written text by tapping on it or underlining it, and then write a related sentence. This
related sentence   sometimes    did not need    to be  in  proximity   of previously   written   text.  Participants   had   no
problem  understanding       that the  underline   was   meant   as  an indicator,   and  not  for   emphasis.     When     the
participants re-read   the text later, they did  not appear  confused   by  the  underlines   or  other   markings    that  had
accrued.

Repertoire
Despite  the availability  of   a wide  variety   of materials,  every  pair constrained   themselves      to a very   limited
subset. Even when the widest variety of materials was made available, all pairs tended to use only one or two
materials almost exclusively. New types of materials were generally introduced                   to  distinguish      types  of
information, i.e. in a session recorded entirely on 3x5 cards a pink post-it was used to record conclusions.
  In addition to limiting their choice of materials, all the participants made use of a remarkably limited set of
gestures, deixis, and symbols. Women were considerably more likely to use hand gestures than men. Still, these
gestures were   mostly  limited   to an approval   gesture  (e.g. thumbs    up)  and   a questioning    gesture    (e.g. hands
spread palm up, like what usually accompanies a shrug). Actions that related to the artifact consisted of a variety
of pointing gestures. Participants pointed at, tapped on, or ran a finger along (under) artifact elements. Gestures
involving both hands were apparent, e.g. indicating some written text with one hand, either pointing, tapping,
or underlining, and then tapping the area being used to record conclusions with the other hand
  A similarly limited number of symbols were employed in the written artifacts. Symbols were almost never
used independently, but almost always as an annotation or in reference to some other piece of text. The symbols
used  regularly  were   question  marks   (by far  the most  prevalent),  arrows, smiles,    stars, and check     marks.   Two
different pairs of males each drew representations of a hand with the middle finger extended, but only once each.
Despite a variety of labels and stickers, pairs only made use of stars and colored dots.
  Actions,    gestures,   and symbols      were  polymorphic.    Pointing,   for  example,    might    be  used    to  indicate
suggested topics, related information, reminders, request for clarification, or illegible handwriting. Participants
used  underlining   to  indicate  emphasis,   to  relate the current   discussion back    to  previous     discussion    or the
problem statement, to set the context of a subsequent contribution, and to indicate repetition. The meaning of
question marks and other symbols were similarly context-sensitive.

                                                             
Conflict
The sessions were remarkably consistent in the high degree of collaboration, the success of arriving and shared
conclusions, and the use of similar mechanisms. The S5 pair was an exception. They displayed a high level of
hostility towards each other, and they failed to arrive at a conclusion to any of their three topics--the only pair
to fail to do so.
   The two women had very different demeanors. S5L was very                   aggressive    while  S5R    tried    to  be  more
conciliatory.   S5L   tended to  make   long,   individually   produced     contributions,  but   then gave  short,    negative
responses such as "no" or "who cares?" with a considerable amount of underlining. The most interesting aspect
of the pair's interaction, however, is that the communicative methods they used were consistently the reverse of
the other pairs.
   Rather than the episodic structure seen in the other pairs, the S5 pair would pursue a topic only until there
was a conflict at which point S5L would usually turn the material over or introduce another piece of paper and
start a new  topic.   S5L  tended to  ignore   her  partner's interruption  requests,  but  was   insistent that   her own   be
attended to immediately. The pair never settled on a specific place for conclusions. S5R tried to designate such a
space,  but S5L  did  not adhere  to  that designation.  In   one session,  S5R    attempted   to maintain  interaction    on a
centralized sheet of paper, but when S5L contributed, she would pull the paper to her side of the workspace and
halt the interaction by writing long tracts of text. During another session, S5L would often reach across the table
and write whole sentences. One entire segment takes place on S5R's side of the table.
   It is interesting that the only pair that did not display many of the coordinating mechanisms just discussed
also displayed a high level of conflict and lack of success. In this sense, S5 is the exception that proves the rule.

DISCUSSION
   Despite   all the  variation  introduced    into the  study   sessions,  there  is considerable   evidence   of    consistent
communicative      needs  and   methods    for meeting   these   needs. This   consistency   spans    differences   in    topics,
materials,  and    individuals. That    these  methods   were    consistently  recreated   indicates   something      about the
importance of these needs.      Implications of addressing these needs      in   a CMC     environment    will   be   discussed
further below.
   Some environments provided affordances that naturally mapped to a specific task, e.g. relating two ideas by
placing them in proximity with each other. In the conditions where the materials did not provide these natural
affordances, participants did their best to approximate them. For example, on the single large sheet of paper
arrows were used to approximate collocating related ideas. While pairs with multiple materials tended to reserve
specific papers for their results, in the single large sheet of paper condition people approximated this by marking
off areas reserved for conclusions. The methods participants developed were certainly driven by the affordances
of the  materials  they were  using.   However,     the fact that pairs given    less appropriate  materials    approximated
methods by appropriating the available affordances implies that they weren't just responding to the environment
as it was given    to them, but  that  they had   some   idea of  specific  communicative    methods    that  they    felt were
required.
   These    observations   might  lead  one    to the conclusion   that  the  specifics  of  the  environment      make    little
difference. It  is possible that given  any    environment,   people will   create tools   appropriate to   the environment,
adapting to the limitations of their tools and "making do" with whatever affordances are available in order to
perform   important   communicative     tasks.  Conversely,   it might  be  argued    that we   could  determine      the "best"
affordances, and simply ensure that any collaborative environment supported them. However, the effectiveness of
an affordance cannot be     judged   in isolation.  Different  affordances   and   groups   of  affordances  will   map    more
"naturally"  to  different activities.  A  comparative   approach   should   be   taken to  determine   how     collections  of
affordances more effectively support any specific collaboration method.

Support     for    Complex       Interaction

Flexible Topical Structure
   The pervasive use of multiple, simultaneous topics threads mirrors the kinds of interaction being studied in
multi-user text chat environments (Herring, 1999; O'Neill & Martin, 2003) O'Neill and Martin make the case
that  temporal   proximity   is not  as important    as interactional   coherence,    and  that participants    in a  text  chat
environment will develop mechanisms for repairing misunderstanding. In fact, they found that rather than being
limited by the lack of temporal proximity, participants incorporated it into their communication as a source of
humor. Like people using text chat, participants in our study were able to maintain interactional coherence via
the affordance of persistence rather than strict alternation of contributions. Similarly, the text of contributions
was not constrained by direction, succession, or strict alternation. Participants made full use of the ability to add
contributions   with  minimal   regard  to format   despite  the  fact that this  produced   messy,    complex     workspaces.
These kinds of expressive freedom should be explored in the next generation of collaboration tools.

                                                              
Managing Multiple Topics with Interaction Contexts
The overall structure of the interaction followed a sort of stream-of-consciousness series of topics. There was no
advance organization or agenda setting. Instead, the participants responded to each other's contributions as they
were  brought   into the  workspace.   Rather   than  imposing  a  mechanism     for ordering   and managing     topics,  the
participants managed their focus on each topic through the affordances of the physical workspace.
   Participants seemed to move the various topic threads between several states. Participants used position and
orientation  to  invite a  response,   to initiate collaboration,  or  to  indicate  ownership     (and  the  corresponding
limitation on their partner's contributions). This happened with multiple topics at a time, indicating a model of
discourse that is less linear and instead relies on opportunistically advancing elements of the overall interaction.
Collaborative software could support this model by providing better management of multiple topics including
simultaneous   awareness    of  the state of each. These    observations   also  suggest  a collection  of loosely   defined
"soft" workspaces, each representing a context of interaction that includes topic information as well as affective
information   and   the current participant   expectations.  The   software   to support  this  would    have  to support  a
simple mechanism      for switching   attention   from one  topic  to  another   as  well as  merging    and  branching   the
contexts.
Prioritizing Contributions
   Not all   contributions  are of  equal  importance.  The   use  of  interruption   indicates that   participants  want to
bring some   contributions   to their  partner's  attention immediately,     while   others can   wait  until the partner is
available. Within the confines of the synchronous environment, there seems to be some variability in just how
synchronous an interaction needs to be. Collaborative software could support this management of prioritization
by providing mechanisms for passive contributions to a shared artifact along with more proactive tools that alert
participants to certain contributions as they are being made.

Ease   of    Indicating      Attitude
The  majority    of contributions   to any   session   fell into  two  categories:   contributing   new    information   and
indicating an affective response to that information. Topics were addressed just until both participants had
indicated (dis)agreement or (dis)approval, not until they had been exhaustively examined. Each participant used
the ability to quickly express an affective response as a recurring tool to help shape and direct the interaction. It
is notable that participants indicated attitudes with symbols and hand gestures rather than written out sentences.
The ability to easily and continuously express attitude is fundamental to conversation, but generally absent from
current collaboration technologies. Even the use of emoticons and similar tools requires a conscious mapping of
response to representation.
   For the   participants,  the  affective   layer of  information  took   the  place of  thorough   data  analysis.  In  the
artifacts there  is a wide   variety  of  content  types, but   there is a notable   absence   of  any  sort  of  organizing
mechanisms. Aside from defining work and conclusion spaces, there are almost no explicit rating systems, pro
and con lists, or inter-relation between the topics. Since indications of approval and agreement were often made
with non-persistent actions, the participants were required to remember the status of the various topics and of the
interaction as a whole. Without a visible record, both participants would have had to assume that they were each
remembering things in the same way. There's an upper limit on the complexity of data managed this way. After
a certain point, it becomes necessary to impose some organization so the information can continue to be used
effectively. Although    collaboration    technologies can  help  with this,  fixed  organizational  schemes     would carry
with them the problems of inflexibility that motivated this study. We should explore collaboration technologies
that automatically   infer  the implicit  organization from   affective  contributions    and  artifact manipulations,   and
facilitates the application of this organization as the need becomes apparent.
   This discussion suggests two important limitations of this study; the limited time frame and the dependence
on personal  opinion    and knowledge     (rather than external  data and/or  formal  evaluation   criteria). It is  possible
that a longer time frame or the requirement to use external information and formal criteria would have motivated
participants  to invent   more  organizational    mechanisms.   Also,  writing   all  contributions  by   hand   limited  the
amount    of text that  could   reasonably   be  generated  in  30 minutes.     This seemed    to dampen   enthusiasm     for
extended debates or long explanations.

Simpler      Tools,     Emergent       Conventions
The participants in this study only developed a small number of communicative methods, and once a participant
pair chose a material or method, they tended to use it for the duration of the session. Even when the method was
found to be inefficient, or they agreed    on its  limitations, they  fell to using  it again  for the  next  topic. Similar
self-constraint on the   use of available materials and     tools has  been   documented    in  usage   studies  of  complex
software such as word processors and spreadsheets. (Nilsen et al., 1993) notes that users only learn a subset of
the application's functionality--usually just enough to accomplish their normal tasks. It is possible that fewer
yet more flexible tools in collaborative software might encourage users to make more creative and personalized
use of the environment.

                                                             
    There  is a similar  self-imposed    limit  on  the   use of notational   conventions.  In   the few   cases where
conventions    were   attempted,    they  either   quickly    became   confusing,     were immediately     ignored   or
miscommunicated between the participants. The effort of remembering and applying a convention outweighed
its perceived value. Collaborative technologies should be designed to reinforce the use of notations by allowing
conventions to emerge from the interactions without them being explicitly defined.

User-Driven,      Complex       Actions

Polymorphic Actions
In contrast to the  limited  number   of actions,  the communicative     functions  performed   were numerous.   Every
action was used for multiple purposes. Actions such as pointing, underlining, and drawing an arrow do not by
themselves have concrete semantic content or indicate a specific communicative function. Each of these takes on
meaning given the context in which it is used. Each of these actions could be combined and overlapped with
other actions as well as modified, giving rise to the wide range of meanings we observed. For example, tapping
on a piece of text that one has just written draws attention to the new contribution, while tapping on text just
written by  one's partner may   indicate  agreement,   or if followed by   further writing may   indicate the intent to
comment.   These   combinations   were   additionally  modified    based on  the  interactional context in which    they
occurred. The   position or  ownership   of the indicated text  changes  the  meaning   of the  writing that  followed.
Finally, the nature of these composite actions was additionally modified by the perceptible attitude of the person
who was performing them. The speed or intensity with which the actions were performed further extended the
already broad palette of possible communicative acts. For example, a participant may have tapped more gently
to show agreement or more energetically to show insistence.
    Despite polymorphism, the intention of each action was almost never misconstrued. Rather than create any
formal definitions, participants were willing to expend the mental effort to perform continuous (re)interpretation
of these actions and their context. For example, post-interviews with the S6 participants revealed that even when
there was an awareness of a mismatch in interpretation (P1 knew that P2 had misunderstood the meaning of a
notation used by P1), the participants preferred to revise their understanding of each other's behavior rather than
produce external documentation (P1 interpreted P2's actions in light of the misinterpretation).
    The number of possible meanings accessible to the participants could not be reasonably represented using the
typical "single tool = single meaning" paradigm available in existing user interface development toolkits. We
should  investigate the  creation of  simple,   flexible  tools that support  creative combination   and   repurposing.
Allowing users' own repertoires of symbols and actions to emerge from their interaction will give rise to richer
and more actor appropriate tool sets.

CONCLUSIONS
This study was conducted in an environment significantly different from either typical conversation or typical
on-line communication. Face-to-face conversation is generally not persistent, and relies heavily on a wide range
of non-verbal cues. Typical online environments provide a structured set of tools to facilitate communication,
but don't support   complex  gesturing   or physical   interaction. This study environment   attempted    to  marry  the
limited communication channels of the online environment with the flexible representational abilities of pen and
paper. Participants' level of engagement suggests that this marriage was successful.
    The data gathered from this study shows a great deal of consistency at the structural level of artifact-mediated
communication.    Analyzing  interaction  from   the  bottom-up    gives a  sense  of how  people  act  "naturally" and
suggests several possible implications for the design of collaborative systems. A new generation of collaborative
technologies could include support for multi-faceted and parallel interactions, lightweight tools for expressing
attitude, context   representation,   and   scaffolding   for   automatically  detecting   and   supporting   emerging
conventions.
    This study should not, however, be taken too literally as a design for an online environment. Some of these
behaviors  are  deeply  tied to the physicality    of the workspace,   e.g. managing    placement  and  orientation  of
materials, using both hands for gesturing, or touching to get one's attention. A direct implementation of this
environment would have difficulty reproducing this physicality and at the same time fail to take advantage of
abilities afforded by the electronic medium (Dillenbourg & Traum, 1999; Hollan & Stornetta, 1992). Instead,
we should recognize that communicative and representational practices emerge from interaction. This study
demonstrates    the emergence   of  powerful,   context-specific     mechanisms    in  underconstrained    collaborative
interaction. As Suthers (2005) proposes, the appropriate next step is to iterate over a series of software designs,
evaluating each in terms of a qualitative understanding of how the affordances each makes available influence
and facilitate users' collaborative processes.
    People make sense of the world through interactions based on their perception of how objects allow them to
act, not necessarily a contemplation of the objects' purpose. Action occurs in the instant-to-instant process of
perceiving and responding to the world, not in an abstract vocabulary of models and operations. Providing users
with complex    manipulation    tools might,    in fact,  be  less  important  than   providing  effective context  and
information presentation (Button & Sharrock, 1997). In the long run, one of our challenges is to determine how

                                                           
collaboration technologies can make the best use of computational resources and most effectively leverage the
processes of sense-making already taking place in the minds and interactions of our users.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under award 0093505. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed   in this  paper are those of the authors and    do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

REFERENCES
Button, G., & Sharrock, W. (1997). The production of order and the order of production. Paper presented at
       the ECSCW '97, Lancaster.
Conklin, J. (2003). Dialog mapping: Reflections on an industrial strength case study. In P. A. Kirschner, S. J.
       B. Shum & C. S. Carr (Eds.), Visualizing argumentation: Software tools for collaborative and
       educational sense-making (pp. 117-136). Great Britain: Springer-Verlag.
Dillenbourg, P. (in press). Designing biases that augment socio-cognitive interactions. In R. Bromme, F. Hesse
       & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers and biases in computer-mediated knowledge communication--and how
       they may be overcome. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Dillenbourg, P., & Traum, D. (1999, December). The long road from a shared screen to a shared
       understanding. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 3rd conference on computer supported
       collaborative learning, Stanford.
Garfinkel, H. (2002). Ethnomethodology's program: Working out Durkheim's aphorism. Lanham, MD:
       Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Herring, S. C. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii
       International Conference on System Sciences, Hawai'i, USA.
Hollan, J., & Stornetta, S. (1992). Beyond being there. Paper presented at the Proceedings of CHI'92 Human
       Factors in Computing Systems.
Kato, H., Yamazaki, K., Suzuki, H., Kuzuoka, H., Miki, H., & Yamazaki, A. (2001). Designing a video-
       mediated collaboration system based on a body metaphor. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall & N. Miyake
       (Eds.), CSCL 2: Carrying forward the conversation (pp. 409-423). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Nilsen, E., Jong, H., Olson, J. S., Biolsi, K., Reuter, H., & Mutter, S. (1993, April 24-29). The growth of
       software skill: A longitudinal look at learning & performance. Paper presented at the InterCHI '93,
       Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The psychology of everyday things (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday.
O'Neill, J., & Martin, D. (2003). Text chat in action. Paper presented at the GROUP'03, Sanibel Island,
       Florida, USA.
Rittel, H., & Webber, M. (1973). Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Sciences, 4, 155-169.
Sacks, H. (1984). Notes on methodology. In J. M. Atkinson & J. Heritage (Eds.), Structures of social action
       (pp. 21-27). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Selvin, A. M. (2003). Fostering collective intelligence: Helping groups use visualized argumentation. In P. A.
       Kirschner, S. J. B. Shum & C. S. Carr (Eds.), Visualizing argumentation: Software tools for
       collaborative and educational sense-making (pp. 137-163). Great Britain: Springer-Verlag.
Shipman, F. M., III, & McCall, R. (1994). Supporting knowledge-base evolution with incremental
       formalization. Paper presented at the CHI'94, Boston, MA.
Suthers, D. (2005). Technology affordances for intersubjective learning: A thematic agenda for CSCL, To
       appear in Proceedings of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2005, Taipei, May 30-June 4th
       2005.
van Bruggen, J. M., & Kirschner, P. A. (2003). Designing external  representations to support solving wicked
       problems. In J. Andriessen, M. Baker & D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to learn:     Confronting cognitions
       in computer-supported collaborative learning environments. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

                                                       
