        Effects of an Individual's Prior Knowledge on
          Collaborative Knowledge Construction and
Individual Learning Outcomes in Videoconferencing

                           Bernhard Ertl, Birgitta Kopp & Heinz Mandl
                                           Department of Psychology
                                Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich
                           {ertl|koppb|mandl}@emp.paed.uni-muenchen.de

      Abstract. This paper deals with collaborative knowledge construction in videoconferencing. The
      main topic for investigation is how to predict individual learning outcomes, and in particular the
      degree to which an individual's prior knowledge and collaborative knowledge construction can
      influence individual learning outcomes. In this context, the influence of prior knowledge and two
      measures of instructional support, a collaboration script and a content scheme, were analyzed with
      respect to collaborative knowledge construction. An empirical study was conducted using 159
      university    students. Students   worked   collaboratively    in groups  of  three within    a case-based
      videoconferencing learning environment and were supported by instructional support measures.
      Results indicated that collaborative knowledge construction had a greater impact on individual
      learning outcomes than an individual's prior knowledge.

      Keywords: prior knowledge, factual knowledge, applicable knowledge, cooperative/collaborative
      learning,  teaching/learning    strategies, videoconferencing,      collaboration script, content scheme,
      collaborative knowledge construction, shared application

INTRODUCTION
Recently, there  has  been    quite a  lot of   research  on  collaborative learning in  computer    supported   learning
environments   (cf. Andriessen,     Baker   &   Suthers,  2003;  Bromme,    Hesse   &   Spada,   in  print; Dillenbourg,
Eurelings & Hakkarainen, 2001; Kirschner, 2002; Koschmann, Hall & Miyake, 2002; Stahl, 2002). In this
context, most researchers focus on how learners use the learning environment, on supporting collaborative
learning or on the processes involved in collaborative learning. However, research generally does not consider
sustaining effects of the collaborative learning environment. This means that ­ even if researchers study the
increase in learners' knowledge ­ questions about the predictors of individual knowledge acquisition remain
unanswered.   However,   the   issue   of   predictors    is crucial  for research  in  computer    supported    learning
environments. Many studies are able to prove the effects of support measures during the learning process, but
can prove none or only few effects on individual learning outcomes (cf. Baker & Lund, 1997; Fischer, Bruhn,
Gräsel & Mandl, 2002; Pfister & Mühlpfordt, 2002; Weinberger, 2003). One reason for such results may be the
influence of an individual's prior knowledge, which may negate effects of collaborative knowledge construction
(cf. Dochy, 1992; Kalyuga, Chandler & Sweller, 1998, 2000, 2001; O'Donnell & Dansereau, 2000; Renkl,
Stark, Gruber & Mandl, 1998; Stark & Mandl, 2002). Thus, finding predictors for individual learning outcomes
can help to improve support measures for collaborative learning by focusing on relevant criteria.
   This paper   focuses  on   predictors    for individual   learning outcomes   in  collaborative    net-based  learning
scenarios. The influence of prior knowledge and collaborative knowledge construction is investigated based on
an empirical study. For further insights, the effects of support on collaborative knowledge construction are also
researched, in particular the effects of a collaboration script and a content scheme.

COLLABORATIVE LEARNING IN VIDEOCONFERENCING
Collaborative learning in small groups means that groups act relatively independent of a teacher with the goal of
acquiring knowledge or skills (cf. Cohen, 1994; Dillenbourg, 1999). One major goal of collaborative learning is
to support   social interaction  and   encourage     the  learners'  cognitive processes.  In   this  context,   learners'
elaborations are seen   to play     a crucial   role (cf. Webb,   1989;   Webb   &   Palincsar,  1996)     for expressing
knowledge,   ideas  and beliefs  to   their  partners  (cf.  O'Donnell    & King,  1999;  Palincsar   &    Brown,  1984;
Rosenshine   &  Meister, 1994):     learners  work   to  co-construct   knowledge  collaboratively    (cf.  Bruhn, 2000;

                                                             
Fischer,  Bruhn,  Gräsel  &   Mandl   2000;   Roschelle    &  Teasley,   1995).  In  addition,   learners externalize   and
elaborate on  learning   material by  taking   notes  (cf. Gould,     1980;   Molitor-Lübbert,   1989),   e.g. in a   shared
computer application. In collaborative learning environments, learners often create these written representations
collaboratively (cf. Baker & Lund, 1997; Dillenbourg & Traum, 1999; Klein, 1999; Suthers, 2001). During this
process, they create a shared external representation of the subject matter, which can be helpful for collaborative
knowledge construction (Ertl, 2003; Fischer et al., 2002). When constructing a shared external representation,
learners must externalize their knowledge, that is, they must elaborate on and comprehensibly explain their
knowledge to their learning partner (cf. Hayes & Flower, 1980; Peper & Mayer, 1986). Furthermore, creating
shared external representations can encourage learners to solve conceptual or structural problems they may have
with the subject matter (cf. Fischer & Mandl, 2002; Gould, 1980; Molitor-Lübbert, 1989) and influence the co-
construction  of  knowledge    (cf. Eigler,   Jechle, Merziger     &    Winter,  1990;     Fischer &    Mandl,    2002). In
videoconferencing, shared applications play a prominent role in such externalization processes: The shared
applications  offer a shared  externalization    forum, which      is common     to all the   dispersed learning   partners
(Dillenbourg & Traum, 1999). In computer-supported learning environments, shared applications are often built
as tools for the learners (cf. Spitulnik, Bouillion, Rummel, Clark & Fischer, 2003; Suthers & Hundhausen,
2001). Such tools support the active representation of knowledge and can support learners domain-specifically
(cf. Dillenbourg & Traum, 1999; Roschelle & Pea, 1997), reduce consensus illusions and foster the integration
of prior knowledge (cf. Fischer et al., 2002). However, studies show that it is not enough to simply provide a
collaborative  learning  environment     (cf. Johnson   &     Johnson,   1992;   Lou,   Abrami     &  d'Apollonia,    2001;
Rosenshine & Meister, 1994; Salomon & Globerson, 1989; Slavin, 1995). The collaborative learning process
and outcomes can be improved greatly when appropriate additional support is provided.

Outcomes of Collaborative Learning
In this context, it is necessary to have a view on the conceptualization of learning outcomes. There are two main
methods of assessing the benefits of a collaborative learning scenario: either individually on the learner level or
collaboratively on a group level. However, there are differences in the interpretation of such learning outcomes
(cf. Anderson, Reder & Simon, 1996; Greeno, 1997; Hertz-Lazarowitz, Kirkus & Miller, 1992; Salomon &
Perkins,  1998;  Slavin, 1995;    Webb,   1989).  The   main   questions    surround    the degree   to which    individual
knowledge assessments can evaluate the effects of collaborative knowledge construction and the degree to
which group assessment can indicate an individual's learning progress. Regarding individual learning outcomes,
one can   distinguish between   conceptual    knowledge    and  applicable    knowledge     (cf. De   Jong   &  Fergusson-
Hessler,  1996).  According    to   this distinction,  the    term conceptual    knowledge      is used   if   learners  can
appropriately recite facts about the subject matter, while applicable knowledge means that learners can also
apply their knowledge, e.g. in problem solving. In contrast to the clear conceptualization of individual learning
outcomes, it is less clear how to measure the effects of collaborative knowledge construction on a collaborative
level. In this context, Hertz-Lazarowitz et al. (1992) suggest that the product of the collaboration process, e.g. a
final collaborative problem solution, should be considered as "group knowledge" or as a collaborative learning
outcome.  Other   approaches   stress the  importance   of    learners' convergence     in  knowledge     construction   (cf.
Fischer & Mandl, in press; Jeong & Chi, 1999).
   Even if differences between individual and collaborative measures of learning outcomes may be attributed to
characteristics of different learning tasks, the issue of the individual and social aspects of learning outcomes is
of particular  importance   for cooperative    learning    in computer    supported     learning   environments.   In   such
environments, groups may be formed and disbanded quite quickly (cf. Walther, 1994; Walther & Burgoon,
1992).   Therefore,  the individual's    benefit  from  the   collaboration    may    become     more   important   for  the
collaborating partners   than social  aspects  of groups   or  the    quality of collaboration   (cf. Kerr,    1983). Thus,
learners  in such   scenarios may    desire   maximal   individual    profit  instead   of  a high   quality   collaborative
knowledge    construction. As   a   consequence,   dysfunctional      group   phenomena     may  occur    (cf. Salomon   &
Globerson, 1989). On the other hand, when focusing on high-quality collaborative outcomes, groups may apply
strategies for maximizing group performance at the cost of neglecting group members with less knowledge. In
such cases, the skilled learners may benefit quite a lot from collaboration, while less skilled learners may not
benefit at all (cf. Dembo & McAuliffe, 1987; Salomon & Globerson, 1989; Webb, 1989). Thus, it is important
to analyze both collaborative and individual learning outcomes when investigating group learning (cf. Salomon
& Perkins, 1998).

                                                           
Support Measures for Collaborative Learning
Collaborative learning in computer supported learning environments is often supported to avoid dysfunctional
group phenomena, to improve the learning process and to foster knowledge acquisition. Well-known examples
for such  support   are collaboration    scripts  (cf. Baker    & Lund,   1997;  O'Donnell   &  King,   1999;  Pfister &
Mühlpfordt,  2002;   Rummel,     Ertl,  Härder    & Spada,   2003)    and content   schemes, which  provide    conceptual
support (cf. Brooks & Dansereau, 1983; Dobson, 1999; Ertl, Reiserer & Mandl, 2002; Fischer et al., 2002). In
the context  of   CSCL,  collaboration     scripts  aim  mainly   at  supporting  collaboration strategies by  assigning
different roles to the learners and by sequencing or structuring the work. In contrast, conceptual support aims
particularly at improving the comprehensibility of the subject matter's structure.
    Such support    measures    are mainly   directed   at collaborative  knowledge    construction and   are  thought to
substantially improve the process of collaborative knowledge construction. This is reflected in many studies
(e.g. Baker & Lund, 1997; Ertl et al., 2002; Fischer et al., 2002; Rummel et al., 2003). However, even if many of
these studies were able to reveal effects regarding the quality of collaborative knowledge construction, there are
often mixed results regarding individual learning outcomes (cf. Baker & Lund, 1997; Fischer et al., 2002; Pfister
& Mühlpfordt, 2002; Weinberger, 2003). One reason for this may be the influence of an individual's prior
knowledge.

THE ROLE OF PRIOR KNOWLEDGE IN COLLABORATIVE LEARNING
An individual's prior knowledge is known to be an important prerequisite for individual knowledge construction
and learning outcomes. Many theoretical approaches stress the importance of learners' prior knowledge when
acquiring new learning material (cf. Gerstenmaier & Mandl, 1995; Glaser, 1989). Many empirical studies also
highlight the influence of prior knowledge on individual learning outcomes (cf. Dochy, 1992; Kalyuga et al.,
1998, 2000, 2001; O'Donnell & Dansereau, 2000; Renkl et al., 1998; Stark & Mandl, 2002; Weinert & Helmke,
1998). Thus, when assessing learning outcomes, the structure of an individual's prior knowledge may negate the
effects of the collaborative knowledge construction.
    In research on collaborative learning environments, an individual's prior knowledge is mostly neglected
with respect to learning outcomes. Different levels of learners' prior knowledge are mainly used to explain
group phenomena (cf. Salomon & Globerson, 1989), the quality of explanations (cf. Webb, 1989) or as a control
variable for ensuring   that learners   do  not   differ significantly. In  studies about the   support of collaborative
learning, an individuals' prior knowledge often plays an important role in group composition (cf. Slavin, 1995;
Cohen, 1994), while the influence of prior knowledge as a prerequisite for collaborative knowledge construction
and individual learning outcomes often remains unclear. However, studies by O'Donnell and Dansereau (2000)
investigating the effects of prior knowledge in collaboration indicate that an individual's prior knowledge also
influences learning   outcomes      in the  collaborative    learning context.  Furthermore,   studies  reveal that prior
knowledge could interact with other factors in collaborative knowledge construction ­ such as instructional
support measures for the learners (cf. Reiserer, 2003).
    In summary,     results  show    that   prior  knowledge    influences   individual  and   collaborative   knowledge
construction. In addition, studies indicate that there are interactions between an individual's prior knowledge
and instructional support measures. To date, there have been no findings on the role of an individual's prior
knowledge    in the context  of  support    measures     for collaborative  knowledge   construction.  There   is also no
information  concerning     the extent   to which   an   individual's  prior knowledge    and  collaborative   knowledge
construction may influence individual learning outcomes.

RESEARCH QUESTIONS
For gaining insights on these issues, we conducted an empirical study using the following research questions:
         Research   question    1:  To  what   extent  does    an individual's  prior  knowledge   affect the  quality of
         collaborative knowledge construction supported by a collaboration script and a content scheme?
         Research   question    2:  To    what    extent do    an individual's   prior  knowledge   and   the  quality of
         collaborative   knowledge      construction     affect   learners'  individual  learning  outcomes    regarding
         conceptual and applicable knowledge?
METHOD
To  answer   these  questions,   an    empirical   study   was  conducted   in  the laboratory  of  Ludwig    Maximilian
University. 159 undergraduate students of Education took part in this experiment.
    Design of the Experiment. The experiment comprised an individual and a collaborative learning unit (cf.
figure 1). During the individual learning unit, learners acquired knowledge about attribution theory on the basis
of a theory text. After working on this text, the learners' prior knowledge was assessed using an individual case
solution and    a short-answer   test   about  conceptual    knowledge.     For the collaboration,  three  learners were

                                                             
connected with a desktop video-conferencing system, which included an audio- and video-connection and a
shared application. Using this videoconferencing environment, learners had to collaboratively solve a learning
case according to attribution theory. During collaboration, groups of three learners worked in one of four
conditions of  a  2x2-factorial design.  The variable  factors   were     collaboration script  (with vs. without)       and
content scheme (with vs. without). After the collaborative learning unit, learners' knowledge was assessed on an
individual basis by asking them to solve a case and complete a short-answer test.

                             Individual learning unit
                        Individual knowledge acquisition by a theory text

                         Assessment of an individual's prior knowledge
                          regarding applicable and factual knowledge

                           Collaborative learning unit                               Assessment of the quality of
                                                                                collaborative knowledge construction
                                 Collaborative work on a case                      by the collaborative case solution

                              Assessment of individual knowledge
                           regarding applicable and factual knowledge

  Figure 1: Design of the experiment

As instructional support for collaborative knowledge construction, a collaboration script, a content scheme and a
combination of both were used and compared with a control condition. Both the collaboration script and the
content scheme pre-structured the collaboration.
  The collaboration script/no content scheme condition (13 Triads) structured the collaborative unit into four
phases. In the first phase, learners had to read case material and extract important information on an individual
basis. In  the second    phase, learners had   to  exchange   information    and   resolve  comprehension    questions
collaboratively. They used the shared application for writing down concepts that were important for the case
solution. In the  third  phase, learners had   to  reflect individually    and in  the  fourth  phase,   learners  had    to
collaboratively develop the case solution.
  The no collaboration script/content scheme condition (14 Triads) pre-structured the shared application that
was realized   as a table, divided  into three main   categories: Cause,     for  identifying   possible causes   for    the
problem described in the case, Information for case information and for giving evidence for the causes and
Attribution for identifying the correct attribution pattern of the cause. The categories Information and Attribution
each contained two subcategories: Information was divided in columns for Consensus and Consistency to make
these  two aspects  of  attribution theory salient. Attribution  was      divided into  two sections   according      to the
theories of Kelley (1973) and Heider (1958) to help learners attribute each cause to the relevant source.
  In the collaboration script/content scheme condition (13 Triads), the collaborative unit as well as the shared
application was pre-structured. In the first phase, learners had to individually complete the content scheme with
a paper and pencil. In the second phase, the main tasks included the exchange of information and a collaborative
collection of all attributions in the shared application. In the third phase, learners compared their own notes with
the information that had been collected. In the fourth phase, learners were asked to develop the solution and to
formulate a collaborative case solution in the shared application.
  Learners   of   the no collaboration   script/no content  scheme     condition  (13   Triads) received  no additional
support or structure for solving the case collaboratively.

Data Sources
For the analysis, several data sources were included to assess the individual's prior knowledge, the quality of
collaborative knowledge construction, and individual learning outcome. A treatment check was also conducted.
  An individual's prior knowledge: conceptual knowledge. Conceptual knowledge was measured by a short-
answer test for recalling theory concepts. Learners had to complete sentence openers, e.g. "According to Kelley,
an event can be attributed to these three causes:". This test consisted of 8 items (M = 26.3; SD = 9.51; empirical
max. = 43). The reliability of this test was sufficient (Cronbach's  = .69).

                                                         
   An   individual's  prior    knowledge:    applicable    knowledge.  Concerning    an  individual's  prior  applicable
knowledge, learners worked on a case individually. For the assessment, this case solution was analyzed with
respect to theory concepts and case information. Items used correctly for the individual case solution were
summed up as a score (M = 15.0; SD = 6.68; empirical max. = 31). For ensuring inter-rater reliability of data,
two evaluators marked analysis 10%. The consistency between these evaluations was high (w = .91).
   Quality   of collaborative   knowledge     construction.    To assess the quality  of the  collaborative  knowledge
construction, the product of the collaborative knowledge construction ­ a collaboratively solved case ­ was
analyzed   with respect    to correctly  used   theory   concepts  and case  information.  According   to the   different
categories  of  the attribution    theory, a coding   system   was  developed  in which   all causes,  information  and
attributions were listed in an identifiable way without any overlap. On basis of this coding scheme, a sum was
defined  as  a  measure    of the  quality   of the collaborative   knowledge  construction.  For   ensuring  inter-rater
reliability of data, two evaluators marked analysis 10%. The consistency between these evaluations was high (r
= .87).
   Individual learning outcomes: conceptual knowledge. Conceptual knowledge in the post-test was measured
by a short-answer test for recalling theory concepts. This test consisted of 8 items, which were similar to the
items of the pre-test. The reliability of this test was sufficient (Cronbach's  = .62).
   Individual   learning    outcomes:      applicable    knowledge.  For  determining    individual  learning   outcome
(applicable knowledge), learners solved a case individually after collaboration. Similar to the pretest case, the
posttest case was analyzed with respect to correctly used theory concepts and case information. Scores were
given for case information and theoretical concepts. For ensuring inter-rater reliability of data, two evaluators
marked analysis 10%. The consistency between these evaluations was high (w = .90).
   Treatment check. A treatment check was made to ensure that there were no differences regarding learning
prerequisites  within the     four experimental   conditions.   This  served as   a  control for an  individual's  prior
knowledge and the learner's motivation. Furthermore, the effects of content scheme and collaboration script
were   controlled regarding    the  quality  of  collaborative  knowledge   construction  and  the  individual  learning
outcomes.
   Data analysis. For verifying the effects of content scheme and collaboration script, a multivariate analysis of
variance (MANOVA/GLM) was calculated for the quality of collaborative knowledge construction and the
individual  learning  outcomes.     This   used  the  content   scheme   and collaboration   script as  factors and   an
individual's prior knowledge as covariate. Linear regressions were computed to find predictors for the quality of
collaborative   knowledge     construction   and    individual  learning outcome.    Non-significant   predictors  were
excluded from analysis.

Table 1: Means and SDs of collaborative knowledge construction and individual learning outcomes.
                  Collaborative Knowledge             Individual Learning Outcome        Individual Learning Outcome
                        Construction                     (Conceptual Knowledge)            (Applicable Knowledge)
                      M              SD                      M            SD                     M            SD
Total                58.00          18.73                   29.10        7.75                 18.58          6.88
Max.                 92.00                                  42.00                             32.00
Control              47.18          14.24                   29.92        7.41                 15.82          5.71
Script               43.00          11.79                   28.49        8.40                 15.95          5.74
Scheme               66.62          13.40                   26.50        9.37                 18.48          7.77
Combined             73.46          15.22                   31.21        4.40                 22.79          5.93

RESULTS
The  treatment  check   disclosed    that  there  were   no significant  differences  regarding  prior  knowledge   and
motivation between the four experimental conditions. Furthermore, the effects of the interventions concerning
collaborative  knowledge      construction   and learning  outcome   were  calculated including  an   individual's prior
knowledge as covariate. With respect to the quality of collaborative knowledge construction, the content scheme
had a large effect. Learners with content scheme clearly applied more concepts than learners without content
scheme (cf. table 1; F(1,144) = 127.33; p < .01; K² = .47). With respect to individual knowledge acquisition,
learners in all conditions benefited greatly during collaboration. The content scheme also proved to be effective
for individual learning outcomes with respect to applicable knowledge. Learners with the content scheme scored
higher (F(1,144) = 21.84; p < .01; K² = .13). With respect to conceptual knowledge, there were no significant
differences.  Regarding    the collaboration     script, there were  no  significant effects  regarding the   quality of
collaborative knowledge construction and the individual learning outcomes. An interaction between the factors
of collaboration    script and  content    scheme   could   not be  found,  despite  the fact that  learners  with both
interventions scored descriptively the highest regarding all outcome measures (cf. table 1).

                                                             
Research Question 1
Research question 1 was about predictors of the quality of collaborative knowledge construction. As the results
in table 2 show,   over 45 %    of the variance                  regarding   the collaborative knowledge construction  could be
predicted by prior knowledge and the support measures. The strongest predictor was the content scheme, while
the individual's prior knowledge (conceptual) played only a marginal role. The collaboration script and the
individual's prior knowledge (applicable) were not significant as predictors. The high amount of predicted
variance shows that an individual's prior knowledge as well as the intervention highly influenced collaborative
knowledge construction. Unexplained variance may be attributed to other individual learner prerequisites or
characteristics of the collaboration process that were not measured in this study.

Table 2:   Multiple regression  for predicting                   the quality of  collaborative knowledge construction   by prior
knowledge, content scheme and collaboration script.
                                       Collaborative knowledge construction
                                       (standardized E-weights*)
Prior knowledge (conceptual)           .18
Content scheme                         .68
R²                                     .49
Adjust. R²                             .48
* Only statistically significant predictors (p < .05) are listed

Research Question 2
Regarding predictors for individual learning outcome, the results are quite different (cf. table 3 and 4). With
respect to applicable knowledge, 40% of the variance could be predicted by the individual's prior knowledge
and collaborative knowledge construction. In the context of applicable knowledge, collaborative knowledge
construction exhibited a greater influence than each single measure of an individual's prior knowledge1. The
content scheme did not prove to be a significant predictor. However, the content scheme may have had an
indirect influence, as it is the main predictor for the collaborative knowledge construction. The collaboration
script, again, did not prove to be a predictor.

Table 3: Multiple regression for the prediction of individual learning (applicable knowledge) outcome by prior
knowledge, content scheme, collaboration script and collaborative knowledge construction.
                                       Individual learning outcome
                                       (applicable knowledge, standardized E-weights*)
Prior knowledge (conceptual)           .27
Prior knowledge (applicable)           .22
Collaborative knowledge                .40
construction
R²                                     .41
Adjust. R²                             .40
* Only statistically significant predictors (p < .05) are listed

When analyzing conceptual knowledge, 60 % of total variance was predictable (cf. table 4). The main predictor
was conceptual prior knowledge; applicable prior knowledge played a minor role. Neither the collaborative
knowledge construction nor the interventions proved to be significant predictors. However, it must be stated that
both tests for conceptual knowledge comprised similar items, even if arranged differently.

1 When   analyzing  the effects of collaborative                 knowledge    construction and  an individual's prior knowledge
  (conceptual and applicable) in separate regressions, each of them would be able to predict about 23% of
  variance. Thus, one could state that the quality of collaborative knowledge construction and an individual's
  prior knowledge have nearly the same influence on individual learning outcomes with respect to applicable
  knowledge.

                                                                        
Table 4: Multiple regression for the prediction of individual learning outcome (conceptual knowledge) by prior
knowledge, content scheme, collaboration script and collaborative knowledge construction.
                                          Individual learning outcome
                                          (conceptual knowledge, standardized E-weights*)
Prior knowledge (conceptual)              .68
Prior knowledge (applicable)              .16
R²                                        .61
Adjust. R²                                .60
* Only statistically significant predictors (p < .05) are listed

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
These  results  show   that the  effects  of  an individual's               prior knowledge    are  quite varied  in  the quality of
collaborative   knowledge     construction    and                individual  learning   outcome.    For   collaborative   knowledge
construction,  the influence  of an  individual's                prior knowledge   is   quite small compared   to the   influence of
support  measures.  A   further  outcome   is that               conceptual  knowledge   proved    to be  a significant predictor in
contrast to applicable knowledge, which was not a significant predictor. This is an interesting result, considering
the fact that collaborative knowledge construction is a task of applying knowledge. Thus, one would expect
applicable knowledge to be a predictor. However, considering the content scheme as a strategy for applying
knowledge, the presence of this "professional" strategy may have negated the influence of individuals' naïve
strategies measured    in the pretest. Therefore,                the collaborative  knowledge    construction  may    have relied in
particular on the conceptual knowledge of the individuals and the strategies offered by the support.
   The impact of prior knowledge increases when looking at individual learning outcomes. However, in this
context,  one  has  to distinguish  between    applicable              and   conceptual  knowledge.    With   respect to  applicable
knowledge, the quality of collaborative knowledge construction still had the most influence. However, looking
at the values in table 3, one can assume that the influence of collaborative knowledge construction and both
measures of an individual's prior knowledge is somehow balanced1. The collaboration did not have an influence
on conceptual    knowledge.     Even   if all   learners               improved   their level  of   conceptual  knowledge     during
collaboration, the main predictor was an individual's prior knowledge. However, this effect may be attributed to
the similarity of the test items in the pre- and the post-test.
   These results can explain differences between individual and collaborative learning outcomes on the basis of
different variables influencing both measures. One can assume that for collaborative knowledge construction,
the collaboration effect, including the effect of instructional support measures, is much stronger than individual
learners'  prerequisites.   This means     that  collaborative               knowledge    construction    can  be    modified quite
fundamentally    by   instructional support.    In               contrast,  regarding individual    learning outcomes,    individual
prerequisites have a greater influence and may negate the effects of collaborative knowledge construction. This
has to be considered when designing instructional support for collaborative learning.

IMPLICATIONS
There are several implications of these findings. First, collaborative knowledge construction can be influenced
much more by a well-designed intervention than by an individual's prior knowledge. Secondly, an individual's
prior knowledge    gains  in  importance   regarding               individual  learning  outcomes,    but collaborative   knowledge
construction still greatly influences this area. These results help explain the effects of many studies which find
differences regarding collaborative knowledge construction and individual learning outcomes. However, more
research in this context is necessary to be able to generalize these results. Furthermore, the influence of learners
with different levels of prior knowledge should be analyzed with respect to group processes and individual
learning outcomes.
   The educational implications of these findings involve the design of collaborative learning environments. In
learning environment research, interventions are often directed either towards achieving a better collaboration
process or an improved learning outcome. However, to achieve sustainable learning environments, one has to
consider   the effect  of interventions,  the   collaborative               problem   solving  process   and an  individual's  prior
knowledge. Results of this study show that collaborative knowledge construction can have greater impact than
learners' individual prerequisites. This means that carefully designed learning environments may balance out the
differences in learners' individual prerequisites. However, such mechanisms must be verified by various process
analyses.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by DFG (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft), project number MA 978/13-3.

                                                                        
REFERENCES
Anderson,    J. R., Reder,   L.  M.,  and Simon,   H. A.   (1996).  Situated learning   and education. Educational
   Researcher, 25, 5-11.
Andriessen,   J., Baker,    M., and   Suthers, D.  (Eds.). (2003).  Arguing   to learn: Confronting    cognitions  in
   computer-supported collaborative learning environments. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Baker, M., and Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a CSCL environment. Journal of Computer
   Assisted Learning, 13, 175-193.
Bromme,     R., Hesse,  F.-W.,   and   Spada,  H. (Eds.).  (in print). Barriers  and biases  in  computer-mediated
   knowledge communication - and how they may be overcome. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Brooks, L. W., and Dansereau, D. F. (1983). Effects of structural schema training and text organization on
   expository prose processing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 811-820.
Bruhn,   J. (2000).  Förderung    des  kooperativen  Lernens   über Computernetze.   Prozess  und   Lernerfolg  beim
   dyadischen Lernen mit Desktop-Videokonferenzen [Fostering cooperative learning in computer networks:
   Process and learning outcome in dyadic learning in dektop-videoconferencing]. Frankfurt am Main: Peter
   Lang.
Cohen,   E.  G.   (1994).   Restructuring the  classroom:   Conditions   for productive    small groups. Review    of
   Educational Research, 64, 1-35.
De Jong,    T.,  and  Ferguson-Hessler,   M.   G.  M.  (1996).  Types   and  qualities  of knowledge.  Educational
   Psychologist, 31, 105-113.
Dembo, M. H., and McAuliffe, T. J. (1987). Effects of perceived ability and grade status on social interaction
   and influence in cooperative groups. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 415-423.
Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by 'collaborative learning'? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborative-
   learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 1-19). Oxford: Elsevier.
Dillenbourg, P., Eurelings, A. & Hakkarainen, K. (Eds.). (2001). Proceedings of EuroCSCL 2001: European
   perspectives on computer-supported collaborative learning. Maastricht: McLuhan.
Dillenbourg, P., and Traum, D. (1999, January). Does a shared screen make a shared solution? Paper presented
   at the Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL), Stanford.
Dobson, M. (1999). Information enforcement and learning with interactive graphical systems. Learning and
   Instruction, 9, 365-390.
Dochy, F. J. R. C. (1992). Assessment of prior knowledge as a determinant for future learning. The use of prior
   knowledge state tests and knowledge profiles. Utrecht: Uitgeverij Lemma B.V.
Eigler, G., Jechle, T., Merziger, G., and Winter, A. (1990). Knowledge and text production. In H. Mandl, E. De
   Corte,   N.   Bennett    and H.  F. Friedrich   (Eds.), Learning    and instruction: European    research   in an
   international context. Analysis of complex skills and complex knowledge domains (pp. 295-397). Elmsford,
   NY: Pergamon.
Ertl, B. (2003). Kooperatives Lernen in Videokonferenzen. Förderung von individuellem und gemeinsamem
   Lernerfolg     durch external   repräsentierte Strukturangebote     [Cooperative learning  in  videoconferencing.
   Support of individual and cooperative learning outcomes by representational aids], [Dissertation, Ludwig-
   Maximilians-Universität München].
   Available: http://edoc.ub.uni-muenchen.de/archive/00001227/01/Ertl_Bernhard_M.pdf.
Ertl, B., Reiserer, M., and Mandl, H. (2002). Kooperatives Lernen in Videokonferenzen [Cooperative learning
   in videoconferencing]. Unterrichtswissenschaft, 30, 339-356.
Fischer, F.,    Bruhn,  J., Gräsel,  C.,  and  Mandl, H.    (2000). Kooperatives    Lernen  mit   Videokonferenzen:
   Gemeinsame        Wissenskonstruktion       und    individueller    Lernerfolg    [Collaborative    learning    in
   videoconferencing:       Collaborative   knowledge      construction    and   individual   learning   outcomes].
   Kognitionswissenschaft, 9, 5-16.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., and Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering collaborative knowledge construction with
   visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12, 213-232.
Fischer, F., and Mandl, H. (2002). Facilitating knowledge convergence in videoconferencing environment: The
   role  of  external   representation tools.  In G. Stahl  (Ed.),  Computer   support  for collaborative learning:
   Foundations for a CSCL community. Proceedings of the CSCL 2002. January 7-11. Boulder, Colorado,
   USA. (pp. 623-624). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fischer, F., and Mandl, H. (in press). Knowledge convergence in computer-supported collaborative learning:
   The role of external representation tools. Journal of the Learning Sciences.

                                                           
Gerstenmaier, J., and Mandl, H. (1995). Wissenserwerb    unter   konstruktivistischer  Perspektive [Knowledge
  acquisition from a constructivist perspective]. Zeitschrift für Pädagogik, 41, 867 - 888.
Glaser, R. (1989). Expertise and learning: How do we think about instructional processes now that we have
  discovered knowledge structures? In D. Klahr and K. Kotovsky (Eds.), Complex information processing:
  The impact of Herbert A. Simon (pp. 269-282). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gould, J. D. (1980). Experiments on composing letters: Some facts, some myths, and some observations. In L.
  W. Gregg and E. R. Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive processes in writing (pp. 97-127). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong questions. Educational Researcher, 26, 5-17.
Hayes, J. R., and Flower, L. S. (1980). Identifying the organization of writing process. In L. W. Gregg and E. R.
  Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive processes in writing (pp. 3-30). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: Wiley.
Hertz-Lazarowitz, R., Kirkus, V. B., and Miller, N. (1992). Implications of current research on cooperative
  interaction for classroom application. In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz (Ed.), Interaction in cooperative groups: The
  theoretical anatomy of group learning (pp. 253-280). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Jeong, H.,and Chi, M. T. H. (1999, April). Constructing shared knowledge during collaboration and learning.
  Poster presented at the AERA Annual Meeting, Montreal, Canada.
Johnson, D. W., and Johnson, R. T. (1992). Positive interdependence: Key to effective cooperation. In R. Hertz-
  Lazarowitz (Ed.), Interaction in cooperative groups: The theoretical anatomy of group learning (pp. 174-
  199). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., and Sweller, J. (1998). Levels of expertise and instructional design. Human Factors,
  40, 1-17.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., and Sweller, J. (2000). Incorporating learner experience into the design of multimedia
  instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92, 126-136.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., and Sweller, J. (2001). Learner experience and efficiency of instructional guidance.
  Educational Psychology, 21, 5-23.
Kelley, H. H. (1973). The processes of causal attribution. American Psychologist, 28, 107-128.
Kerr, N. L. (1983). Motivation losses in small groups: A social dilemma analysis. Journal of Personality and
  Social Psychology, 45, 819-828.
Kirschner, P. A. (Ed.). (2002). Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL? Heerlen: Open Universiteit
  Nederland.
Klein, P. D. (1999). Reopening inquiry into cognitive processes in writing-to-learn. Educational Psychology
  Review, 11, 203-270.
Koschmann, T., Hall, R., and Miyake, N. (Eds.). (2002). CSCL 2: Carrying forward the conversation. Mahawa,
  NJ: Erlbaum.
Lou, Y., Abrami, P. C., and d'Apollonia, S. (2001). Small group and individual learning with technology: A
  meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 71, 449-521.
Molitor-Lübbert, S. (1989). Schreiben und Kognition. In G. Antos and H.-P. Krings (Eds.), Textproduktion: Ein
  interdisziplinärer Forschungsüberblick [Text production: An interdisciplinary research review] (pp. 278-
  296). Tübingen: Niemeyer.
O'Donnell, A. M., and Dansereau, D. F. (2000). Interactive effects of prior knowledge and material format on
  cooperative teaching. Journal of Experimental Education, 68, 101-118.
O'Donnell, A. M., and King, A. (Eds.). (1999). Cognitive perspectives on peer learning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Palincsar, A. S., and Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension-
  monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.
Peper, R. J., and Mayer, R. E. (1986). Generative effects of note-taking during science lectures. Journal of
  Educational Psychology, 78, 34-38.
Pfister, H. R., and Mühlpfordt, M. (2002). Supporting discourse in a synchronous learning environment: The
  learning protocol approach. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer support for collaborative learning: Foundations for
  a CSCL community. Proceedings of the CSCL 2002. January 7-11. Boulder, Colorado, USA. (pp. 581-589).
  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Reiserer,  M.  (2003).  Peer-Teaching   in  Videokonferenzen.      Effekte  niedrig-   und    hochstrukturierter
  Kooperationsskripte auf Lernprozess und Lernerfolg [Peer-teaching in videoconferencing. Effects of low
  and high structured cooperation scripts on learning process and learning outcome]. Berlin: Logos.

                                                       
Renkl, A., Stark, R., Gruber, H., and Mandl, H. (1998). Learning from worked-out examples: The effects of
  example variability and elicited self-explanations. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 23, 90-108.
Roschelle, J., and Pea, R. D. (1997). Trajectories from today´s www to a powerful educational infrastructure.
  Educational Researcher, 26, 1-16.
Roschelle, J., and  Teasley,  S. D.   (1995). The    construction of  shared  knowledge in  collaborative   problem
  solving. In C. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. (pp. 69-97). Berlin: Springer.
Rosenshine, B., and Meister, C. (1994). Reciprocal teaching: A review of the research. Review of Educational
  Research, 64, 479-530.
Rummel, N., Ertl, B., Härder, J., and Spada, H. (2003). Supporting collaborative learning and problem-solving
  in desktop-videoconferencing settings. International Journal of Educational Policy, Research & Practice, 4,
  83-115.
Salomon, G., and Globerson, T. (1989). When teams do not function the way they ought to. International
  Journal of Educational Research, 13, 89 - 99.
Salomon,   G., and Perkins,  D.  N. (1998).   Individual  and social  aspects of learning.  Review of  Research  in
  Education, 23, 1-24.
Slavin, R. E. (1995). Cooperative learning: Theory, research and practice. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn &
  Bacon.
Spitulnik, M., Bouillion, L., Rummel, N., Clark, D. & Fischer, F. (2003). Collaborative online environments for
  lifelong learning: Design issues from a situated learning perspective. International Journal of Educational
  Policy, Research & Practice, 4, 17-53.
Stahl, G. (Ed.). (2002). Computer support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community.
  Proceedings of the CSCL 2002. January 7-11. Boulder, Colorado, USA. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stark, R., and Mandl, H. (2002). "Unauffällige", "Vorwissensschwache", "Unmotivierte" und "Musterschüler":
  Homogene      Untergruppen    beim  Lernen   mit   einem   komplexen  Lösungsbeispiel    im Bereich  empirischer
  Forschungsmethoden       ["inconspicous",    "students   with   low previous   knowledge",   "unmotivated"    and
  "model pupils": Homogeneous sub-groups when learning with a complex worked-out example in the field of
  empirical    research  methods].    München:      Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität,    Lehrstuhl   für  Empirische
  Pädagogik und Pädagogische Psychologie.
Suthers, D. D.  (2001). Towards     a systematic    study of representational guidance  for   collaborative learning
  discourse. Journal of Universal Computer Science, 7, 254-277.
Suthers, D. D., and Hundhausen, C. D. (2001). Learning by constructing collaborative representations: An
  empirical    comparison  of three   alternatives. In P. Dillenbourg,  A. Eurelings and   K.  Hakkarainen   (Eds.),
  Proceedings of the First European Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (euroCSCL)
  (pp. 577-584). Maastricht: McLuhan Institute.
Walther, J. B. (1994). Anticipated ongoing interaction versus channel effects on relational communication in
  computer-mediated interaction. Human Communication Research, 20, 473-501.
Walther, J. B., and Burgoon, J. K. (1992). Relational communication in computer-mediated interaction. Human
  Communication Research, 19, 50-88.
Webb, N.   M.  (1989).  Peer  interaction  and learning   in small groups.   International Journal of  Educational
  Research, 13, 21-39.
Webb, N. M., and Palincsar, A. S. (1996). Group processes in the classroom. In D. C. Berliner (Ed.), Handbook
  of educational psychology (pp. 841-873). New York, NY: Macmillan.
Weinberger,    A.  (2003). Scripts    for computer-supported      collaborative  learning. [Dissertation,   Ludwig-
  Maximilians-Universität München].
  Available: http://edoc.ub.uni-muenchen.de/archive/00001120/01/Weinberger_Armin.pdf.
Weinert, F. E., and Helmke, A. (1998). The neglected role of individual differences in theoretical models of
  cognitive development. Learning and Instruction, 8, 309-323.

                                                          
