 The SENSE Project: A Context-Inclusive Approach to
 Studying Environmental Science within and Across
                                                    Schools

 Danaë Stanton Fraser1, Hilary Smith3, Ella Tallyn2, Dave Kirk2, Steve Benford2, Duncan
                Rowland2, Mark Paxton2, Sara Price3 and Geraldine Fitzpatrick3
                               1 Department of Psychology, University of Bath
  2 Mixed Reality Laboratory, School of Computer Science & I.T., University of Nottingham
                   3 Interact Lab, Department of Informatics, University of Sussex

     Abstract.   This    paper describes   a project designed   to   provide  children  with   a context-inclusive
     approach to collecting scientific data. The term context-inclusive refers to the collection of data which
     records the process of scientific data collection itself. We outline the design process carried out within
     two   partner schools  with  the aim    of engaging children  in taking  part  in,  and reflecting  upon, the
     scientific process involved in collecting and analysing scientific data. We provided children with the
     ability to share and compare their data with children at their own and other schools. Our context-
     inclusive approach involved the design of tailored sensors and a bespoke interface displaying video
     data  synchronised   with   environmental    pollution data.  Through    evaluation  of the   data collection,
     analysis and sharing sessions, we describe how the context-inclusive approach impacts on children's
     understanding   of  the   scientific process.  We  focus  on  children's discussion   and   reflection around
     understanding the constraints of measuring. We argue that the collection and presentation of contextual
     data engenders reflection on constraints, and may enable improved understanding of that process.

     Keywords. Context, collaboration, eLearning, children, evaluation, sensors, pollution, visualisation

INTRODUCTION
Innovations in Grid computing (Foster et al., 2001) and e-Science will soon enable access to large collections of
remote scientific data and high performance visualisations of this data, including data captured from sensor networks,
for example as part of environmental science (Steed et al., 2003). The SENSE project, reported on here, builds on
such approaches and technologies with the aim of demonstrating how Grid-enabled e-Science sensors might provide
data resources for children to collaborate with one another within and across schools.
Several recent  projects have  involved    children collecting data  within   their local environment    and   then being
connected with other children so that they can make sense of, and compare data (see Cohen, 1997; Lawless and
Coppola, 1996; Pea et al., 1997; Tinker and Berenfeld, 1994). As new interactive technologies are developed, new
possibilities emerge for children to learn by doing, receive feedback and refine understanding while building new
knowledge  (see Kafai and   Resnick,  1996).    Authors have   often argued   that  the nature of  investigation is better
understood by carrying out one's own inquiry (Dewey, 1910/1964; Resnick, 2000), and many educational institutions
aim to help children learn through real world contexts by carrying out field trips and visits. These experiences
however, are often peripheral and educational environments have become increasingly structured, allowing limited
time for creative participation and autonomy in learning (Resnick et al., 2003; Price et al., 2003).
There is also a move towards using mobile technologies to support class-based experiential and active learning. The
RAFT project employed the ideas of mobile learning in remotely accessible field trips (Kravcik et al., 2004). The
children on the fieldtrip used tablet PCs, a web cam and microphone to connect to peers back in the classroom who
were able to offer extra information to the field group, and input their ideas to the team's goal.

In all this and related work, there is a concern that individual learners gain an understanding of real world context and
this can be achieved through exploring and discussing these contexts. Where collaborative learning is concerned,

                                                          
children are often introduced to (aspects of) real world settings to ground their knowledge and understanding. In the
SENSE project we have been acutely aware that sensor technologies should be used by teachers and children to aid
real world collection and analysis of data. However, while other projects are exploring real world collection of data
and the importance of collaboratories involving other children and scientists, we have particularly focused on how
the distribution of such data over networks will remove such contextual factors of real-world settings as are afforded
by local experience. Accordingly, we have stressed the importance of video to enable children to contextualise the
data they are exploring. Children collected data within the natural environment, extending activities that teachers
already carried out in class, but giving them additional resources to enhance the relevance of context and engage
children further in the process of science such as exposure to time/location methodology.
The contribution  of  this paper is to  inform  how  the video data   collected operates   to give contextual cues  and
therefore understand how best to design remote collaborative technologies. We proceed by describing the sensor
technologies and applications we have developed, and then discuss our evaluation of our context-inclusive approach
taken from analysis of video recordings of the school data collection, analysis and sharing sessions.

DESIGN ACTIVITIES
Environmental Science in School
The children's domain of scientific work was environmental science, and more specifically pollution monitoring,
specifically focusing on carbon monoxide (CO). In order to introduce the domain and use of sensors we developed a
programme of activities that spanned one school year. Working closely with the teachers and children at two schools,
one in Nottingham and one in Brighton, the aim was to encourage children to think about the process of `doing
science'. The activities were designed to familiarise children with capturing, manipulating and reflecting on their
own air quality data, and with using a tailored interface to share data across schools. The children in Nottingham
were aged 10-11 years, and in Brighton aged 13-14 years. They generally worked in small groups of 4, accompanied
by an adult facilitator when data collecting.

Technologies
In order to conduct these school sessions, we developed a range of technologies that enabled children to input,
manipulate and visualise their collected data in a variety of ways. Whilst we are yet to directly integrate with Grid
technologies to distribute data across schools, we simulated such an approach by hiding the technical process of data
transfer between participating schools.
The small teams of school children were given an array of sensors to measure their local environment: a CO sensor;
an anemometer   for  wind  speed; and   a video  recorder to record   the scientific activity in  context (Figure 1). In
addition, a local map  was   used to plan  measurements    locations,  and any  changes  to   the plan. The  CO   sensor
equipment was designed for use in environmental scientific research (Steed et al., 2003), and adapted following
design sessions in school with the children. CO readings were recorded and displayed by a PDA attached to the CO
sensor. The children in Brighton kept the CO sensor and a PDA together on a board, whilst children in Nottingham
made the CO sensor multi-coloured and attached it to the end of a stick.

     Figure 1. Sensors used to collect environmental data: anemometer, CO sensor with PDA, video recording

Data Analysis Tool
The data analysis challenge for the children was then to manage the different types of data they had and to develop
an understanding   of what   each data  type   told them  individually about  their  local environment    and what    the
combination of data types offered them in their task of air pollution analysis. For this detailed analysis and reflection
task we created a data visualisation tool for use in the classroom. Our tool displayed a graph of the CO data, along
with time-synchronised video data recorded by the children (Figure 2). Annotations of interesting and surprising

                                                          
points recorded by the children were then added to the graph, e.g. when a large vehicle passing did not appear to
increase the CO reading. Annotations were displayed as a red point on the graph.

ANALYSING AND SHARING
Our analysis focuses on the children's understanding of the scientific process, particularly how understanding the
constraints of CO measurement is impacted by the provision of contextual data alongside measurement data. We
examine how children explored measurements whilst considering methodological issues in data collection. We focus
on critical incidences around factors such as delayed readings, effect of the wind on the readings, and recall on
incidences of particular import. We divide our analysis into the particular stages of the process from data collection,
through analysis and finally through reflection on data provided by the other school.

Data Collection
Hypothesising about expected CO readings began in the classroom during route planning activities. The nature of
obtaining immediate readings whilst out collecting data meant that these hypotheses could be discussed, and location
decisions altered during the data recording session to develop more in-depth hypotheses about how CO behaves, and
the properties of the sensing devices in use. In one example, a group of children saw a lorry coming out of their
school and waited to measure exhaust fumes as it passed. No change was recorded by the sensor, with the reaction
"that's rubbish!" elicited from one in the group. Using knowledge about the equipment, the group decided to alter the
position of their sensor at a roadside location and place it on the pavement, closer to traffic exhaust fumes. They
further hypothesised that their position by a pedestrian crossing would reveal higher readings because "at the traffic
lights cars stop then they start again so they must... chuck a lot more carbon monoxide out." A lower reading than
expected was gained here and the children reflected on the equipment they were using, and also whether wind may
be responsible for that reading.

            Figure 2. Data Analysis Tool Interface with CO graph, annotations and video context

Data Analysis
On the following day, the children used the data analysis tool to inspect their data. The group mentioned above
developed their own ideas about how their equipment worked. At the time of the lorry incident it was not apparent
that their monitor had detected an increase in CO. One girl noted, "The lorry didn't do much [to our CO reading]...
we would have thought there would be more pollution, it's a big vehicle and we were standing right behind it".
Reviewing the video data, another child then noticed, "It suddenly goes up in a minute... What happened at 10:09?
The next bit where we stopped it goes up really high". Another responded, "It might be we haven't actually got the
carbon monoxide yet, it's sort of floated... and then it started reading". They then chose to annotate their graph with
their hypothesis about the equipment, "We expected more of a change in carbon monoxide [by lorry] it took longer
than we expected about 30 secs or maybe a minute to go up slightly".
The sensor used in Nottingham was attached to the end of a long stick. This enabled children to experiment with
holding it in different positions in relation to the traffic. The wind ribbon was also attached to this stick underneath
the sensor. The children recorded the wind direction in relation to the hole on the sensor where the air enters. These
two factors led children to experiment with trying to `catch' pollution, by turning the sensor to either face the wind,
or to face the direction they believed the car exhaust would be coming. These brief instances highlight the children's
awareness of how the design of the sensing technology could influence the results.

                                                         
The facility to view synchronised video and CO data was used both as a memory aid for what was done, and as a way
for absent children to participate in the later reflection stages even though they had not witnessed data collection
first-hand. Our intention for data annotations was that they would enable others to access the reflected thoughts of
the children who captured the data, whilst providing further opportunity to add in their interpretation of the data or
hypotheses. Comments that were inserted included location-relevant information, wind observations, notes about
malfunctioning equipment, reasons for location choice and reasons for different sensor positions and orientations.
In the classroom we discussed reasons for high readings which did not seem to connect to any occurrence of heavy
traffic. Children talked about how the wind could disperse or focus CO. One interesting feature of our use of video
was that the video camera also acted as an indicator of particularly windy conditions due to the noise from the
camera's microphone as wind blew across it. Children also talked about how air enters the sensor via a hole in the
sensor casing. The directional nature of the hole, together with the wind, can affect the reading of CO. In this respect
the design   limitations of  the technology   enabled   the children to gain  a  deeper  understanding    of CO  and   air
movement. It also made them critical about the results they obtained, realizing that there are not always direct
mappings between readings and pollution. Interpretation was needed in order to begin to make sense of what was
happening, and contextual cues taken from annotations and video data were relied on in these instances.

Sharing and Reflection
To engage the school children further in understanding air pollution and promote deeper reflection on their findings,
children had the opportunity to ask questions of children at the other school who had engaged in the same project.
These  data  sharing sessions  occurred   between   remote  others who  were    not known  before  the session.  Prior to
communication, children from each location were given the opportunity to review the other location's video, CO and
annotation  data using   the familiar analysis   tool. Discussions centred  on  noticing  differences  in data collection
methods, e.g. the two schools used different methods of collecting wind data (a ribbon versus an anemometer), how
the sensor was mounted (a stick versus a board), and the different types of annotations made. Comments were made
about the sensor design "theirs is on a stick"; about the scale of CO data, "they've got over 200 [parts per million
CO]!"; and "What does wind towards mean, and wind across?", referring to annotations.
The feedback obtained from the participants in the session provided understanding of alternative ways to carry out a
study. It opened up dialogue on aspects that children at each location had so far taken for granted:
"We held ours [CO sensor] lower to the ground and got a lower reading but they held theirs higher up and got a
higher reading so if we were to do it again I would probably hold it up in the air not put it down"
Most  notably, the   kinds  of reflection which   occurred  relied most prominently    on the   contextual data, such  as
annotations and video views of data collection, in understanding how the measurements were differently structured
and obtained.

DISCUSSION
Gordin   and Pea  (1995)    suggest  that the ability  of the human   mind   to quickly  process   and remember   visual
information suggests that concrete graphics and other visual representations can help people learn. We certainly
believe that the video of the context in which the children took their readings aided children in understanding and
reflecting upon the data they had collected. They also helped children make sense of the conditions and context in
which the data sets from the other school were collected and enabled them to reflect on the method as well as the
results. We believe this context-inclusive approach is significant for three reasons. Firstly, it allows individuals to
reflect on method as part of data collection. Secondly it provides an aide-memoir to groups who have collected data
together in  interpreting  results. Thirdly,  it allows new   participants who  have  engaged   in similar   processes to
understand new perspectives on their own and others' data. It is not difficult to imagine the import of such findings
for activities required by national curricula in situations where schools are networked together.      Our initial studies
have shown that contextual data can allow the remote participation of schools at a distance with plausible outcomes
of comparison and reflection on both process and results. Such a process does not just support locally-directed
learning, indeed it relies on the differences in local interpretations of scientific activities. Such interpretations are
then bridged by children at remote sites through the use of contextual data.
We have identified important specific features of our approach. Firstly, the use of a common interface in presenting
and analysing data is beneficial in later cross-school interpretation. Secondly, contextual data may include a number
of features. In the case of SENSE, we have used time-synchronised video data and time-indexed freeform textual
annotations. Finally, we highlight a range of future possibilities for furthering our approach.

                                                            
Initially, we have noted possibilities for further contextual data. For example, the impact of wind on our particular
scenario of pollution indicates that visualisations of wind data might prove useful. More generally, it is the case that
trails on a map displaying GPS data would also provide interesting contextual cues (e.g., see Iacucci et al., 2004).
Future direction would involve designs that take into consideration the methodological issues that children were
reflecting upon. For example:
    ·    By  developing  software   which  calculates or   averages time differences   between    reading points     and
         annotation points, so that understanding time delays in registering readings can be considered.
    ·    By  using unanticipated  features  of the contextual  data, such   as   wind  noise over the    video camera
         microphone to consider the contextual properties of each of our data sources.
In discussions, Tom (year 9) reflected "Going outside to actually measure it yourself, makes you really think about
what you are doing and not just reading it out of a book cos then it doesn't mean much". As such, and following
Tom, the experience retained much of the child-directed approaches to learning that research in CSCL has repeatedly
shown to be an important feature of learning. Nonetheless, by encouraging children to collect what we have termed
context-inclusive data, we have facilitated an integration of individual, small group and remote collaboration. The
use of contextual data has supported consideration of methodology across all three whilst allowing children to
collaborate across schools without the financial and time costs of field trips and long-term programmes.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The SENSE     project  was funded   by the  JISC   with contribution from   the  EPSRC     funded Equator   IRC.     We
acknowledge the help of Dr Anthony Steed and Dr Ben Croxford at UCL and David Daniels at Sussex University.
Thanks also to the pupils and teachers at the Nottingham and Brighton schools for their collaboration in this work.
REFERENCES
Dewey,   J. (1910/1964) Science  as subject matter  and  as method.  In  R. D.   Archambault  (Ed.) John   Dewey     on
Education. Chicago. University of Chicago press. 182-192
Cohen, K. Ed. (1997) Internet links for science education: Student-Scientist Partnerships. New York. Plenum
Foster, I., Kesselman, C., Tuecke. S. (2001) The Anatomy of the Grid: Enabling Scalable Virtual Organizations.
International J. Supercomputer Applications, 15(3)
Gordin, D., & Pea, R. D. (1995). Prospects for scientific visualization as an educational technology. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 4(3), 249-279.
Iacucci, G., Kela, J. & Pehkonen, P. (2004) Computational Support to Record and Re-experience Visits. Personal
and Ubiquitous Computing Journal, 8(2), 100-109
Kafai, Y. & Resnick, M. (1996) Constructionism in Practice: Designing, Thinking and Learning in a Digital World
Kravcik, M.,   Kaibel, A., Specht,  M.  &  Terrenghi,   L. (2004)   Mobile  Collector  for Field  Trips.  Educational
Technology and Society, 7(2), 25-33
Lawless, J. G. and Coppola, R. (1996). GLOBE:Earth as our backyard. Geotimes 41(9):28-30.
Pea, R. D., Gomez, L. M., Edelson, D.C, Fishman, B. J., Gordin, D. N. and O'Neil D. K. (1997). Science education
as a driver of cyberspace technology development. Pp. 189-220 in Internet Links for Science Education:Student-
Scientist Partnerships, K. C. Cohen ed. New York:Plenum.
Price, S., Rogers, Y., Stanton, D., & Smith, H.    (2003)   A New    Conceptual   Framework   for CSCL:    Supporting
Diverse Forms of Reflection through Multiple Interactions. In (eds) B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen, U. Hoppe, Designing
for Change in Networked Learning Environments. Proc. of the Int. Conf. on CSCL
Resnick, M., Berg, R., & Eisenberg, M. (2000) Beyond Black Boxes: Bringing Transparency and Aesthetics Back to
Scientific Investigation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, Vol. 9, No. 1, 7-30
Resnick, M. (2003). Playful Learning and Creative Societies. Education Update, vol. VIII, no. 6, February 2003
Steed, A., Spinello, S., Croxford, B. & Greenhalgh, C. (2003) e-Science in the Streets: Urban Pollution Monitoring,
Proceedings of the 2nd UK e-Science All Hands Meeting, Nottingham, UK
Tinker, B. and Berenfeld, B. (1994). Patterns of US Global Lab adaptions. Hands On! Available http://hou.lbl.gov

                                                         
