  Improving the Coordination of Collaborative Learn-
                             ing with Process Models

          Angela Carell1, Thomas Herrmann1, Andrea Kienle2, Natalja Menold1
1Management of Information and Technology                           2Informatics and Society
   Ruhr-University of Bochum, Germany                         University of Dortmund, Germany
        firstname.lastname@rub.de                                andrea.kienle@uni-dortmund.de

      Abstract. CSCL is seen as a socio-technical process which has to be carefully planned by both
      students and teachers. These processes can be presented as graphical models which serve as maps
      to guide the students through their collaboration. In an experimental field study, the participatory
      development of these models was compared to a condition without models. The data shows the ad-
      vantages of graphical models for the students' planning coordination. Most of the five hypotheses
      are confirmed in this study. These findings show just how important a technical concept is which
      helps to integrate the developed models as a means of coordination and navigation into CSCL-
      systems.

      Keywords: Coordination, graphical process models, maps, representational guidance

INTRODUCTION: THE NEED TO SUPPORT STUDENTS' COORDINATION
It is an increasingly common finding in CSCL and CSCW studies that CSCL is a socio-technical process which
requires careful planning and preparation by both students and teachers. In several experiments with CSCL for
seminars conducted at a university, we learnt that the effort needed to be put into this preparation is often under-
estimated. Our approach was to offer the students a platform with which they could coordinate and mutually
prepare presentations. We pursued a concept of blended learning where students present the results of their re-
search in face-to-face sessions, while the research itself is organized as teamwork. The teams of three students
used a web-based system to collaborate. We tried to initiate learning processes by deliberately designing tasks
which were able to motivate the students in collaborating and sharing their results. They were asked to integrate
their differing findings and perspectives and produce a single document. We have worked with platforms such as
BSCW   (Appelt   & Mambrey,      1999), LiveLinkTM (Opentext) and  KOLUMBUS    (Kienle  & Herrmann,         2003)
which can be used to exchange documents, web-links, comments etc. In our first experiments we focused on
giving the students instructions as to how they could interact with the system and then expected them to develop
their own way of collaboration. However, we learnt that this kind of preparation was insufficient and that our
expectations were not fulfilled.
   We could observe a number of problems which arose in this kind of setting that had similarly also been found
by other authors (Guzdial & Turns, 2000, Lipponen et al., 2002):
·  The interaction between students and the sharing of knowledge was poor. They split the task into independ-
   ent parts instead of collaboratively working on it. Statements, questions, comments etc. from different stu-
   dents were not really interrelated or presented in integrated documents. Thus, there was a poor convergence
   of the students' perspectives (Stahl & Herrmann, 1999).
·  The students did not use the system as intensively as was expected. Many of the system's possibilities re-
   mained unused.
·  The use of the systems didn't really improve the teams performance.
·  The expectation that the students would be able to organize their collaboration themselves while using the
   system was not fulfilled.
   Our explorative studies showed that those aspects of the learners' tasks which refer to the process of com-
puter-mediated collaboration were often neglected. We could say that the more the learners focused on the con-
tent of their task, the more they lost their awareness of the process of collaboration and the possibilities that the
technical system offered. We came to the conclusion that we can not study the effect of computer support on
collaborative learning before we have a method that ensures that intensive collaboration and usage of the system
takes place. We can therefore see that supporting the students to plan their process of collaboration on their own
will be a major success factor. This is based on the assumption, that CSCL not only covers content-oriented
learning but also process-oriented learning. Fig. 1 shows the different stages of preparation for CSCL.

                                                         
  The rectangle shows the main focus of research in this paper. The focal point implies that the students learn
how to organize collaboration, and that they gain a meta-cognitive understanding of what they will be learning,
and how they will be learning it. It also includes an increased awareness of the collaboration process and of what
problems could arise.
   While the definition of the task and its presentation can mainly be carried out by teachers, the plan of the col-
laboration process has to be developed by the students themselves as opposed to being delivered to them. This is
due to supporting self-directed learning and learning "how to learn collaboratively". The planning of the col-
laboration and of the usage of the system should take place in face-to-face sessions before the system is used. The
outcome of the planning phase can be a graphical process model which guides the further process of collabora-
tion.

  Figure 1: The focus on process-oriented learning

  The effects and the appropriateness of this kind of process model in supporting a smooth collaboration can be
compared with other concepts (cf. section "Related Work"). This comparison as well as our explorative CSCL-
studies led us to the proposal that students should develop graphical process diagrams as maps which guide them
through the technically supported collaboration.
  This proposal is based on our research during the last seven years when we explored the role of graphical
models in supporting collaboration in work and learning. For this purpose, we have developed an appropriate
modeling  notification, an editor which  supports  it, and "the socio-technical walkthrough"    as a participatory
method in applying these tools. Now we have the basis to systematically investigate the possible effectiveness of
model building as a preparatory stage in CSCL curricula. In this paper we start with a field experiment which
provided statistical evidence of the strengths of process maps and the socio-technical walkthrough by contrasting
them with text based instructions (sections "Method" and "Results"). This finding justifies further elaboration of
a technical concept which integrates process models as maps for collaboration into the CSCL-system itself (sec-
tion "Conclusion"). Future tests will show how the improved planning has an impact on the collaborative proc-
ess, the task accomplishment and the learning.

RELATED      WORK:         PROMOTING             THE    COORDINATION             OF  COLLABORATIVE
LEARNING
In CSCL research, four main concepts of supporting group coordination and collaborative learning are discussed.
These are: cooperation scripts (Dillenbourg, 2002), maps (Wang et al. 2000), scaffolding (e.g. Weinberger al.,
2002, 2004), and feedback as a strategy of coordinated intervention (Zumbach and Reimann, 2003). In this arti-
cle, we focus on the difference between scripts and maps and their potentials for guiding groups through the
process of planning and carrying out their computer supported collaborative learning process. These concepts are
closest related to process modelling as we have analyzed them in this paper.
  Following Dillenbourg (2002, 64), a collaboration script can be described as "a set of instructions prescrib-
ing how students should form groups, how they should interact and collaborate, and how they should solve the
problem." Numerous approaches can be summarized under the term cooperation script. With respect to speech
act theory (Austin, 1955), some solutions implement posting of categories in the learning environment to pro-
mote the knowledge building group interaction. For instance, Baker and Lund (1997) use a structured communi-
cation interface containing a set of communication act buttons ("I agree", I propose to...", "Do you agree?") in
order to facilitate an easier understanding. The buttons are grouped in categories according to their communica-
tion function (e.g., "construct a knowledge chain", "come to agreement", "manage the interaction"). Ludvigsen
and Mørch (2003) used different categories of inquiry (e.g., problem, deepening knowledge, reliable knowledge,
meta-comment) which are seen as relevant for scientific inquiry but also helpful as problem solving guidelines. In
their approach, students had to select a category of inquiry each time they posted a message.

                                                         
   Generally most of these script approaches are more or less related to supporting content related group discus-
sion but are not designed to promote the learning process itself. Therefore, Weinberger et al. (2002, 2004) sug-
gested a differentiation between content related (epistemic scripts) and cooperation related scripts (social scripts)
to enhance the learning of the process of problem based learning. In their approach, the former were based on
content related questions or on a cloze which has to be answered or filled in and thereby leads the students
through the learning material. The latter assigned the student two different roles, viz analyzer, who has to analyze
the material accurately, and reviewer, who has to prove the arguments of the analyzer and find both inconsisten-
cies and gaps in the argumentation. Their results showed   that social scripts can enhance individual acquisition of
knowledge, whereas epistemic scripts apparently do not to lead to expected outcomes. Indeed, there is not yet an
evidence that social scripts are  suitable for learning and internalizing the process of collaborative learning in
such a way that learners are able to transfer this process to other learning situations in a self-directed way.. An-
other script related approach focussing on the process perspective of collaborative learning is the learnflow sys-
tem designed by Wessner et al. (1999). They designed a process orientated script by predefining sequences of
actions which are built into the learning system like a learnflow. However, this learnflow approach neglects the
articulation work, collaborative learning needs to make the "flow" happen (Schmidt and Bannon, 1992). Re-
sumptive scripts are rather restrictive, implemented in the CSCL-system, prepared by the teacher and only allow-
ing only one predefined solution of how the learning process should be carried out. However, particularly in
problem solving situations there is usually more than one way of performing the collaborative learning process.
Therefore, these script implementations are hardly suitable in supporting students to plan and carry out their
collaborative learning process in a self-directed manner.
   In contrast to scripts, our conclusion from the literature is that maps (as a form of graphical process models)
are more suitable in supporting the collaborative learning process because they are "inherently vague" (Suchman,
1987). Following Schmidt and Bannon (1992, 25) it can be said that "any non-trivial collective activity requires
effective communication that allows both ambiguity and clarity". On the one hand, maps presuppose a plan of the
required activities, the agreements about who is doing what with whom, and the resources needed, but they do
not represent these practices and circumstances in full detail. With all respect to promoting self-directed learning
and the building of a mutual understanding of the learning process, maps could be developed at the beginning of
the learning process jointly by the students rather than being provided by the teacher.
   Wang et al. (2000) designed a map orientated approach "supporting teams in the description and definition of
processes, the learning of these processes, and the adaption and execution of these processes" (p. 358). A di-
rected graph underlies their hypermedia based approach. The nodes represent tasks and the edges represent the
coordination structure between the tasks. Wang et al. (2000) provide a shared hypermedia workspace in which
users can access shared and persistent objects (nodes and links). Tasks (nodes) and the connections between tasks
(edges) can be manipulated either synchronously or asynchronously by the students. Different node types can be
edited by using different type-specific interaction tools. The advantage of this approach is that students can de-
sign their learning process collaboratively and self-directed. However, in our opinion students have to be sup-
ported in planning this process because of their lack of experience in both, problem based learning and self-
directed learning. Furthermore, the aspects which are presented in the graphs should not only cover the process
of collaboration but also the usage of the technical system and its integration in this process ­ this means to fol-
low a socio-technical perspective.
   Our approach is to intensify the students' reflection of how to carry out their task collaboratively. Our sugges-
tion is that this intensification can be achieved by using the following strategies:
1.  CSCL has to be considered as a socio-technical process where the interaction between the students and the
    application of   technical means is highly interwoven    (Herrmann  2003).       This socio-technical perspective
    should guide the planning of the students´ collaboration processes.
2.  It reveals that it is disadvantageous to confront the students with completely finalized plans of collaboration.
    In contrast we suggest a participatory approach where the students can themselves develop a plan of how
    they want to work together and use the system. This strategy was inspired by the idea of transferring the
    methods of the participatory design of software systems (for an example Kensing et al., 1998) with the de-
    sign of a socio-technical system as a whole (Herrmann et al., 2004). The students' sessions, where they
    planned their cooperation, were facilitated, that means that the socio-technical process was developed step-
    by-step following a concept which we call socio-technical walkthrough.
3.  Those parts of the task which refer to the socio-technical process of collaboration should not only be de-
    scribed textually, but also provide models which represent the interaction between the students and between
    their activities, as well as the computer system including computer-mediated communication. These models
    can be seen as maps.
4.  The task description should be permanently available and brought to the students' attention. This requires
    textual descriptions and process models being permanently available on the system. To enable seamless inte-
    gration of perception of the process models and use of the system, we suggest offering these diagrams as a

                                                         
    means of support awareness, which navigate the way through the learning material and guide students' con-
    tributions. These function as a navigational aid emphasizing the role of the diagrams as representational
    guidance.
5.  These strategies were found by using explorative investigations in field studies where computer-mediated
    communication and document exchange were used to support collaborative learning. Subsequently we ana-
    lyze our assumption of the usefulness of graphical process models in an experimental setting.

EXPERIMENTAL FIELD STUDY: THE RELEVANCE OF GRAPHICAL PROCESS
MODELS

Setting
We conducted our experimental field study to test the assumption that preparing the collaboration with the
help of graphical process models leads to better results than when just working with text. Our notion of
better refers to the degree of using the system and of exchanging and integrating knowledge. The study was em-
bedded in a seminar "consequences of information technology" at the University of Dortmund (Germany) in
winter term 2003/2004. 24 students participated in the seminar (21 male and 3 female). In the seminar, groups of
three students had to prepare a presentation and a thesis/paper upon given topics. Therefore subtasks like collect-
ing material, preparing a table of contents, a reciprocal review of developed material had to be carried out. The
students had access to the system LiveLinkTM to support and document their collaboration.
   The experiment was related to the seminar's phase of reciprocal reviews in which two group members had to
give a (written) review to the other student about her/his prepared presentation. For the experimental field study
the following setting was arranged:
·   Eight groups of three students took part in the study. Each group met in a 1.5h face-to-face session.
·   In the session, each group had to develop a detailed plan at the process of collaboratively writing reviews.
·   The sessions were moderated. Therefore two moderation methods were used: a traditional method using
    traditional visualisation aids (meta-plan, flipchart) and the socio-technical walkthrough which uses graphical
    process models (socio-technical walkthrough method, c.f. Herrmann et al. 2004). In the following these two
    methods are named as the condition "without model" and "with model". Due to our small sample, we ne-
    glected to compare the condition "with model" with a third condition "without moderation". This considera-
    tion is further underpinned by our teaching experiences which      led us to the assumption, that students have
    to be supported while planning their collaboration. The participants were randomly assigned to the condi-
    tions. The two conditions did not differ by gender. 4 moderators were involved. Each moderator facilitated a
    session in each condition to reduce the influence of his/her characteristics on the experiment.
·   Preliminary to the session, each group of students received the same detailed instructions about the task and
    disjunctive information about the system LiveLinkTM, and organizational aspects. Therefore, one student did
    not know the same aspects of technical and organizational conditions as the others in her/his group. The stu-
    dents should discuss these aspects in the session, but they were not allowed to bring the instructions into the
    session. The disjunctive instructions were given to the students to allow us to observe the exchange of in-
    formation during the discussion. To collect data on the information exchange, all participants were asked to
    complete questionnaires both before, as well as after the session.
·   In developing the plan of the collaboration process, the groups had to reflect on how the system LiveLinkTM
    could be used in preparing the reviews. The students developed possible plans as to how to proceed and dis-
    cussed how the system LiveLinkTM could be used. The students agreed on a plan which covered certain as-
    pects such as deadlines and responsibilities. In the condition "without model" the results were summarized in
    checklists (as a kind of text, e.g. a "To Do"-plan on the flipchart, see fig. 2). In the condition "with model"
    the result was a graphical process model (see fig. 3), which was produced with the help of an editor.1
·   After the sessions, the students started to work on their reviews which had to be finished within one month.

1 We have carefully considered the question whether the usage of a computer system under the condition "with
  model" would influence the results. However, in our opinion there are no disturbing effects, as firstly only
  moderators used the system, and ­ in the without model condition ­ the moderators produced a clearly readable
  text documentation of the students' contributions. Secondly, the participants in both conditions were computer
  science students who had frequently worked with computer systems. Since computer science students are more
  familiar with modeling methods than people with another background, it should be mentioned that a simple
  modeling method was used which has proved as easily understandable (Herrmann et al., 2004).

                                                        
Assumptions and Hypotheses
Our assumption was that the usage of models during the preparation of the collaboration leads to better results (in
comparison to the usage of checklists). Better results are operationalized by:
  Knowledge exchange: We assume that focusing on process models leads to a better knowledge of the col-
laboration process (in comparison to the usage of checklists). This assumption supposes that process models
enable a structured presentation of exchanged knowledge. This presentation conveys the communication of both
aspects ­ the CSCL-system and the process of cooperation. Our hypothesis is that:
Hypothesis 1 (H1):  Students in the condition "with model" mention more aspects which are part of others'
                    given instructions in the questionnaire filled in after the session than students in the condi-
                    tion "without model".

         Figure 2: Visualization of tasks (left) and To Do-plan (right) in the condition ,,without model"

          Figure 3: Example of a process model as it was developed during a session. The original text is trans-
          lated. The explanations of the modelling elements have been added.

                                                       
  Integration of exchanged information during the group discussion in the artefacts: During the planning
of the collaboration process, the group members exchanged their knowledge about the CSCL-system and how to
use it. We assume that the planning discussions reveal differences with respect to the multiplicity of aspects
which are found in the plans being developed during the group sessions. The number of all items contributed
during the session can be seen as an indication of the complexity of the collected information that can potentially
be taken into account when generating agreements for the collaborative process. These items are contained in the
visualisation of the group discussion (text based vs. graphical process models).  Although our experiment sup-
poses that the condition "with model" leads to a better planning process, this assumption does not coercively
imply that more items are collected under this condition. It could also be the case that the "without model" group
produces a higher number of items which are superficial or may not be consequently used for the planning proc-
ess. Therefore, the following hypothesis is non-directionally formulated:
Hypothesis 2 (H2):  The two conditions differ in the number of items which are contained in the visualisations
                    of the plans.

  In addition, it is interesting to see how many commitments groups made using the collected information. A
statement is a commitment when a specific cooperation task is assigned to a deadline or to a person. For example
the agreement "task management has to take place in the system" is not a commitment in contradiction to "person
B adds task in the systems on Monday". We were specifically interested in the commitments regarding the usage
of the CSCL-system, as we wanted to encourage the usage of the system. The group can make its own decision as
to how and if the system is used. We presume that the use of process models helps groups to organize their work.
This means more commitments about the usage of the CSCL-system are made and collected pieces of informa-
tion are more utilised. To test this assumption we a) identified how many commitments a group made in relation
to all collected information and b) we identified how many commitments a group made regarding the usage of the
CSCL-System. Our hypotheses are:
Hypothesis 3 (H3):  Taking into consideration all collected items there are more commitments in the condition
                    "with model" than in the condition "without model".
Hypothesis 4 (H4):  Within all collected items there are more commitments related to the use of the CSCL-
                    system in the condition "with model" than in the condition "without model".

  Furthermore we expected that the groups in the condition "with model" would introduce more aspects about
the socio-technical design into the artefacts in comparison to groups in the condition "without models". Such
aspects relate to the functionality of the CSCL-system (e.g. tasklists or use of discussion forums) and the organ-
izational arrangements for the use of the system (e.g. naming responsible moderators for discussion forums).
Before the sessions the information about these aspects was given to the participants in the instructions. We hy-
pothesize that:
Hypothesis 5 (H5):  In the condition "with model" more aspects related to socio-technical design are embed-
                    ded into the artefacts, compared with the condition "without process model".

  Usage of the CSCL-system: We want the students to use the system in a self-motivated way and suppose we
can encourage them to do so by means of using our specific approach.      If the usage of process models leads to a
better knowledge of the collaboration process in the group, it can be presumed that group members in the condi-
tion "with models" develop more common ideas about the cooperation process with the CSCL-system and that
more binding agreements regarding the usage of the system were made. These should lead to a more intensive
usage of the CSCL-system and the execution of joint tasks. We expect that these groups access the system more
often and are overall more active users of the system. The usage of the system was measured by writing reviews
during the collaborative work and thereby counting the logged events in CSCL-system. Furthermore, we analysed
which functions of the system had been used by group members in the two conditions. We hypothesize that:
Hypothesis 6 (H6):   In the condition "with model" the number of logged events during the process of writing
                    reviews is higher than in the condition "without model".

Data collection
Data used to survey the knowledge exchange process related to the collaborative process was gathered in the pre-
post-design2 by means of a written questionnaire. The questionnaire we used to collect information about the

2 Pre-post design means that the same questions have to be answered before and after the session.

                                                        
system LiveLinkTM, how it was used for the preparation of reviews and the cooperation within the group. The
questions were:
·    How can your group use the LiveLinkTM           system to develop reviews?
·    Which functions of the LiveLinkTM system can be used to do this?
·    Which agreements could be made within the team to help facilitate cooperation, as to how the system should
     be used?
    The integration of exchanged information into the developed artefacts (meta-plan visualization, and ToDo-
lists vs. graphical process models) was analyzed for the survey. Logfiles were analyzed to look at the actual use
of the LiveLinkTM system during the preparation of the reviews (after the group sessions).

RESULTS

Knowledge exchange
How often knowledge was exchanged was tested by comparing the numbers of aspects mentioned in the ques-
tionnaire. Table 1 and fig. 4 are related to the first hypothesis. They show group statistics for those aspects which
were part of the instructions and were contributed to the group discussion. "Pre" means before the moderated
session and "post" means after the session. There is no significant
difference  between    groups  pre-test-scores  and    the  latter had  no
significant effect on post-test-scores (B = 0.16, t = 0.87, p = 0.39)3
The analysis showed that the average number of aspects mentioned
increased after the session in both conditions, whereas the value of
post-test-score in the condition "with model" is significantly higher
than in the condition "without model". We can conclude that in the
condition "with model" the participants exchanged more informa-
tion aspects amongst each other about the CSCL-system and work
organisation than in the condition "without model". Consequently,
hypothesis 1 is accepted.

       without model        with model         t (df = 22)
        M         SD       M      SD
pre    0.83       1.19    0.75    1.14           0.18                         Figure 4: Group statistics showing the
post   1.42       0.90    2.01    1.0            -1.72*                       average of mentioned aspects
N             12               12
Table 1: Group statistics and t-test statistics related to
mentioned aspects; *p =< .05, one-tailed t-tests.

Integration of information into the developed artefacts
The integration of collected information into the developed artefacts was tested by analysing the visualised out-
puts (in checklists in the condition "without model" and in diagrams in the condition "with model") produced
during the group sessions.

                                                            without model             with model        t (df = 22)
  Variables                                                M            SD          M          SD
  A (no. of general contributions to the discussion)     27.50         4.34       19.25        5.19        4.23***
  B (no. of socio-technical design aspects)                8.25        4.14       13.50        2.39        -3.81***
  C (quotient general commitments/contributions)           0.29        0.03        0.34        0.05         -2.61
  D (quotient commitment LiveLinkTM usage /                0.12        0.03        0.31        0.04        -13.53***
  contributions)
  N                                                                12                     12
        Table 2: Group and test statistics of the variables on the output of group discussion; ***p<.001;
                                A: Two-tailed t-test; B, C and D: one-tailed t-tests.

3 Because the building of groups was randomised, a t-test for independent samples to compare the post-test-
scores was used. Since the size of the sample is small, the pre-test-scores were compared and their effect on the
post-test-scores were identified by covariance analysis. The independent t-test was chosen as there is no signifi-
cant difference between groups pre-test-scores and the latter had no significant effect on post-test-scores.

                                                              
  It turned out, that the groups in the condition "without model" produced more contributions during the dis-
cussion than the groups in the condition "with model" (Variables "A", table 2, fig. 5) (H2 is accepted). We con-
clude that the visualisations of the discussion in the condition "without model" contained more pieces of informa-
tion and were more complex than in the condition "with models". In contrast, the groups in the condition "with
                                                                                 models"    reached    more    agreements
                                                                                 related  to the   CSCL-system,     and  at
                                                                                 the same time utilised the collected
                                                                                 information    better, because     of  the
                                                                                 fact that the number of commitments
                                                                                 in  relation   to  the  number     of  all
                                                                                 visualised     discussion     items    was
                                                                                 higher (variable "D", table 2, fig. 5).
                                                                                 This   cannot   be    said of  all  com-
                                                                                 mitments (variable "C", table 2, fig.
                                                                                 5). If we   look   at all  commitments,
                                                                                 there    is    not     any     significant
                                                                                 difference    between     the  conditions
      Figure 5: Group statistics of the variables to output of group             (H4   is   accepted,   H3  is  rejected).
                                                                          Furthermore     it   has  shown     that  in  the
                                                condition "with models" the visualised output covered signifi-
                                                cantly more points linked to socio-technical design than in the
                                                condition  "without         model"   (variable   "B",   table   2, fig. 5).
                                                Hypothesis 5 is accepted. If we look at table 2 we can con-
                                                clude that the participants in the condition "with model" were
                                                more  able to        integrate the  information    (given  in  the instruc-
                                                tions) into the group plans.

                                                Usage of LiveLinkTM
                                                The  analysis        of the logfile  showed    that the   students   in the
                                                condition "with model" were significantly more active in the
                                                CSCL-system          than   the  students   in  the condition      "without
                                                model". The number of activities in the system in the condi-
                                                tion "with   model"         amounts   to  2433   and    in  the condition
                                                "without process model" it amounts to 1231 (2(1) = 394.32, p
                                                < .001). Fig. 6 shows which activities this concerned. Fig. 6
    Figure 6: Number of activities in system    shows   also that       the students   in the  condition    "with  model"
                                                were  more   active         in almost   all  of  these  activities:  They
searched more documents in folders (browse), positioned more documents (create), downloaded more documents
(fetch), viewed more documents (view), and were more active in the discussion forums (discussion), than the
students in condition "without process model". Hypothesis 6 is accepted. In this regard the students in the condi-
tion "with model" were using the system LiveLinkTM intensively for their cooperative work.
  Furthermore it should be mentioned that 22 students found the session used to plan the collaboration very
helpful. They also regarded the moderation during the sessions as very helpful.
  The presented results indicate that the condition "with model" leads to better results concerning the exchange
of knowledge about the collaborative process. It also improves the development of commitments related to the
use of the CSCL-System and the integration of learned content about socio-technical design in the cooperation
plan. It also promotes the using of the CSCL-system better than the condition "without model".

CONCLUSION AND FURTHER RESEARCH: INTEGRATION OF GRAPHICAL
PROCESS MODELS INTO CSCL-SYSTEMS
  The experimental field study presented in this paper revealed that the usage of graphical process models dur-
ing the preparation of the collaboration can lead to more knowledge exchange and integration, as well as com-
mitments concerning the collaborative learning process, and a more intensive and collaborative usage of the

                                                       
CSCL-system. However, further studies will have to observe, whether the combination of an intensified collabo-
ration process and working on a certain problem might cause    a "burn out" effect for the students.
  To test the influence of models on the CSCL-process our next step is the integration of the process models
into the CSCL-system in order for them to be continuously available, and to serve as a representational guidance.
Representational guidance means the design of a software system that enables the software itself to facilitate the
collaborative learning (Suthers and Hundhausen 2002). To demonstrate the integration of coordinative process
models, we use a CSCL prototype (KOLUMBUS, Kienle and Herrmann 2003). It supports collaborative learning
                                                          by using an integrated view on communicative con-
                                                          tributions (annotations) and material (text, multime-
                                                          dia  elements).    This  content structure   can   be  inter-
                                                          twined with such graphical process models as those
                                                          developed in the sessions of the experiment.
                                                               Our concept is that a model can be developed and
                                                          modified with the help of an external editor (SeeMe-
                                                          Editor), which then enables users to develop models
                                                          with  a   semi-structured   modeling       notation SeeMe
                                                          (Herrmann     &   Loser  1999).  This   editor has  already
                                                          been  used    in   the sessions  of  the   condition   "with
                                                          model"    for  our study.  Because    the  semantic   of the
                                                          elements   of  the  SeeMe-models      can   be consistently
                                                          interpreted, the model itself has a guiding character
                                                          and  can   be  interpreted  for  the  integration   into the
        Figure 7: content structured by tasks             CSCL-System.
                                                               Before a model (as shown in figure 3) can be in-
                                                         tegrated  into  the CSCL-System,      it has to be   aestheti-
                                                         cally improved.     After  this improvement,    a   specially
                                                         designed import functionality offers the possibility of
                                                         integrating    the  collaboratively    developed     SeeMe-
                                                         model  in   all CSCL-systems      which     use  XML      like
                                                         KOLUMBUS does. The model is used to structure a
                                                         (sub-)area  of  the  systems    content.  For  example,   for
                                                         each activity in the process model, a task can be cre-
                                                         ated and assigned. These tasks can be combined with a
                                                         deadline  and   awareness   mechanisms       which   indicate
                                                         the progress of the task completion. For each entity, a
                                                         folder is created which can be combined with a link to
                                                         already existing material. When integrating the model
                                                         into  the CSCL-System,      the user  can   decide,  whether
                                                         the  sub-area  should   be  structured   in accordance  with
      Figure 8: content structured by material           the tasks (see fig. 7) or with the material (see fig. 8).
                                                             After  the  import   of the  process    model,   an inte-
grated view on the created (sub)-area and the graphical process model is presented (see fig. 7 and 8). This inte-
gration allows the students to use the model not only to prepare and plan the collaboration but also as an artifact
(with underlying functionality) which accompanies the whole computer supported collaborative learning process:
the graphical elements of the process model are linked to the folders, documents and statements which represent
the learning material and discourses of KOLUMBUS. Thus, it will be possible to use the diagram to navigate
through the content of the learning system and to relate the content to the planned and ongoing process. We as-
sume that the continuous work with the model internalize their way of collaboration and increase the competence
for self regulation. Our further research concerns an evaluation of the influence of these integrated models on the
computer supported collaborative learning process.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Gerry Stahl and Martin Wessner for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper and Mi-
chael Prilla for implementing the prototype of integrating process models into KOLUMBUS.

                                                        
REFERENCES
Appelt, W. and Mambrey, P. (1999) Experiences with the BSCW Shared Workspace System as the Backbone of
     a Virtual Learning Environment for Students. In Collis, B. and R. Oliver (Eds.), Proceedings of ED-
     MEDIA'99. Charlottesville, VA: AACE, 1999, 1710-1715.
Austin, J.N (1955) How to do Things with Words. Oxford.
Baker, M. and Lund, K. (1997) Promoting reflective interaction in a CSCL environment. Journal of Computer
     Assisted Learning, 13, 175-193.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002) Over-scripting CSCL. The risk of blending collaborative learning with instructional de-
     sign. In P.A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three Worlds of CSCL. Can we Support CSCL . Heerlen: Open University
     Nederland, 64-91.
Guzdial, M. and Turns, J. (2000) Effektive Discussion through a computer-mediated anchored forum. The Jour-
     nal of the Learning Science, 9, 4, 437-469.
Herrmann, T. (2003): Learning and Teaching in Socio-Technical Environments. In T.J. Van Weert, and R.K.
     Munro (Eds.), Informatics and the Digital Society. Social, Ethical and Cognitive Issues. Boston et al.:
     Kluwer, 59-72.
Herrmann, T. and Loser, K.-U. (1999) Vagueness in models of socio-technical systems. Behavior & Information
     Technology. Special Issue on Analysis of Cooperation and Communication, 18, 5, 313-323.
Herrmann, T., Kunau, G., Loser, K.-U. and Menold, N. (2004) Sociotechnical Walkthrough: Designing Technol-
     ogy along Work Processes. In: A. Clement et al. (Eds.), Artful Integration: Interweaving Media, Materi-
     als and Practices. Proceedings of the 8th Participatory Design Conference 2004. New York: ACM, 132-
     141.
Kensing, F., Simonsen, J. and Bødker,   Keld   (1998) MUST        - a method for participatory design. Human-
     Computer Interaction, 13, 167-198.
Kienle, A. and Herrmann, T. (2003) Integration of communication, coordination and learning material ­ a guide
     for the functionality of collaborative learning environments. Proceedings of the Thirty-Sixth Annual Ha-
     waii International Conference on System Sciences, 33.
Lipponen, L, Rahikainen, M., Hakkarainen, K. and Palonen, T. (2002) Effective Participation and discourse
     through a computer network: Investigating elementary students' computer-supported interaction. Journal
     of Educational Computing Research, 27, 4,    355-384.
Ludvigsen, S. and Mørch, A. (2003) Categorisation in knowledge building: Task specific argumentation in a co-
     located CSCL environment. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen and U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for Change in
     Networked Learning Environments. Proceedings of the CSCL Norwell, MA: Kluwer. 2003, 67-76
     Opentext, http://www.opentext.com/, last visit: 2004-11-09.
Schmidt, K. and Bannon, L. (1992) Taking CSCW Seriously. Supporting Articulation Work. Computer Sup-
     ported Cooperative Work (CSCW). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 7-40.
Stahl, G. and Herrmann, T. (1999) Intertwining Perspectives and Negotiation. In: Proceedings of Group'99 In-
     ternational conference on Supporting Group Work (Phoenix, AZ., November 1999). 316-325.
Suchman, L. A. (1987) Plans and situated actions: The problem of human-machine communication. Cambridge
     U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Suthers, D. and Hundhausen, C. (2002) The effects of representation on students' elaborations in collaborative
     inquiry. In Stahl, G. (Ed), Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Support for Col-
     laborative Learning (CSCL) 2002, Boulder, 472-480.
Wang, W., Haake, J., Rubart, J. and Tietze, D. A. (2000) Hypermedia-based support for cooperative learning of
     process knowledge. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 23, 357-379.
Weinberger, A., Fischer, F. and Mandl, H. (2002) Fostering computer supported collaborative learning with
     cooperation scripts and scaffolds. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer support for collaborative learning: founda-
     tions for a CSCL community. Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative
     Learning (CSCL) 2002, Boulder, 573-574.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F. and Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
     collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33 (1), 1-30.
Wessner, M., Pfister, H.-R. and Miao, Y. (1999) Using learning protocols to structure computer-supported coop-
     erative learning. Proceedings of ED-MEDIA 99,    471-476.
Zumbach, J. and Reimann, P. (2003) Influence of feedback on distributed problem based learning. In B. Wasson,
     S. Ludvigsen and U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for Change in Networked Learning Environment. Proceed-
     ings of the International Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (June 14-18, 2003)
     in Bergen, Norway. Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer, 219-228.

                                                       
