 ACT: A Web-Based Adaptive Communication Tool

Agoritsa Gogoulou, Evangelia Gouli, Maria Grigoriadou                                     Maria Samarakou
      Department of Informatics & Telecommunications,                                 Department of Energy
                           University of Athens                                     Technology, Technological
                    {rgog, lilag, gregor}@di.uoa.gr                              Education Institute of Athens
                                                                                           marsam@teiath.gr

      Abstract.     This paper   presents  a web-based    adaptive   communication    tool,  called  ACT.    ACT
      supports and guides the learners' communication/collaboration by implementing the structured
      dialogue    either  through   sentence  openers  or   communication     acts.  The   scaffolding  sentence
      templates are adapted according to the cognitive skills addressed by the learning activity, the
      model of collaboration followed and the educational tool used. The learners have the possibility to
      personalize   the    communication/    collaboration  process   by  enriching  the   provided    set of   the
      scaffolding   sentence  templates    with  the desired   ones  and to  monitor  their  debate  in a   visual
      graphical     representation  form   through   the  Dialogue   Tree.   The    first empirical  results    are
      encouraging    regarding   the  predetermined   set   of the  scaffolding sentence    templates   and   their
      proper use, the adaptation framework supported, the provided facilities and the coherence of the
      dialogue.

      Keywords:      Communication,       structured  dialogue,    sentence   openers,     communication      acts,
      scaffolding sentence templates, adaptation, Dialogue Tree

INTRODUCTION
Peer interaction is acknowledged as a significant factor in collaborative learning. However, the learners do not
necessarily  have   the  desired productive   collaboration/communication     skills (e.g.  provide    explanations,  ask
questions, engage in argumentative discussions) (Lazonder, Wilhelm & Ootes, 2003; Soller, 2001). Structuring
approaches aim to create appropriate conditions by designing and scripting the collaboration framework before
the interaction begins (Andriessen, Baker & Suthers, 2003). In this context, the structuring of the dialogue is
used as an approach to encourage and guide learners to certain types of communication (Andriessen, Baker &
Suthers,  2003). The    structured  dialogue  may    follow a  fully or  semi-structured   form   implemented    through
sentence  openers   or  communications     acts,  enabling  learners  to  compose    their  message    and  denote   their
underlying intention by using predetermined Scaffolding Sentence Templates (SST).
  Results from various research efforts indicate that the use of the structured dialogue supports and increases
learners' task-oriented  behavior,   leads to more   coherence   in  discussing  argumentatively    the subject     matter,
promotes reflective interaction, lightens the learners' typing load, guides the sequence and the content of the
dialogue, enables the monitoring and the interpretation of the ongoing discussion and is characterized as an
adequate pedagogical approach for virtual learning groups (Baker & Lund, 1997; Soller, Lesgold, Linton &
Goodwin, 1999; Hron, Hesse, Cress & Giovis, 2000). However, the potential improper use of the SST and the
restriction of the learners' choice of words imposed by the structured dialogue are two disadvantages to be taken
into account during the development of synchronous communication tools (Lazonder, Wilhelm & Ootes, 2003).
According to Lazonder et al. (2003), the SST should be derived from naturally occurring online text-based free
dialogues while Soller (2001) states that it is important to provide the widest and most appropriate range of SST.
  A   number     of synchronous     communication     tools have    been  developed   (either  integrated    in a   CSCL
environment or as standalone tools) to support the dialogue through a structured communication interface. In
BetterBlether (Robertson, Good & Pain, 1998), the communication interface consists of sentence openers, which
support the skills of good communication, trust, leadership and creative conflict. The communication tool of the
LeCS environment (Rosatelli & Self, 2002) provides a set of sentence openers, which facilitates the process of
reaching  an  agreement,    while   specific expressions    enable  learners to express     their emotional   state.  The
communication tool of the EPSILON environment enables learners to communicate through sentence openers
which are    classified to categories  according  to  the   Collaborative Learning   Conversation      Skills Taxonomy
(Soller, 2004). ALEX (Hirsch, Saeedi, Cornillon & Litosseliti, 2004) is a structured dialogue tool, which enables
learners to make arguments by selecting and completing partial sentences (sentence openers) and facilitating
learners  to make   references   to already  sent messages.    Jermann   and  Schneider    (1997)   in their  tool  called

                                                          
Conference MOO, support both the free-text and the structured dialogue; the structured dialogue is implemented
through four buttons (e.g. "I don't understand") and four sentence openers (e.g. "I propose"). They assert that
the learners' preference on a specific dialogue mode (free or structured) depends on the particular content type
(i.e. task, strategy and interaction management). Also, the Co-Lab tool (Lazonder, Wilhelm & Ootes, 2003)
supports the free-text and the structured dialogue. All these tools support the implementation of the structured
dialogue through sentence openers and provide a fixed set of SST regardless of the context of the collaborative
activity and the collaboration framework followed. Moreover, they provide limited degree of personalization
(i.e. few tools enable learners to select between the structured and the free form of the dialogue).
     Our research efforts take previous work in structuring the dialogue in synchronous communication tools one
step further, by attempting to:
(i)   implement the structured dialogue either through sentence openers or communication acts depending on
      the   learning  outcomes (i.e. cognitive  skills) addressed   by the   collaborative activity and  the  model    of
      collaboration followed by the group members,
(ii)  provide the most meaningful and complete set of SST adapted according to the collaboration framework
      followed    in the collaborative activity (i.e. the  cognitive skills  addressed by  the  collaborative    learning
      activity, the model of collaboration followed and the educational tool used), and
(iii) offer  learners  the possibility to personalize   the  communication/collaboration    process   by enriching    the
      provided set of the SST with the desired ones.
     To this  end,   we  developed   a synchronous    communication    tool  with  adaptive  capabilities called   ACT
(Adaptive    Communication     Tool).  The  learners    can  monitor   the   dialogue progress    and reflect   on their
communication/collaboration by accessing the Dialogue Tree as well as the results of the quantitative analysis of
their debate at any time during the elaboration of the activity. The first results revealed from the formative
evaluation of the ACT tool are encouraging regarding the predetermined set of the SST and their proper use, the
adaptation framework, the provided facilities (the monitoring of the dialogue through the Dialogue Tree and the
enrichment of the SST) and the coherence of the dialogue. Moreover, they drew useful implications concerning
the way the SST are provided to learners as well as the adaptive and adaptable capabilities of the ACT tool.
     The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the following section, we present in detail the functionality
of the ACT tool in terms of the SST provided, the adaptive capabilities supported, and the facilities provided to
the learner. Afterwards, we discuss the results from a study that we conducted in the context of the formative
evaluation of the ACT tool. The paper ends with the main points of our work and our near future plans.

THE ACT TOOL
ACT was developed in the context of a web-based adaptive collaborative learning environment, referred to as
SCALE (Supporting Collaboration and Adaptation in a Learning Environment) (Grigoriadou, Gogoulou, Gouli
&    Samarakou,    2004).  The SCALE      environment   follows  the conceptual    framework   of the   Activity Theory
(Engeström, 1987; Cole & Engeström, 1993) and supports (a) the individualized learning: enables learners to work
on learning activities, provides personalized feedback and guides/supports learners during the elaboration of the
activity through pedagogical agents, (b) the collaborative learning: enables learners to work on collaborative learning
activities, supports   the group formation  of  the   learners based   on their individualized  characteristics  and  the
characteristics of the activities, supports alternative models of collaboration between the group members, promotes
and   facilitates the  synchronous  communication     between  the  group  members,   and  guides   the learners   at the
communication and at the learning level through pedagogical agents, and (c) the assessment process: supports the
automatic assessment of the activities, the collaborative assessment and the peer assessment and provides feedback
tailored to learners individual characteristics and needs.
     The ACT tool can run as a standalone communication tool or in the context of the SCALE environment,
supporting   the   synchronous   communication   of   the  learners in groups   of up  to  four persons.  The    learners
communicate       in the context of  a specific collaborative   activity  which  addresses  cognitive    skills  that are
classified to one of the four levels: Comprehension level (Remember + Understand), Application level (Apply),
Checking-Critiquing level (Evaluate) and Creation level (Analyze + Create) (Gogoulou, Gouli, Grigoriadou &
Samarakou,    2004).   Moreover,   a specific model    of  collaboration  is followed  during   the elaboration   of  the
activity; the group members may collaborate either having the same duties or undertaking different roles. In any
case, one of the group members plays the role of the moderator, being responsible for the coordination of the
group process (e.g. proceed to the next question, terminate the communication session), the summarization of
the debate and the submission of the final answer.
     The ACT tool aims to guide and support the learners appropriately during their debate. To this end, we
followed the structured form of the dialogue aiming to (i) eliminate the off-task discussions, (ii) guide the
learners towards the underlying learning outcomes of the activity or the duties and responsibilities implied by
the model of collaboration, and (iii) enable the automatic interpretation of the learners' interaction as well as the

                                                            
tracing of the dialogue states. The functionality of the ACT tool in terms of the SST and the facilities provided
to the learner as well as the adaptivity of the tool are discussed in the following.

Using ACT
The ACT tool enables learners to communicate and collaborate in the context of a learning activity. The learners
have to fill, in the corresponding log in form, their username, the activity index and the sub-activity index. Once
all the group members are logged in, the tool enters into the communication mode otherwise the tool enters into
the wait mode, showing which members of the group are already connected. Figure 1 presents the main screen
of the ACT tool as it appears at the communication mode. It consists of the following areas:
x   The Dialogue Area, which shows the debate that has taken place. The messages are recorded, numbered and
    presented in a chronologically sent order. Each dialogue message has the form: [message_number] [sender]:
    [message composed by the sender].
x   The Message Composition Area, which enables the learner to construct the desired message on the basis of
    the SST provided (an analytical description of the message composition process is given in the section
    entitled "Communicating with ACT").
x   The Message   Submission   Area,   which  enables   the learner to submit   the   message to  all or to selected
    members of the group.
   Upon the completion of the collaboration in the context of the activity, the learners may proceed to the
elaboration of another    subactivity (they  can select   the desired  one  through    the option "Session/Change
Subactivity") or terminate the communication session and exit the tool (i.e. by selecting "Session/Exit" or the
button "End Chat" from the Message Submission Area).

                                    Dialogue
                                    Area

                                                                           Message
                                                                           Composition
                                                                           Area

                                               Message
                                               Submission
                                               Area

                    Figure 1:  A screen shot of the ACT tool at the communication mode

Predetermined Scaffolding Sentence Templates
In ACT,  the   structured form of     the dialogue  is supported  utilizing both     the sentence openers   and the
communication acts. For the determination of the most appropriate sets of the scaffolding sentence templates,
we followed a research-based approach (Gouli, Gogoulou, Grigoriadou & Samarakou, 2003; Gogoulou, Gouli,
Grigoriadou & Samarakou, 2004). More specifically, we conducted three empirical studies during the design
phase of the tool in order to determine the appropriate sets of the sentence openers and the communication acts.
The supported sets of the SST have resulted from the text-based free dialogues and the feedback received from
the participants as well as the experience of the authors. The provided SST are categorized to one or more of the
following discourse categories: Proposal (P), Question (Q), Reasoning (R), Clarification (C), Motivation (M),
Agreement (A), Disagreement (D), Need (N), Opinion (O), and Social Comments (S). The provided sets of the
sentence openers as well as the communication acts include:

                                                         
(i)   a subset dedicated to the development of the cognitive skills addressed by the collaborative activity (e.g.
      the sentence openers: "I propose" , "I agree with"; the communication acts: "Proposal", "Agreement").
(ii)  a subset dedicated to the development of communication skills (e.g. the sentence openers: "I don't know.
      Can you help me?", "Can you explain?"; the communication acts: "Social Comments", "Comments on the
      Activity"), and
(iii) a subset available only to the moderator of the group concerning cognitive as well as communication skills
      (e.g. the sentence openers: "We conclude that the answer is", "Let's move on to the next question"; the
      communication acts "Answer", "Group Coordination").

Communicating with ACT
In the Message Composition Area of the ACT tool, the learner has access to the provided SST and has the
possibility to construct the desired message by filling in the required arguments depending on the SST. In
particular, regarding the sentence openers, the available SST include:
x     [Sentence] (fully structured SST): the sentence text as it appears on the list (e.g. "Very good idea", "I don't
      know. Can you help me?"),
x     [Sentence Opener][Argument] (semi-structured SST): the sentence opener plus an argument which may be
      an explicit reference to an already sent message appearing on the Dialogue Area (e.g. see Figure 1, "Can
      you explain? [1. rgog: ...] ", where in [...] appears the already sent message by the learner) or may be filled
      in by the learner (e.g. see Figure 1, "I propose as an answer for the first question the (b)").
      In some     sentence openers,  like  "I agree  with........",  the [Argument]  may   consist of  both a reference
      message and a filled in text (e.g. "I agree with [reference to an already sent message] free text" where the
      filled in "free text" specifies further the learner's belief),
x     [Sentence Opener][Argument1][Conjuction][Argument2] (semi-structured SST): the [Sentence Opener] and
      the [Conjuction] are predetermined sentence texts while [Argument1] and [Argument2] may be an explicit
      reference to an already sent message appearing on the Dialogue Area or may be filled in by the learner (e.g.
      see Figure 1, "Because the number has to be greater than 10 ­ argument for [1. rgog: I propose as an answer
      for the first question the (b)]": the first argument has been filled in by the learner while the second one is a
      reference message),
while regarding the communication acts, the available SST include:
x     [Communication act][Argument]: the communication act label plus an argument which is filled in by the
      learner (e.g. "Proposal: lets look at the diagram first"),
x     [Communication act][Reference to a message][Argument]: the communication act label plus a reference to
      an already sent message appearing on the Dialogue Area plus an argument which is filled in by the learner
      (e.g. "Clarification  [15. rgog:  What     is "st"?]: By   "st",   I mean  the total  number  of  students");  the
      [Argument] in some communication acts is optional (e.g. "Agreement [3. lilag: The answer is (c)]").
     In case the [Argument] is a reference message, the learner can select the desired one from a pulldown list
appearing next to the corresponding SST in the Message Composition Area.
     Besides the predetermined sets of SST, the learner may determine his/her own SST in case the available ones
do not cover his/her needs. The learner's determined SST are part of the student's model and become available
each   time   the learner  uses the ACT    tool. For  each   additional    SST, the learner determines  the  text to be
displayed, the accompanied arguments and the discourse category (e.g. Proposal (P), Question (Q)). At any
time, the learner may edit his/her set, through the option "Student Model/Personal Sentence Templates" from the
menu    or  by  selecting  the  button "Personal     Sentence  Templates"      from the toolbar,   and proceed  to  any
modifications (e.g. change the text) and/or deletions (i.e. delete one of his/her own defined SST). In this way,
the   learner  has the possibility  to personalize   the communication/collaboration       process and  to  exceed  any
potential restrictions imposed by the use of the predetermined sets of SST.

Adapting the Provided Scaffolding Sentence Templates
According to the Activity Theory, the object of the learning activity, the mediational tools used, the rules and the
division    of labour  followed   by   the learners,  constitute    essential elements  of  the conceptual  framework
(Engeström, 1987; Cole & Engeström, 1993). In ACT, the object of the learning activity is closely related to the
expected learning outcomes, the mediational tools involve any tool that may be used during the elaboration of
the activity (e.g. educational software), the rules include the provided sets of SST and the division of labour
depends on the model of collaboration followed. Taking into account these elements and having as an objective
to support the learners' communication/collaboration, to prevent floundering and to guide their thinking towards
the desired directions, we adapt the provided SST on the basis of (i) the level of the learning outcomes (i.e.
cognitive skills) addressed by the activity, (ii) the specific roles that the learners undertake in the context of a
specific model of collaboration, and (iii) the educational tool, if any, used for the elaboration of the activity.

                                                            
   On  the basis  of the   proposed adaptation   framework,  the sentence        openers  are aligned with   the
Comprehension, Application and Checking-Critiquing level of the cognitive skills, while the communication
acts are aligned with the Creation level and the role that each learner undertake. Also, the communication acts
are used to support the learners' dialogue in case learning activities do not explicitly address one out of the four
aforementioned levels of cognitive skills, but they rather aim to cultivate to the learners skills in communication,
and/or to enable them to discuss/exchange ideas on a specific topic or on the subject/solution of an activity. We
support the sentence openers for the Comprehension, Application and Checking-Critiquing level of cognitive
skills as these are more concrete. The communication acts are considered more appropriate for higher order
cognitive skills or when a model of collaboration with roles is followed since it suffices to guide/assess the
learners in terms of their intention/action. We verified and finalized the above design principles of the adaptation
framework  by the results of the three empirical studies we  conducted        (Gouli, Gogoulou,  Grigoriadou &
Samarakou, 2003; Gogoulou, Gouli, Grigoriadou & Samarakou, 2004).

                      Figure 2. The three-level process of the adaptation framework

   The adaptation framework follows a three-level approach depicted in Figure 2:
x   1st Level: At the 1st level, the adaptation mechanism checks if the group members are going to undertake
    specific roles during the elaboration of the activity/subactivity or to collaborate having the same duties. In
    the first case, the communication acts are used while in the second case the adaptation mechanism proceeds
    to the 2nd level in order to check the level of the learning outcomes.

                                                       
x     2nd Level: This level takes as input and checks the level of the learning outcomes. In case the level coincides
      with one of the Comprehension, Checking-Critiquing or Application levels, then the dialogue is carried out
      with sentence openers otherwise with communication acts.
x     3rd Level:  Once   the  provision     of   sentence    openers and   communication       acts has been     specified,    the
      appropriate sets   need to   be selected.     In  case of sentence   openers,   the  set of the SST    dedicated     to  the
      development of cognitive skills depends on the level of the learning outcomes (e.g. the set of the SST for
      the Comprehension level is different from the one provided for the Checking-Critiquing level). In case of
      communication acts, when a model of collaboration with roles is followed, the provided SST are adapted to
      each  member   according     to the   underlying    role. An   additional   factor,  which    influences the    set  of  the
      provided SST is the educational tool used (e.g. for a concept mapping tool, sentence openers like "I propose
      to link [concept] to [concept]", "Do you agree with the proposition [concept-link-concept]?" are available).
   From the above, it becomes obvious that all the group members (except from the moderator of the group,
who has at his/her disposal additional SST compatible to his/her additional duties) have at their disposal the
same set of SST if they collaborate having the same duties. For example, in case the activity addresses learning
outcomes of the Comprehension level, then all the members of the group may use sentence openers like "I
propose",   "I  believe",  "I agree"   while     in case  the   activity  addresses   learning  outcomes    of the    Checking-
Critiquing level, then all the members of the group have at their disposal sentence openers like "I propose ...
because ...", "I believe ... because ...", "I agree ... because" urging them to justify their point of view. In case a
model of collaboration with roles is followed, the provided SST are different for the group members supporting
their roles  appropriately.   For   example,     in Figure   3, the  two   learners   with user   names  "rgog"    and    "lilag"
collaborate according to the "Driver-Observer" model: the "driver" (learner "lilag") is responsible for making
proposals, answering to the "observer's" questions, and implementing the task while the "observer" (learner
"rgog") is responsible for making comments, asking questions for clarifications, expressing her opinion, giving
the answer and guiding the elaboration of the activity. The provided SST are different for the two learners (e.g.
"Proposal", "Clarification-Explanation", "Justification" for the "driver" "lilag" and "Question", "Opinion" for
the "observer" "rgog").

                                The   user "rgog"   is
                                responsible   to  ask                                                  The  user  "lilag"  is
                                questions, to  express                                                 responsible to  make
                                her opinion, to submit                                                 proposals,  to     give
                                the final  answer and                                                  explanations, etc.
                                to    coordinate    the
                                collaboration.

    Figure 3. Adaptation of the communication acts according to the roles implied by the collaboration model

Monitoring the Dialogue
In assessing     learners'   interaction   and    subsequently     their  collaboration,   the  CSCL    environments        offer
mechanisms to automatically trace learners' actions and/or their dialogue. Usually, the data are recorded into log
files and   may   be  further   analyzed    in    terms   of high-level   indicators.  According     to Jerman,     Soller     and
Mühlenbrock (2001), the CSCL environments may gather data about the learners' interaction and show this
information to the learners in a visualization form or process the data and coach/guide their interaction.
   In ACT, the learners' interaction is recorded into log files, which are accessible, by the tutor. Moreover,
since  we   are  interested  in assessing     the learners'   communication       in terms  of  the  skills addressed     by   the
collaborative   activity  or  the  collaboration    model,   we  keep     records of  the  learners' messages      as these    are
classified  to  the  aforementioned       discourse     categories  (i.e. Proposal    (P), Question     (Q), Reasoning         (R),
Clarification   (C), Motivation     (M),   Agreement     (A),   Disagreement  (D),    Need  (N),    Opinion  (O),   and    Social

                                                                
Comments (S)) and proceed to their quantitative analysis. The data resulted from the analysis are accessible both
to the learners and the tutor and concern the number of messages sent by each group member for each one of the
discourse categories (e.g. number of Proposals), the groups that have performed the specific activity/subactivity,
the models of collaboration followed in the context of the specific activity/subactivity, etc. The learners can
have access to these data at any time during their communication through the option "Group Model".
    As the learners' communication is carried out, their messages are visually represented in a tree structure,
grouped according   to the  reference message.   In particular, ACT  supports   a facility  for       the automatic
construction and update of the Dialogue Tree as the learners submit their messages. The messages are grouped
into sub-trees according to the message that they are referring to. The learners can have access to the Dialogue
Tree at any time during the communication through the option "Options/Dialogue Tree" or through the button
"Dialogue Tree" from the toolbar. The main advantage of such a graphical representation of the dialogue is that
the learners can see the dialogue in a different form, can trace the sequence of the dialogue more easily and can
have a clear view of the dialogue progress. Also, the Dialogue Tree can stimulate the learners to reflect on their
dialogue and improve their participation. In Figure 4, a screen shot of a dialogue tree is presented.

                 Figure 4. The Dialogue Tree represents the learners' debate in a graphical form

EVALUATING ACT
During the formative evaluation of the ACT tool, an empirical study was conducted. The aim of the study was
two fold: (a) to investigate whether (i) the predetermined set of the SST cover the learners needs in terms of
their completeness, understandability, accessibility and facilitation of the dialogue, (ii) the adaptation framework
is  appropriate and complies  to the  learners' communication   preferences, and  (iii) the provided       facilities
(Dialogue Tree and enrichment of the SST) serve their aim, and (b) to analyze the learners' dialogue in terms of
investigating the proper use of the provided SST, the coherence of the dialogue and the degree of the learners'
participation.
    The empirical study took place during the spring-semester of the academic year 2003-2004 in the context of
the postgraduate   course of "Distance  Education   and  Learning"  at the   Department    of    Informatics   and
Telecommunications of the University of Athens. Thirty students participated in the study, coming from a range
of backgrounds and having different expertise in the use of communication media. The duration of the study was
4 hours; each student worked on his/her own computer. We grouped participants into two-person (9 groups) and
three-person (4 groups) teams; one of the members undertook the role of the moderator.
    The working sheet included (a) a brief description of the ACT tool, (b) a description concerning the form of
the dialogue followed and the SST provided, (c) four collaborative learning activities, and (d) a questionnaire
concerning the facilities provided. Upon the completion of each learning activity, the students were asked to
answer a series of questions (multiple choice and open questions) concerning the usability of the tool, the
communication process, the role of the moderator, any problems identified, etc. For the first three activities, the
students of each team had the same duties and acted equivalently while in the context of the fourth activity,
specific models of collaboration were followed, i.e. the "Questioner-Responder" model for the two-person teams
and the "Questioner-Responder-Assessor" model for the three-person teams. The first activity asks the students
to follow a specific scenario enabling them to explore the facilities of the tool and become familiar with the form
of the provided SST. The second learning activity addresses cognitive skills, which concern the students' ability
to remember and understand things (Comprehension level) and therefore sentence openers were used. The third
activity urges the students to think of/reason/discuss/exchange ideas on a specific topic using communication
acts. Finally, the fourth activity addresses cognitive skills, which concern the students' ability to check the
correctness and the completeness of a given "product", to reason about their opinion and to proceed with any

                                                        
necessary modifications of the "product" (Checking-Critiquing level and Application level). According to the
adaptation framework,    communication    acts were   used in the   fourth  activity as the models  of collaboration
implied specific roles.

Empirical Results
The empirical results, concerning the first aim of the study, were drawn from the analysis of the students'
responses on the questions accompanied each collaborative learning activity and the questionnaire included in
the working sheet. The analysis of the students' answers concerning the provided sets of the SST is depicted in
Figure 5. More specifically,
x   the majority of the students characterized the completeness of the predetermined sets of SST as sufficient
    and rather sufficient (90% for sentence openers and 87% for communication acts).
x   a considerable    number   of students  characterized  the  way     the SST  are  presented  and  especially   the
    localization process of the desired SST, as easy (sufficient and rather sufficient). However, 25% of the
    students found difficulties to localize the appropriate sentence opener to be used (characterized the specific
    criterion as average and rather insufficient). They considered that the provided SST could be grouped
    instead of presenting them in a list. This result was taken into consideration and we redesigned the form that
    the SST are provided to the learners (a group formation of SST is supported; see Figure 1).
x   most of the students (70% for sentence openers and 94% for communication acts) believed that the use of
    the provided SST facilitated their dialogue (characterized the specific criterion as sufficient and rather
    sufficient).  Although   a  small percentage   (6%)    of   the students   believed   that the provided    set of
    communication acts made the communication process difficult, the corresponding percentage for the set of
    sentence openers was quite high (30%). The students' answers indicate that the size, the form and the
    number    of arguments   of the  sentence  openers  may   cause   difficulties;  on the contrary, the set  of  the
    communication acts is smaller and the form as well as the number of arguments to be filled in is simpler
    than in the case of the sentence openers. It is important to mention that most of the students, who found
    difficult the use of sentence openers, have high degree of expertise in the use of chat tools and prefer the
    free dialogue.
   As  far  as   the application  of  the  adaptation  framework     is concerned,    the majority  of  the  students
(approximately 80%) considered the provision of the sentence openers or the communication acts in line with
the context of the activities. A percentage of students (approximately 10%) argued that the communication acts
(sentence openers) could also serve the underlying outcomes of the second (third and forth) activity and some of
the students (10%) preferred the sentence openers (communication acts) instead of the provided communication
acts (sentence openers).
   Regarding the facilities provided to the students, the analysis of the students' answers showed that
x   a considerable number of students (76%) found the facility of connecting a message with an already sent
    message very useful since it reduces the typing load. However, 24% of the students characterized the
    specific facility as indifferent because they believe that the complexity of the composition message process
    is increased.
x   the majority of the students (83%) considered the capability of the ACT tool to group messages into sub-
    tress and to represent the dialogue in a visual graphical form (Dialogue Tree) very useful because it enables
    them to monitor the dialogue in an organized and enjoyable manner, to evaluate the collaboration process
    more easily and to proceed to interventions in order to improve their participation. However, a number of
    students (17%) mentioned that there was no need to consult the Dialogue Tree.
x   most   of the students (66%)    characterized the  facility of  enriching  the   predetermined sets   of sentence
    openers   and  communication     acts with  their own   phrases   useful.  Approximately,    50%   of them   took
    advantage of the specific facility during the elaboration of the activities, defining one or two phrases.
   The analysis of the students' dialogues (log files and dialogue trees) revealed the following:
x   The majority of the exchanged messages indicate that the provided SST were used in correct manner. It
    seems that the students understood the underlying intention and they selected carefully the most appropriate
    SST. In one case, one of the group members was quite eager to participate and was inclined to conclude the
    main points of the discussion, although he was not assigned the role of the moderator (since he didn't have
    at his disposal such a phrase, he made use of the possibility to define his own phrase).
x   The dialogues presented sequential coherence as the students listened carefully to their interlocutors and
    related their answers to the appropriate message. In some cases, the depth of the dialogue trees was five
    levels deep showing that the students were able to agree/disagree, justify their opinions and follow up the
    others' contributions. To this direction, the provided facility of connecting a message with an already sent
    message helped quite a lot. However, there were a very few cases that the dialogue seemed to be quite flat
    as one of the group members didn't not contribute in time while the rest two members continued the
    discussion.

                                                         
   Persentage of Students

                                   Suf
                                       RSuf
                                            Ave
                                                RIns
                                                     Ins
                                                         Suf
                                                             RSuf
                                                                  Ave
                                                                       RIns
                                                                            Ins
                                                                                Suf
                                                                                    RSuf
                                                                                         Ave
                                                                                             RIns
                                                                                                  Ins
                                                                                                       Suf
                                                                                                           RSuf
                                                                                                                Ave
                                                                                                                    RIns
                                                                                                                         Ins
                                                                                                                             Suf
                                                                                                                                 RSuf
                                                                                                                                      Ave
                                                                                                                                          RIns
                                                                                                                                               Ins
                                                                                                                                                   Suf
                                                                                                                                                       RSuf
                                                                                                                                                            Ave
                                                                                                                                                                RIns
                                                                                                                                                                     Ins
                                                                                                                                                                          Suf
                                                                                                                                                                              RSuf
                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                       RIns
                                                                                                                                                                                            Ins
x   All                     the  members             of  each     group      participated         actively      in   the     discussion.       The     students       appreciated           their
    interlocutors' opinions (e.g. they used the phrase "Very good idea") and they perceived the need as well as
    they were motivated by their interlocutors' questions to elaborate on their opinions.
   Although the above results are preliminary, the provided SST as well as their usage and accessibility seem to
be satisfactory                        and      they     caused       minor      difficulties         resulting      into    coherent          dialogues.       Also,     the      adaptation
mechanism proved to be appropriate regarding the selected set of the SST and the facility of enriching the
predetermined                          sets    of    SST     with     the   learner's        ones,    gives      a  degree       of   freedom       to      the learners.      The      visual
representation of the Dialogue Tree supports the monitoring of the dialogue and the students claim that serves as
a means to reflect on the collaboration process.
                          100%

                           80%

                           60%

                           40%

                           20%

                             0%

                                    Completeness         Understandability       Easiness    of   the   Facilitation of       Completeness          Easiness    of   the   Facilitation of
                                    of the  prov ided     of the   prov ided        localization           the dialogue       of the prov ided         localization           the dialogue
                                       set  of  SO           set   of SO         process f or the        when SO are             set  of  CA        process f or the        when CA are
                                                                                 appropriate SO             prov ided                               appropriate CA             prov ided

   Figure 5. Results concerning the provided set of sentence openers (SO) and communication acts (CA). The
                           abbreviation Suf stands for Sufficient, RSuf for Rather Sufficient, Ave for Average, RIns for Rather
                                                                             Insufficient and Ins for Insufficient

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PLANS
In this paper, we presented ACT, a synchronous communication tool enriched with adaptive capabilities. The
discriminative characteristics of the ACT tool are: (i) the use of both sentence openers and communication acts
for the implementation of the structured dialogue, (ii) the adaptation of the provided sets of the SST according to
the learning outcomes addressed by the collaborative learning activity, the model of collaboration followed by
the group members, as well as the educational tool used for the elaboration of the activity, (iii) the capability of
alleviating the possible restriction of the learners, imposed by the structured form of the dialogue, by enabling
learners to define their own SST and enrich the provided sets, and (iv) the monitoring of the group dialogue and
its graphical representation through the Dialogue Tree. The provided facility of connecting/grouping messages
by making explicit reference to a previous message as well as the capability of defining SST enhances the
contextual structure of the exchanged messages and enables the learners to follow the communication forms that
match as much as possible their own preferences and needs. Our near future plans include the enhancement of
the adaptive and adaptable capabilities of the tool with respect to the learners' preferences and interaction
behavior (e.g. support of the free dialog after a negotiation of the group members) and the enrichment of the
monitoring facilities with additional features regarding the visualization of various quantitative collaboration
indicators, such as the density of interaction and the degree of collaboration.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is co-funded by 75% from E.E. and 25% from the Greek Government under the framework of the
Education and Initial Vocational Training Program ­ Archimedes.

REFERENCES
Andriessen,                      J.,   Baker,        M.,  and     Suthers,       D.      (2003)       Argumentation,             Computer          Support,     and      the   Educational
                           Context of Confronting Cognitions. In J. Andriessen, M. Baker & D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to Learn.

                                                                                                      
        Confronting   Cognitions  in   Computer-Supported    Collaborative  Learning Environments,   2003    Kluwer
        Academic Publishers, 1-25.
Baker, M., and Lund, K. (1997) Promoting reflective interactions in a computer-supported collaborative learning
        environment. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 13, 3, 175-193.
Cole, M., and Engeström, Y. (1993) A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Saloman (Ed.),
        Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations. New York: Cambridge University
        Press.
Engeström, Y. (1987) Learning by Expanding: An Activity-Theoretical Approach to Developmental Research,
        Helsinki, Orienta-Konsultit Oy.
Gogoulou,    A.,   Gouli, E., Grigoriadou,  M.,   and  Samarakou,      M. (2004)  Adapting   the "Communication-
        Scaffolding" Tools in a Web-based Collaborative Learning Environment. Proceedings of the ED-MEDIA
        2004, World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia & Telecommunications, Vol. 2004
        (1), (Lugano, Switzerland, June 2004), 1153-1161.
Gouli, E., Gogoulou, A., Grigoriadou, M., and Samarakou, M. (2003) Towards the Development of an Adaptive
        Communication Tool Promoting Cognitive and Communication Skills. Proceedings of the PEG 2003
        Conference, (St. Petersburg, Russia, June 2003).
Grigoriadou, M., Gogoulou, A., Gouli, E., and Samarakou, M. (2004) The activity as a fundamental unit of
        learning + collaboration in SCALE. In Grigoriadou, M., Raptis, A., Vosniadou, S., and Kynigos, X.
        (Eds.): Information   and Communication     Technologies    in Education, Proceedings  of  the 4th Hellenic
        Conference with International Participation, Vol. A, (Athens, September 2004), 525-534.
Hirsch, L., Saeedi, M., Cornillon, J., and Litosseliti, L. (2004) A structured dialogue tool for argumentative
        learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, 72-80.
Hron,   A., Hesse,  F., Cress,  U., and  Giovis, C.   (2000) Implicit  and explicit dialogue  structuring in virtual
        learning groups. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 70, 53-64.
Jermann, P., and Schneider, D. (1997) Semi-structured interface in collaborative problem-solving. Proceedings
        of the First Swiss Workshop on Distributed and Parallel Systems (Lausanne,Switzerland).
Jermann, P., Soller A., and Mühlenbrock, M. (2001) From Mirroring to Guiding: A Review of State of the Art
        Technology for Supporting Collaborative Learning. Proceeding of EuroCSCL, (Maastricht, NL), 324-
        331.
Lazonder,   A.,  Wilhelm,   P., and  Ootes S. (2003)   Using   sentence   openers to foster  student interaction in
        computer-mediated learning environments. Computers & Education, 41, 291-308.
Robertson, J., Good, J., and Pain, H. (1998) BetterBlether: the design and evaluation of a discussion tool for
        education. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 9, 219-236.
Rosatelli, M., and Self, J. (2004) A Collaborative Case Study System for Distance Learning. International
        Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 14, 97-125.
Soller, A., Lesgold, A., Linton, F., and Goodwin, B. (1999) What makes peer interaction effective? Modelling
        effective  communication    in an intelligent CSCL.    Working    papers of the  American  Association   for
        Artificial Intelligence Fall Symposium   on   Psychological    Models of  Communication   in Collaborative
        Systems, 116-124, Menlo Park, California.
Soller, A. (2001) Supporting Social Interaction in an Intelligent Collaborative Learning System. International
        Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 12, 40-62.
Soller, A.   (2004)  Computational   Modeling and     Analysis of   Knowledge    Sharing in Collaborative  Distance
        Learning. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction: The Journal of Personalization Research, 14, 4,
        351­381.

                                                         
