The Effects of Electronic Communication Support on
                       Presence Learning Scenarios

                        Andreas Harrer, Sam Zeini and Niels Pinkwart
                       Collide Research Group,Universität Duisburg-Essen
                                {harrer, zeini, pinkwart}@collide.info

       Abstract. This paper investigates in the effects of using electronic communication forms in web-
       based environments. Following the idea of triangulation, we used qualitative methods, statistical
       analysis  and Social  Network  Analyses   to explore  the patterns of  communication     within one
       selected case of a mixed presence/web-based university course. The results show that while an
       isolated perspective does not suffice to explain the complex processes, taking more perspectives
       into account in a combined and integrated way provides a better understanding of technology
       enabled communication and interaction.

INTRODUCTION
In current educational  practice, web based    environments  are an   established means    to accompany  learning
scenarios. In contrast to other computer based support methods, web based tools have some inherent practical
advantages: they normally do not require the user to install any software, and a significant number of today's
learners already has some experience in browsing web pages and therefore is used to the underlying usage
patterns.
In learning contexts there are numerous variants of how the WWW is used. Different functions include web
pages serving as a more or less static information source, web-based intelligent tutoring systems where the main
purpose of the system is to teach rather than to be a learning resource, and environments which take into account
social perspectives of learning and offer means for communication or collaboration as a central element of the
web based learning support (Madrazo, 2003; Scardamalia, 2004).
   In addition to these differences in the function of existing web based environments for learning support, also
the usage context of these systems varies considerably: one characteristic factor is the learning group size, which
can vary between very small groups (or even isolated single users that to not interact with others) and large
communities with their special needs (Gaudioso & Boticario, 2003). Further distinguishing criteria include the
course type  (e.g., lecture vs. seminar),  and the  age of  students. In addition,  some   approaches  are related
primarily to distance learning scenarios, while others focus on the support of presence courses.
   Today's support of presence lectures at university level via web based environments is a typical intermediate
case between presence and distance learning situations, sometimes denoted with the term "blended learning"
(Sauter,  Sauter &  Bender,  2004): often, the lecture  is done  physically, but  a lot of supporting  actions are
delegated to a web-based environment due to lack of time, university staff, or other constraints. Students and
teachers can make use of web-based support environments in various ways (like, e.g., communication facilities,
resource collections, the management of exercises if appropriate, etc). One goal of this paper to find out whether
this web based support improves the learning results of the students.
   Pinkwart et al. (2005) present some investigations that analyze the interrelations between active usage of the
forum embedded in the iPAL (internet Portal to Augment Learning) web portal, and the student's final grade in
the examination. Indeed, a positive correlation was observable. One of the particular results showed that an
above-average system usage correlates positively with a good grade. However, interesting questions remain: In
order to thoroughly understand the relations between the usages of the web based environment by learning
groups and the learning outcome, we redesigned iPAL to be able to conduct a more detailed analysis of system
usage and its comparison to learning outcomes.

THE SETTING: LECTURE AND WEB-BASED COMMUNICATION ENVIRONMENT
The course that was investigated in this paper is the lecture "Software Engineering" held in the summer term
2004 at the University of Duisburg-Essen in Germany. The course is taken mainly by second year students of
computer science. It consists of a lecture with accompanying exercises being part of the presence learning
scenario.

                                                        
The exams were conducted in a mixture of small group (3-5 students) projects of 4 weeks duration and oral
exams taken after the project submission. To support the small project groups with a proper communication
infrastructure, each group was given a small group discussion forum, a Wiki, and CVS server access:
    The small group discussion forum was meant for communication within the project groups and with their
assigned "customers", our student tutors taking the role of the customer of the software project to be developed.
The Wiki was introduced to the students in the lecture as a means of co-constructively editing and refining living
documents, which can be used to find common ground on specific terms by defining their interpretation. The
CVS server supported the distributed software development by taking responsibilty of version managment and
conflict management in case of concurrent modifications of source codes and project documents.
    In the following sections of the paper we will analyse and discuss the usefulness of these communication
facilities and their impact on group structure and dynamics as well as on the outcome of the exams. This is
meant to shed light on our preliminary results (Pinkwart et al. 2005) that showed that a strong participation in
the lecture's discussion forums correlated with the achieved grades. At this point we investigate more deeply in
the use  of   a variety  of  support   tools for  project  work.  Our   hypothesis   is that  using  computer-based
communication infrastructures facilitates the success of project work: here, we put a specific focus on relating
the different communication means with each other. Especially the question if there is a key communication
infrastructure crucial for success, or if synergy / balance of different tools proves to be effective is a focus in our
study.
    The methodology     of the  study  can   be characterised as  a mixed   method   design,  following   the  idea of
triangulation  (Denzin   1980). The    decision was   to use  qualitative methods,   statistical analysis and   Social
Network Analyses (Wassermann and Faust 1994). This research design allows to use the results from one
applied methodological approach as interpretation context for the other methodological pathways.
    Qualitative analyses of the forums and the Wiki: Qualitative methods are suitable for understanding new
phenomena. In triangulation designs qualitative methods are usually used with the aim of building typologies
and hypotheses. In our case, the building of hypothesis was guided by the question of differences between the
typologies we found, and also by asking how these are affected by other factors.
    Social  Network   Analysis  (SNA):  In  contrast  to quantitative methods  which    analyse  structures indirectly
through the operationalised properties of the analysed cases, SNA allows the reconstruction of social structures,
e.g. communication paths. In our study we used the typology derived by the qualitative analyses for sampling
the most interesting groups (in the sense of the highest variance) in the way of how they organised their project.
    Statistics: Based on categorisation of groups with different types of Wiki and forum usage by qualitative
analyses, statistical analysis serves us to explain differences between groups, done by formulating hypothesises.
    Long term statistical analysis: Since iPAL had already been used to support a past course, we decided to
compare the results of both courses. In addition to the result comparisons, we were also able to make some long
term analysis, because 75% of the students from the actual course were also present at the past course.
    The qualitative   analysis was   mainly  done  by long  term  observations through    the teaching   staff and  by
analysing the content of the Wiki and the forums. The data for the SNA and the statistical analysis was extracted
from the database used by iPAL and the CVS log-files.

Qualitative and Quantitative Results from Wiki and Forum Usage
To understand how Wiki and the forums were used within the different project groups, we analysed the content
and the creation process through its versions as well as the forums qualitatively. We found out that the Wiki
usage varied widely in separate dimensions:
    On the one hand the interactivity of the construction, i.e. number of different authors, number of versions
and scope of changes between versions varied: some groups made small and frequent updates/modifications,
some had few but rather big changes between versions. Additionally some Wiki pages seemed to have been the
"property/responsibility" of one person, because they were edited exclusively/mainly by one person.
    On  the other hand   the   content and   thus the purpose  of the  usage  varied:   we found   and   indexed four
categories  of  usage of the   Wiki: project  management,    glossary  construction, reference   lists, and/or coding
conventions: In project management, the Wiki is used to coordinate team members' activities and document
their planning. Updates are usually done when replanning, rescheduling and making counterproposals. The final
version is (probably) the documentation of the project process as it happened in reality. For Clarification of
terms/Glossary Construction the Wiki is used to find a common ground and understanding of central terms and
concepts for the project work. Updates are usually done when introducing or defining new terms. The final
version is a glossary of used concepts and terms of the project. Reference List usage provides a common index
to outside resources. Updates occur when giving new references and links. If used for coding conventions, a
style guide for programming and/or documenting code is created. Updates are usually done when conventions
are proposed, changed or retracted. The final version represents the conventions to be used within the project.

                                                          
  We analysed the interactivity of construction and the usage type of the different project groups. 10 out of 20
project groups    used the   Wiki extensively, while   10  used it  hardly or not  at  all.   Some groups   mainly
communicated outside of our support environment, e.g. via ICQ. For the 10 groups using Wiki we manually
indexed the type of usage with the following results:

       Table 1 ­ Categories of Usage for the project groups' Wiki (N=73, Average Scores in Parentheses)
                                                           Purpose of Usage
  Interactivity of           Glossary              Project              Reference List      Coding Conventions
   Construction           Construction          Management
  Few versions,        Group A (71.12)      Group A (71.12)          -                      Group F (84.625)
 large differences     Group K (75.8)       Group G (65.5)
       Frequent        -                    Group B (68.667)         Group C (63.0)         -
       versions,                            Group D (58.375)         Group I (85.25)
 small differences                          Group E (77.625)
                                            Group H (d.n.f)
                                            Group I (85.25)

In the case of the forums' analysis (all 20 groups used this communication means), four different types of usage
could be found. The first category shows a very structured behaviour of using the forums. We could usually find
more threads than in other groups. The topics of threads were structured but the threads were short. The second
category posted just a few but long threads. The third category posted there were both a high number of threads
and some of the threads were also very long. In this case we could also observe a differentiated topic structure.
The fourth category used the forums just for planning meeting dates. We classified each group according to
these categories.
  It is significant that category 3 has the highest average of postings (11.13) and also the best results with
respect to the average score (87.43). This category produced also most total files (383) in the CVS and second
most versions after category 1. There is another interesting result by looking at category 2. One of the project
groups within category 2 decided to use the agile programming paradigm and another project group chose a
modular approach based on the division of labour. Putting them to a subcategory, this subcategory reached a
score average of 86 while the other two project groups within category 2 which had not followed a systematic
approach reached an average of only 53 points. This bias has to be mentioned because the agile approach
usually shows an extensive face to face communication structure and the modular approach shows a rationalized
communication structure in favour of the division of labour concept. Category 4 (no use of the forum for content
structuring) had the smallest average score (66.88) of the categories.
  Counting both concepts together yields that the project group with the highest score average (93 points, T= -
6.29 significant at P < 0.001) belongs to category 1 of the forum characterization and showed no extensive Wiki
usage at all. All members of this group were also present at the course we analysed last term. The group with the
fewest average score (40 points, T= 3.51 significant at p= 0.001) used the forum but not the Wiki. It is also
interesting that there is no significant difference in the average scores by categorizing the project groups into
categories which just used Wiki or forum or used Wiki and forum both.

Social Network Analysis
For our plans to investigate in the patterns of usage of the discussion forum and the resulting communication
structures, we followed the method of Social Network Analysis (Wassermann and Faust 1994, for applications
in CSCL: Reffay and Chanier 2003). For this study we decided to concentrate on "direct active communication",
which manifests itself in a discussion forum by a direct answer of an actor to an actor's posting. For detailed
analysis of the communication structures we had the general discussion forum open to every user of the iPAL
system and additionally separate forums for each project group and their "customer" (cf. Section The Setting).
We will focus on selected SNA features which are applied to the general forum and contrast/relate it with a few
project groups with distinctive project processes, communication structures and project results. Among the SNA
traits are the centrality of one actor, the centralization of the respective network, and the prestige of an actor, all
of them computed based on the degree within the graph.
  The general discussion forum had 64 persons creating 276 postings. The computed value for degree-based
centralization is CD = 0.283 (0 means a completely balanced network, 1 a completely centralized network). This
shows that the network had some "keyplayers", but also that in general the network was not dominated by any
actor. The  average  of  individual actors' centrality was Avg(CD(n))    = 0.044, which  means     that the general
centrality of actors was quite low, so nobody would be called "hub" in this network.
  For the project groups, which typically consisted of 3-5 students and one "customer", we were mainly
interested in    differences between   the  groups and    relations between   communication     structure,  project

                                                         
organisation, and final outcomes. Driven by our qualitative categorization and the concept of maximal variance,
we present 3 selected groups (see figure 1) that are distinctive with respect to the way they communicated and
their general project organisation:

                           Figure 1     Sociograms of groups (left: group1, middle: group2, right: group 3)
  Group 1 (no Wiki usage, little CVS, long threads with few topics) had a centralization CD = 0.5 of the
network with one student as central actor (centrality CD (p) = 1.0 and prestige PD = 0.75), the customer (Adam)
with a  small prestige of  PD(c) =  0.25  (in fact the smallest in this network)  and  other actors with   centrality
ranging from   0.25  to   0.75,  prestige  from  0.5   to 1.0.  This  group had   indeed   problems    with internal
communication (inside and outside the iPAL system), which led to a limited involvement of their customer,
separate development of project subparts and integration problems for the project submission. This resulted in
an inferior project outcome than the individual skills of the group members would suggest.
  Group   2   (no Wiki    use,  highest CVS,   differentiated  topics with  short threads) shown    in the  sparsely
connected graph had a small centralization CD = 0.125 of the network and a low individual centrality CD(n) of
the members ranging from 0.25 to 0.5. The prestige PD(n) varied from 0 to 0.75, with the customer having 0.25
in both centrality and prestige. This can be explained because of the specific process and distribution of labour
this group chose: One of the members (Cai) was assigned as "the Key Account Manager" and exclusively
communicated to the customer (Adam), both in forum and personal meetings. Since the planned project process
was followed consequently the project outcome resulted in the highest score of all the project groups. This
group used other support facilities we provided extensively, especially the CVS with more than 140 files and
1400 versions.
  Group 3 (extensive Wiki and CVS usage, differentiated topics with long threads) shown in the densely
connected graph had also a small centralization CD = 0.1875 but a consistently high individual centrality CD(n)
ranging from 0.75 to 1.0 and prestige PD(n) between 0.75 and 1.0. The customer (Sabrina) was intensively
involved with centrality CD(c) = 0.75 and prestige PD(n) = 1.0. All provided support facilities led to a well-
coordinated project that scored second among all the project groups.
  Reviewing the SNA results, we found that the exclusively structural analysis might not be sufficient to
explain process and outcome of the group's work, but with the additional information we had as creators of the
course, most of the phenomena could be explained utilizing both SNA and the process knowledge. This result
indicates that especially in mixed presence/web-based scenarios, SNA can be helpful to understand and interpret
communication structures.

Statistical Analysis
The dataset represents 20 project groups including the average score, average number of postings, the number of
the files produced and the number of file revisions made by each group. The interesting outcomes are a) that
there is a middle strength correlation (0.541 significant at 0.05 level, Spearman) between number of files each
group  produced  and   the average   score each    group  reached  in the course,  and also  b) a middle    strength
correlation (0.571 significant 0.05 level, Spearman) between CVS revisions made by each group and the average
score each group reached. Another hypothesis was a correlation between the average number of postings for
each group and the CVS usage behaviour. Yet, correlations between the average number of posts and the
number of files or versions produced using the CVS system could not be observed.

                                                          
   As mentioned in the section about research design, the approach presented in this paper is particularly based
on an evaluation study that was carried out last term. Thus it is self-evident to compare the current results with
the past evaluation. We compared the results from Pinkwart et al.(2005) with our current study:
   In this case we can observe that there was a stronger relationship between the number of postings and the
average score (0.485 significant at 0.001 level, Spearman) than in the current study (0.320 significant at 0.01
level, Spearman). This result led us to assume a fortification of personal relationships, and thus more direct (for
us non-observable) communication between the students, since 75% of the students in the recent course know
each other from the last course. The hypothesis that this is caused by usage of Wiki could not be proved, since
the students who used Wiki did not show a significantly different posting behaviour in the average than the
students who didn't use the Wiki. This result leads us to look at the difference between the 75% of the students
(N=55) which were present in both courses. In this case the students have received an average score of 71 points
in comparison to the last course they reached an average of 61 points. This difference is significant (T= 4.72, p <
0.001) and there is correlation between the scores of the pairs (0.643, p< 0.001) that can be interpreted that in
most of the cases (students) who received a high average in the past course received a high average in the
current course, too. On  the  other hand  we could not  see a  significant difference   according to the posting
behaviours within the compared courses.

CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this paper we used mixed method design to evaluate communication processes and structures within the web-
based support system iPAL that was used for a presence university course. Following the idea of triangulation,
we utilized qualitative methods, statistical analysis and Social Network Analysis. Qualitative methods were used
to classify the usage  types  of the communication  facilities Wiki   and  discussion   forums.  Based  on these
categories, we selected project groups with maximal variance of their communication behaviour and conducted
Social  Network  Analysis  to explore  communication    structures in detail. The SNA     of the  whole  learning
community produced a non centralized network, which complies to the large variety of communication facilities
student subgroups used in the project work, according to their own choice. This degree of freedom was intended
by the pedagogical approach. Indeed this is supported by the fact that no single communication form proved to
be superior. In fact the combined usage showed to produce better results with respect to the final scores. These
findings indicate that more aspects of the respective communication forms should be taken into account to be
able to compare them properly. To reduce the complexity of data collection and aggregation of these multi-
perspective analyses, we plan to explicate standard procedures for the follow-up studies, such as automated
processing of forum postings as well as representation formats suitable for analysis.

REFERENCES
Denzin,  N. (1989):  The  Research  Act.  A Theoretical Introduction  to Sociological   Methods,  Prentece Hall,
       Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Gaudioso, E., & Boticario, J. (2003). Towards web-based adaptive learning communities. In Proc. of      Artificial
       Intelligence in Education(AIED 2003)  (p. 237-244). Amsterdam, IOS Press.
Madrazo, L. (2003). SDR: networking. In Designing for Change in Networked Learning Environments: Proc. of
       Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2003) (p. 255-264). Dordrecht, Kluwer.
Moreno, J. L. (1951): Sociometry, Experimental Method and the Science of Society. Beacon house, Inc. New
       York.
Pinkwart, N., Harrer, A., Lohmann, S., & Vetter, S. (2005). Integrating Portal Based Support Tools to Foster
       Learning Communities in University Courses. In Uskov, V. (ed.): Proceedings of the 4th International
       Conference on Web-Based Education (p. 201-206). Anaheim, ACTA Press.
Reffay, C. & Chanier, T. (2003): How Social Network Analysis can hep to measure cohesion in Collaborative
       Distance Learning. Proc. of CSCL 2003 (p. 343-352). Kluwer, Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
Sauter, W., Sauter, A., & Bender, H. (2004). Blended learning. Neuwied, Luchterhand.
Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/KnowledgeForum. In education and technology: an encyclopedia (p. 183-192).
       Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.
Wassermann,   S., &   Faust,  K.  (1994), Social Network    Analysis:  Methods    and   Application, Cambridge,
       University Press.

                                                       
