      Building Bridges within Learning Communities
           through Ontologies and "Thematic Objects"
       Ulrich Hoppe, Niels Pinkwart,                              Felisa Verdejo, Beatriz Barros,
           Maria Oelinger, Sam Zeini                                      Jose Ignacio Mayorga
           University of Duisburg-Essen                                  Spanish Open University
 {hoppe,pinkwart,oelinger,zeini}@collide.info                   {felisa,bbarros,nmayorga}@lsi.uned.es

       Abstract. Communication through artefacts, in the sense of objects (co-)constructed by learners,
       is a well known mechanism in synchronous shared workspace environments. In this article, we
       explore the potential of extending this principle to heterogeneous, anonymous and asynchronous
       learner communities by drawing on existing work, e.g. in the areas of "social navigation" and
       recommender systems. A new ingredient is the description and provision of "thematic objects"
       embedded in a task/activity context. Design principles and available technologies are discussed
       and  an example    implementation   in a   European   project  is presented  from  the perspective  of
       technology design and development.

       Keywords: Artefact-centred community support, social navigation, content-awareness

INTRODUCTION
Shared workspaces     with  visual objects  enrich   human-human     communication     by opening  a   new  channel:
communication through the artefact. When jointly creating and manipulating artefacts, the co-learners' language
based interaction is complemented by an external medium providing inherent constraints. Whereas language
utterances rely on individual interpretation "in the head", actions on the object level have directly observable
results and consequences that may constraint future actions. Communication through the artefact is a basic
principle used in a variety of shared workspace environments in CSCW and CSCL. The typical activities are
editing, brainstorming, (co-)construction and (co-)design. Several authors such as Hoppe and Plötzner (1999) or
Suthers and Hundhausen (2003) have characterised communicative and cognitive functions of interactively co-
constructing and using shared representations. The latter distinguish the following three functions: initiating
negotiations of meaning, serving as a representational proxy for purposes of gestural deixis and providing a
foundation for implicitly shared awareness (group memory).
    A shared workspace environment may support domain unspecific representations such as concept maps
and/or hand written notes, but it may also support more specific, semantically enriched representations such as
system dynamics or Petri Nets. Our experience is based on a multi-representational tool called Cool Modes
(Pinkwart, 2003) in which a whole spectrum of representations is supported. In spite of the common outsiders'
view of CSCL technology being essentially used in remote learning scenarios, shared workspace environments
are often   used  in  face-to-face settings as    an additional communication       channel   together with   natural
communication    and, of  course,  as a structured   medium  with external   memory    function. The   typical usage
scenarios involve smaller groups of 2-5 participants over a time span ranging from some minutes to two hours.
Both limitations in group size and in time are inherently linked to the relatively tight coupling of activities
between group members. It is usually assumed that there is a high degree of continuous awareness between the
session participants and the cooperative activity would not allow for much parallel work in other completely
unrelated activity threads (i.e., even "private" activities are usually related to the co-constructive group task). A
balanced ratio between one's own active contributions as compared to the activity overhead that stems from
continuous awareness (perception) is one of the main factors that limit group size, whereas time is limited by the
ability to continuously concentrate on a coherent task without being able to accommodate for individual breaks
or timeouts. In the following we will constructively explore possibilities to relax these constraints in time and
group  size  while still maintaining    essential features, hopefully    benefits, of "communication    through  the
artefact".
    What   cannot be  expected to  be  transferred  from the  tightly coupled  situation  is the support for   deictic
references  in (real  time)  communication.   Yet,   the external    memory   function   can  be  redefined  from  ­
metaphorically   speaking  ­ short  term to   long  term memory   support.   In    classroom usage of  collaborative
modelling environments such as Cool Modes, we have experienced situations in which the sharing mechanism
has been used to transfer information from small groups to the whole class, e.g. to display and discuss group
results in the public. Yet, in this public situation, input is usually restricted to the moderator or teacher and the
responsible group. Also, this is typically not "late re-use" but "immediate re-use". In a recent study, Katrin

                                                         
Gassner compared a number collaborative discussion and argumentation environments, among other features,
with respect  to  their support for later re-use and     found a  clear deficit in  this respect.  This brought   us to
considering (and implementing) combinations of synchronous co-constructive environments with indexing and
retrieval mechanisms (Hoppe & Gassner, 2002). Although this implied a relaxation of time constraints, it was
not explicitly related to differences in group scale.
  With respect to group size, there is a qualitative difference between groups in which members know (of)
each other and share context in terms of location, curricular content and institutional features (staff, teachers)
and anonymous groups which may share an interest on the content level without sharing much context. Direct or
indirect (i.e. mediated) content orientated social relationships have been supported and studied with anonymous
groups under the notion of "social navigation" (Höök, Munro & Benyon, 2002; Dourish & Chalmers, 1994).
Our intention to support the interoperability between different group scales can also be seen as an attempt to
bridge the gap between direct and indirect social navigation. For CSCL purposes, we propose a specific version
of social navigation that relies on the notion of "thematic objects". Thematic objects are understood as learning
objects  enriched with   metadata which    classify   the object both   within  an ontology   and  in terms  of  social
relations.
  This approach of social navigation based on thematic objects or thematic social navigation is focused on the
following point: It is a basic purpose of social navigation to support users in finding other users with whom to
interact in some  beneficial  way.  We    assume    that  thematically  classified learning objects   can be used    as
indicators for "shared interests". In a learning community, such shared interests are an essential condition for
mutually   enriching interactions between   learners.     The learners  could  even  interact indirectly  through    the
inspection  and   re-use   of  objects  of  shared    interest   without  necessarily    having    a  person-to-person
communication. A comparable approach for assessing shared interests in scientific communities has recently
been presented   by  Francq   & Delchambre   (2005)    using  document   indexing   and  retrieval   techniques. In our
approach, both the ontological classification of objects as well as the association of metadata from the activity
context (user, tools) allows us to extend the search to classes of similar learning objects. This kind of content
awareness functionality is built into a collaborative learning environment. This environment combines access to
a repository for asynchronous sharing with synchronous shared workspace functionality.

                           Figure 1    Social navigation through thematic objects

BASIC CONCEPTS AND SUPPORTING TECHNOLOGIES
This section intends to identify the key concepts and to put them in relation to the social navigation and artefact
based communication principles that were outlined in the introduction.
  Dealing with documents and document handling, the notion of metadata (i.e., data describing data) is of
obvious importance. Related problems are the often needed manual generation, which users may conceive as an
annoying task they tend to avoid (Wickens, 1992). Other critical aspects are related to standardisation and
interoperability. A frequently chosen technique to overcome the interoperability concerns are ontologies. In the
sense of Gruber (1993), an ontology is an "explicit specification of a conceptualisation". Other definitions are
more operational and conceive an ontology as a conceptualisation of a domain into a human-understandable, but
machine-readable format consisting of entities, attributes, relationships, and axioms (Guarino & Giaretta, 1995).
One benefit of ontologies, as compared to other less structured and formal approaches, is their suitability for

                                                           
classical AI and knowledge representation techniques (Uschold & Grüninger, 1996). Another advantage of
ontologies is that they allow for adding a new abstraction level upon the metadata layer. This draws out links
between   entities  that  were  apparently  unrelated, thus   extending    the  querying    vocabulary   for   the users.
Furthermore, the ontology can be used for guiding the users by sorting out this larger amount of possible queries
and  by   providing mechanisms     for  deriving new  knowledge.   Finally,    an  ontology  may  facilitate navigation
through repositories by taking profit from the available context information.
  Apart from the more descriptive approaches of ontologies and related taxonomy based techniques, there is a
variety of technologies that deal with the usage and processing of data and metadata. These range from classical
search approaches with Boolean logics up to complex information retrieval methods, which are able to deal with
vagueness    of queries   and uncertainty about  data (e.g., Fuhr, 2001).     For  our aims, the field   of information
retrieval thus  offers  important  inputs through  the algorithms     it provides.  Yet, classic information    retrieval
methods do not consider user specific and task related information and can therefore not serve as a basis for our
implementation.
  Research on recommender systems is probably the most closely related and therefore most relevant area for
our approach. Similar to information retrieval, recommender systems aim at providing users with relevant
documents. Yet, the principal approach differs in that recommender systems rely on (user provided) ratings of
documents, which are either used directly for recommendation of the rated document, or indirectly to infer
ratings for  similar   documents    (Resnick &    Varian, 1997).   A     frequently applied  method    in   the field  of
recommender systems is collaborative filtering (see Konstan & Riedl, 2002). This algorithm essentially follows
three steps:
    1.    search for users with a profile similar to the current user
    2.    search documents that these users rated positively
    3.    order these found documents using relevance criteria of the current user
  Obviously, this algorithm is closely related to the ideas of social navigation through thematic objects as
expressed in the introduction ­ in a sense, it is orthogonal, as our approach first searches for documents and
then, in a second step, finds users. The collaborative filtering method has proven to be effective, but has several
inherent problems. These include the cold start problem ("how to give recommendations for newly introduced
items?") and the early-rater problem which describes the problems arising from new documents (Sarwar et al.,
1998). Several mechanisms to overcome the cold start problem have been proposed. Some of these are based on
the idea of community membership (Glance, Arregui & Dardenne, 1998). Here, new users assign themselves to
communities, and the system takes other members of that community as reference. The general consideration of
community    aspects   in recommender     systems was  also  used  to    take into  account the  fact that  people  in a
community potentially share topics of interest ­ accepting that people may be members of several communities
with different shared topics. Another approach to overcome the cold start problem of recommender systems has
been proposed    by  Middleton   et al. (2002).  They  investigate the    synergies evolving  from    an  integration  of
recommender systems with ontologies, the latter being used to determine initial user profiles. However, their
approach still relies on explicit and manual user assessment of documents.
  The driving ideas for this paper differ from all the listed concepts in that they do require neither explicit nor
implicit document assessment but instead make use of automatically available activity context for indexing and
retrieval. One of the case studies contained in this paper presents how functions can even be embedded in the
tool that provides the task context. Technical aspects of this solution are explained in Pinkwart et al. (2004).
  In our approach, the activity context links interest-related aspects to object-bound features and can thus be
conceived    as a  connection   of  user- and    document-related  metadata.      The  aims  are similar    to  those  of
recommender systems, and in particular to the idea of collaborative filtering. Yet, we are able to exploit a richer
source of information due to the additional context dimension. The context of a user activity is characterised by
the types objects worked on as well as by the types of activities performed. The repository we suggest provides
an adequate framework for storing, retrieving and re-using groups' results and by-products, and the portal we
propose supplies new ways of finding context information. Finally, as an added-value, the portal makes it easier
for users to access the community, their results and a number of helpful facilities such as semantic navigation or
enhanced searching. The next sections of this paper show how this information can be used to enhance re-use
options of documents in a community, and support the exchange of communities through documents. The latter
aspect illustrates the idea of the seeding of new collaboration options through social navigation by thematic
objects in the sense as motivated in the introduction.

SUPPORTING A COMMUNITY OF SCIENCE LEARNERS
The example application scenarios used in this paper are all related to the ongoing European project COLDEX
("Collaborative Learning and Distributed Experimentation"). COLDEX takes up issues and current challenges
in the area of technology support for collaborative learning in science and technology with a special focus on
learning based on both local and remote experimentation. Within this project, learning experiences and results

                                                          
based on local experimentation in personalised local communities are considered to be a subject of exchange in
a broader community, including long-distance communication. In this sense, the aim is to provide and explore
exchange mechanisms between local communities in Europe. Here, direct communication channels, e.g., by e-
mailing between learners, are not the primary and original goal. As motivated, we focus on artefact based
exchange mechanisms ­ not excluding their potential function as triggers for direct communication, however.
The central medium for exchange is the "Learning Object Repository" (LOR) which is described in the next
section of this paper. It provides both group and community navigation tools as well as mechanisms to detect
similarities of interests in terms of the produced objects or artefacts. This is a special case of the general ideas
related to "social navigation and community support" introduced above.
  One of the tools used in COLDEX is Cool Modes (Pinkwart, 2003), a multi-representational framework to
enable collaborative modelling. The Cool Modes tool supports synchronous cooperation in a shared workspace
environment with coupled objects. Specific types of objects and relations can be defined as domain-dependent
plug-ins. Most  of these plug-ins  offer graph-based   representations,  but  also handwriting  annotations           are
provided.
  Users of the LOR system can take multiple different roles which represent the different group scale they
work in: local group members belong to the same (local) face-to-face learning group; Cool Modes users create
models  within the tool environment  and   upload them    to the repository.  Community   members   of a certain
scientific domain may be interested in Cool Modes models. Individual learners can be members of these groups,
but also external visitors interested in the contents of the repository because of its relation to scientific topics.

Groupware support for challenge-based learning
The COLDEX project aims at supporting learning and experimentation with open-ended challenges for which
no ready-made solutions can be found in a textbook. The themes are mostly inspired by "exploring space" and
include examples such as lunar cartography, the programming of robot vehicles, or growing plants in space. Our
idea of   challenge-based learning (or henceforth ChBL) is thus a special form of problem-based learning (cf.
e.g., Barrows & Tamblyn, 1980; Koschmann et al., 2001) characterised by targeting non-standard, typically
extracurricular, problems in a research orientated learning mode. It aims at familiarising students with adopting
a scientific attitude and approach. Here, the advantage of a centralised learning object is the potentially highly
contextualised and  diverging background   of the thematic   learning  objects. This complexity  is a  necessary
ingredient for a meaningful and rich collection of data and metadata.
  Research and practice in CSCL shares a basic experience with other groupware applications in that using
group orientated software tools puts additional demands on the users. I.e., the use of group or community
orientated tools comes with an additional cost (in terms of additional coordination and interaction efforts). Thus,
from a motivational point of view, there should be a clear benefit in using these tools. For example, if the
explanation of an experiment is standard content of textbooks, it is quite unlikely that learners would engage in
time consuming communications with people around the world to understand the experiment. On the other hand,
if the problems dealt with are non-standard and of really open-ended and exploratory nature, there is an obvious
incentive to engage in  such  an exchange. This   is the  basic argument  for concentrating  on challenge-based
learning as an educational approach. So, the specific pedagogical approach of "building bridges within learning
communities" (not only within the COLDEX project) can be characterised by the three basic elements:
        x    extending "communication through artefacts" from local to global learning communities,
        x    contextualising community information bases with thematic and task-orientated parameters, and
        x    using challenge-based learning as an overall educational design principle.
  These themes have an innovative potential, both from a scientific point of view (in CSCL and Community
Information Systems) as well as for educational practice.

Examples challenges and thematic exploration
One of the COLDEX learning scenarios is "robot in a maze" (Jansen et al., 2004). It has two characteristic
activity modes: (1) the construction of a new maze as a challenge to other learning groups, and (2) the definition
of a robot strategy to escape from (hopefully any) maze in the form of situation-action rules. For example, a rule
for the given situation "free in front and on the left, but blocked on the right side" could be: "go forward". One
of the most obvious strategies for guiding a robot out of a maze is "wall following" which can be challenges by
putting islands in the maze. The Cool Modes system supports both maze construction and the definition of rule
sets. The corresponding learning objects (of type maze or rule set) can be put in the LOR. A rule set can
additionally be executed with a Lego robot in a physical maze.
  The two different aspects of the described scenario foster a special kind of competition between the maze
constructors and the students that program their robots. The users can categorize different classes of mazes (with
or without islands, single or multiple exits, exits at the edge or within a maze), and other users can find different

                                                       
strategies to solve arbitrary mazes of these classes. This allows for a mixture of competitive and collaborative
group work patterns. Using this scenario, the role of the repository is evident, as users can retrieve more classes
of rule sets or mazes which they then try to compete with there own mazes or strategies. Further usages of the
repository  (beyond  simple  searches for mazes    and rule sets, or  analysis    of the  contained  data) arise  if
descriptions and keywords are considered. For example, a user can add the information about his maze class, or
can state that his rule set is "the best" and succeeded in all tested mazes.

                    Figure 2   Maze scenario: simulation in the modelling environment
  Another example of a scenario is "lunar cartography" (Hoeksema et al., 2004). Here, the activity flow spans
from taking  pictures of the moon  to  calculating measures  such  as diameters      or crater heights by  using an
interactive tool  embedded  in Cool   Modes. Using   the LOR,   users  can      exchange  different (annotated and
contextualised) moon pictures to cover different phases of the moon, in order to compare the same crater shown
in different views taken at various sites. The repository can also serve as a platform to extend and enhance a
collection of moon objects with measurements.

Costs and benefits
The costs of using the repository for retrieval issues are the following: just on their own, users have to elaborate
solutions in a potentially complex and highly demanding way, there are no ready made solutions available. In
contrast, the user can collaborate, search the repository for helpful examples, share partial solutions with the
community and thus compose one possible solution for the problem at hand. The additional time effort, of
course a cost aspect, faces the benefit to minimise manual indexing. Similar trade-off situations have been
discussed for information pooling scenarios with database tasks (Cress & Hesse, 2004).
  Again, a big problem concerning repositories is again the "cold start problem": There will be no benefit in
spite of the required efforts before a critical mass of reasonable retrievable thematic objects is reached. Of
course students should be informed about the future benefit to motivate their efforts. Often, it is also possible to
provide an initial set of learning objects from previous experiences or even constructed by a teacher. A similar
problem occurs with user profiles in a growing group of users/learners. Therefore the initialising of user groups
and thus an initial set of user information (partly provided through tedious manual input) should be facilitated as
fast as possible.
  Non-standard challenge-based learning activities require higher "investment" of creativity and involve a
higher risk of failure. They typically come with less context information and scaffolding than, for example, in
common practice scenarios in schools or undergraduate academic settings. On the other hand, they are highly

                                                        
rewarding in   case of success and   they   can  strongly   benefit from exchange   in large learner  communities,
including asynchronous settings and initially anonymous groups.

                      Cost                                     Benefit
Finding resources     Time effort                              Information pool
Creating              Additional time and work effort          Learning by doing
documents
Contextualisation     (Automatic generation: system cost)      User benefits from context information
Indexing              (Automatic indexing: implementation      Large range of possible queries to serve different
                      cost)                                    information needs
Session               Start server, join session               Collaboration (+ log data, i.e. more context
preparation                                                    information)
Storing documents     Additional time effort: uploading and    Information pool
in a repository       manual input of additional metadata
Re-use of             Retrieval and adaptation                 Learning from other users' experiences,
documents                                                      getting different views of the same challenge
                                                               (ideally: understand other users' approaches)
Extracurricular       More time effort to research, to find    Learning not only facts, but also acquiring scientific
nature of             interesting thematic objects             working mode
repository usage
Challenge-based       Potentially highly complex tasks         High user motivation due to the non-standard nature
learning                                                       of topics, opportunity to learn from experience rather
                                                               than from textbooks
Learning              Not knowing everybody personally         Connection of peers with similar interests
community
                                  Table 1      Costs and benefits for ChBL

THE LOR
  In order to describe, integrate, and retrieve information created by a learning community with a variety of
resources, our approach is to define a learning object repository (LOR) with an explicit conceptual model, an
ontology, capturing community work processes and resources (Verdejo et al., 2003). The ontology we employ
consists of the following top level concepts:
      x     Learning Objects (LOs), the core data entities stored in the LOR. Their structure includes references
            to  associated  resources, tools,    learning design    parameters  and other contextual   educational
            information, and (in some cases) information about input and output formats.
      x     Actions, which allow the classification of user actions according to several categories (e.g., Activity
            Theory or models of scientific experimentation activities).
      x     Goals, which specify the purpose of certain actions.
      x     Complementary metadata information, encapsulating domain or scenario parameters.
  The expressive power of a learning object management system is a function of its vocabulary, but also of        its
description format and the abstraction levels enabled by its definition. In our case, this vocabulary includes
standard (IMS-LOM) as well as non-standard metadata slots, as learning communities may often want to define
their own descriptions to suit their needs.
  The LOR integrates data and artefacts created from heterogeneous resources. Artefacts, in this sense, are the
products created by the learners using certain tools. It is possible to upload results in arbitrary file format, such
as images (e.g., from telescopes) or multimedia documents created with commercial tools. These objects are
uploaded through a web interface. As for content keywords, such objects have to be indexed manually whereas
user and group information can be added by the web environment. Using specific COLDEX tools such as the
Cool Modes system the upload is directly embedded in the tool environment and allows for generating more
metadata automatically. These "metadata generated from tool context" include not only user information (from
the login and an internal user profile) but also information about the course context (represented as metadata in
hand-outs and   working  instructions) and    information   about object types  and operations known      in the tool
environment. E.g., in the maze application it is possible to distinguish a maze design from a rule set by the
object types. A maze document can be easily distinguished from a lunar cartography calculation by the different
plug-ins (and by the different object types).
  There is general mechanism for interfacing between the LOR and single tools, which is essentially enabled
by mapping schemes between the LOR ontology and the tool dependent information. The LOR also includes a
mechanism to create object descriptions from contextual community information derived from the conceptual
model, to further enrich an object description with social data in a transparent way. A by-product of this is the

                                                         
ability to support personalisation for specific sub-communities, as these define different application contexts.
Once a new LO type is defined, the LOR will be able to store it, providing adequate metadata values taken from
the community portal or the tool context.
  The LOR is a service to store LOs and enable their retrieval. Users can define new object types, and add or
delete objects of any of the types available. The mechanism to define a new object type consists of declaring the
list of metadata to be added to this LO type (apart from the standard set, which is automatically added to every
type). This operation is performed once to make the system aware of the new LO type existence. Once we have
a set of object types, any user can add or delete objects, either through a web portal, which provides to the user a
direct access to the LOs, organised in workspaces (Verdejo et al., 2004), or directly through specially enhanced
tools in the original task environment (Pinkwart et al., 2004).
  To this point, we have described the mechanism for storing and indexing results of learning activities. Next
we have to define corresponding mechanisms for navigation, retrieval, re-use and information sharing. The
following subsections will explain principles of navigation support based on group context, semantic navigation,
and navigation and exchange through thematic objects. A common point in these subsections is the notion of
contextualisation. The central idea discussed in this paper is the use of learning objects as a means for initiating
asynchronous artefact-centred communication. Here, contexts are used in two different aspects: first, learning
object contexts serve as (meta-)data resources upon which explicit retrieval functions and navigation strategies
operate. Second, task and tool contexts are exploited in implicit, similarity based retrieval operations: without
leaving the current activity context and tool environment, users can, e.g., ask for similar documents or objects
(i.e., similar to those they are working on) and can retrieve peers with supposedly similar interest, namely the
authors of these documents. The found "similar" documents can, again, be directly accessed and manipulated
within the tool context.

Semantic Navigation
Semantic navigation is enabled by the ontology, which establishes a new abstraction level upon that provided by
raw metadata. A benefit of this higher level of abstraction is bringing out links between entities that were
apparently unrelated. For instance, a particular tool could be discovered to be related to a given project or to
another tool by means of the ontology. Thus, two different groups could be found to be related by the fact that
they work on projects which share a common challenge or because they have participated in activities which
required using common tools.
  The importance of this new level does not rely only on permitting new or more elaborated queries but also
on adding the concepts represented by these queries to the user's working vocabulary. For example, a user can
discover an association between two learning objects which were linked because they have one of their authors
in common. These queries allow users to think in terms of different similarity variants: document based, person
based, and task based.
  The ontology consists of entities and relationships, but it also has inference rules. Rules allow for deriving
new information from existing knowledge. Thus, for instance, a rule could state that every project needs a
challenge, that whenever a new Learning Object is created, it is linked to the service which was used to make it
or that users belonging to a group are considered to be developing the group's current project. New connections
open new ways of walking through the LOR. The ontology makes it possible to navigate them by viewing these
links at a higher abstraction level, that is, rather like relations   between   concepts than metadata annotating
objects.
  Finally, the portal brings forth context information, which enables new knowledge to be derived, such as the
current activity being carried out within the project a group is developing or the tool they have selected for
solving a particular task. Rules, again, apply to this knowledge to derive meaningful relations or facts, like
offering that group this particular tool whenever a similar task is to be done.

Navigation support based on context and thematic objects
  Users can either access the LOR through the web interface or through one of the available tools. In the first
case, the web interface would present the metadata for a user-selected learning object together with the possible
search categories, with values automatically filled according to the selected LO and its context. This object
description is then taken as a query, allowing the user to edit or include fields (thus, adding constraints) or delete
them (i.e., relaxing existing constraints). The results of these specifications define the kind of object the user
wants to search. Then, the LOR searching mechanism will be triggered, and the results will be presented. If
necessary, the user would be able to iteratively refine this search.

                                                        
               Figure 3  Searching LOs from a tool (Cool Modes) using query patterns
   Figure 3 illustrates how thematic learning objects can serve as a source for finding "similar" documents that
resemble the user's current task context: from within the modelling environment Cool Modes (here, used with a
maze plug-in again), the user can initiate (without further parameter specification!) a LOR query for "related
objects", whose implementation is based on the context of the current learning object and the ontology structure.
The results of this query (i.e., the list of candidate objects) is mirrored back to the user, who can then either
refine his search, or access one of the proposed documents directly from within his current environment.
   This lookup mechanism for objects is "associative" in the sense that it enables the use of prototypical objects
as a starting point for query generation. The user does not have to learn any query language in order to make use
of the LOR.  Based on this core functionality, we  have    implemented       a number  of search and     retrieval
mechanisms that work on the archive. The advanced mechanisms exploit the context of the current task of the
user: together with the content of an object, the metadata about the tool, the user(s), and the current task (which
may be associated to documents that have a history and, e.g., originate from the repository) constitutes thematic
objects in the sense as described in the introduction of this paper.
   Technically, the implementation relies on query patterns, which can be conceived as query masks generating
concrete queries through filtering processes. There are two ways to define these, either using the ontology
querying language or (in a more simple manner) through a combination of metadata. The latter is mainly offered
through web services and permits establishing a link between the LOR and a number of previously known
external tools. It would be initiated on demand of an external tool. A tool can define a query pattern library
(Pinkwart et al., 2004), which allows the specification of particular search strategies for target objects. Some
pieces of information needed for searches can be taken from the task context and thus be automatically provided
by the tool itself at the moment an instance of the query is generated. For the example case of Cool Modes, the
generated metadata currently includes, e.g., the employed modelling language, the user and his collaborators,
and inferred educational parameters as well as relations to previous document versions - further slots are under
development. This process is illustrated in figure 3 with an example using Cool Modes and goes as follows:
first, the user would ask for LOs similar to his current one (step 1 in figure 3). An appropriate query pattern
would be extracted from the library, and serve the purpose of generating a concrete query based on the user's
current context and the strategy encapsulated in the pattern (step 2 in figure 3). Then, a "search object" (labelled

                                                       
3 in the figure) would be built to trigger the search process (step 4 in figure 3). The rest of the procedure can
either follow the steps already explained for portal-initiated search, or lead back directly to the tool and allow
direct access to the LO (steps 5a/b and 6a/b).
    With this document navigation based on thematic objects and their similarity, even more advanced usage
scenarios are possible: based on a simple relation between users and the documents they have used, an extension
of the similarity measure between documents to the associated users enables finding peers or groups of similar
interest and, iterating this process, to realise social navigation based on the documents contained in the archive.
For the user, this process breaks down to the simple question of "is there someone who is doing similar things to
what I am working on?" The possibility of a system-side answer to this question is indeed a valuable point if one
aims at fostering learning communities and their exchange.
    Both ways, from the portal or by the tool, meet at a common point before triggering the actual search: an
intermediate "search object" is generated, which includes the sought after properties for the target LO as well as
relevant context values. The search object's content is either directly gathered from the portal context, as in the
first case, or supplied by the tools, through a data exchange process, which, in turn, can be completed with
contextual information. Once the search object has been built, the searching can be run, which would produce a
result set. The process can be iterated and the user can participate in refining its results by changing values or
adding constraints.

CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
     So far we have explored and developed mechanisms to use learning objects in context as mediators for
community interactions. These mechanisms are designed to support the sharing of ideas in open-ended and ill-
defined problem domains. I.e., the expected benefit lies in improved problem solving performance facing the
given challenge. The COLDEX environment is fully implemented and demonstrates the feasibility of the general
approach, and particularly the Cool Modes system exemplifies the possibility of using tool information for
contextualised   indexing and  retrieval. This,  as  such,  is an  added  value  regarding    community   support
functionality. As one of the reviewers has correctly pointed out: this is a logical value added, not necessarily a
psychological one. Indeed, the psychological validity of the described mechanisms has still to be studied beyond
functional test of our system implementation.
     The initial  motivation  for (re-)using objects in the community     database can   also be viewed   from   a
sustainability perspective: what would long term effects look like? We assume that, under certain conditions, the
development of social relations might gain a dynamics of its own beyond the sharing of thematic objects. This
could in turn have an impact on the content level: the stimulation of social relations might foster certain types of
innovation and even the definition of new challenges in the learning community! The investigation of this effect
within the community will be one issue for the future research. Another open research issue is the following:
Similar to "feedthrough mechanisms" in synchronous collaboration with direct manipulation, the artefacts that
mediate the communication in our approach may be used as message containers through embedded annotations
which "let the object speak" like a message in a bottle (e.g., a handwritten comment "whoever re-uses this
model, may contact me for a further exchange"). This is possible and it would add a direct communication
channel to the asynchronous exchange.
     We believe that it is worth investigating the aspects of the enabling mechanism and the sustainability effects
on an empirical level. Research on sustainability effects will typically require statistical types of analysis. Such
types of long term analyses need data about a community using systems of the types we presented in this paper.
For  these purposes, we   are currently developing   (and  using continuously in   all our university lectures) an
integrated web based learning support system (Pinkwart et al., 2005) that allows for a variety of evaluation
methods, including "mixed mode social network analyses" (Wasserman & Faust 1994). On the evaluation level,
we are also discussing pathways to analyse "hybrid networks" (ontology terms and persons), both in context of
the LOR and the accompanying web portal. Applying this concept as a real time social network analysis for
group reflection may also have interesting effects on the enabling mechanism.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Parts of this work have been supported in the context of the EU project IST-2001-32327 (COLDEX). We thank
all our partners, especially  Marcelo Milrad   (Växjö,  Sweden)   for the original definition of challenge-based
learning and Kay Hoeksema (Duisburg, Germany) for the orchestration of scenarios.

REFERENCES
Barrows, H.S., & Tamblyn, R.M. (1980). Problem-based learning: An approach to medical education. New York: Springer.

                                                        
Cress, U., &   Hesse,  F.W.   (2004).  Knowledge   sharing   in groups: Experimental   findings of how  to   overcome a social
        dilemma. In Proceedings of ICLS 2004. Los Angeles: UCLA (June 2004), 150-157.
Dourish, P.  &   Chalmers,   M.  (1994). Running   out of space:   models of information navigation.   Proceedings of HCI'94.
        Glasgow (UK), 1994.
Francq, P., & Delchambre, A. (2005). Using document assessments to build communities of interest. In W. Cellary & H.
        Esaki (Eds.): Proceedings of the 2005 International Symposium on Applications and the Internet         (SAINT 2005).
        Trento, Italy, January 2005 (IEEE Press).
Fuhr, N. (2001). Models in Information Retrieval. In M. Agosti, F. Crestani and G. Pasi (Eds.), Lectures in Information
        Retrieval. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 21-50.
Glance,  N., Arregui,  D.,  and  Dardenne,    M. (1998).  Knowledge   pump:   Supporting the  flow  and  use of  knowledge   in
        networked organizations. In U. Borghoff & R. Pareschi (Eds.): Information Technology for Knowledge Management.
        Berlin: Springer.
Gruber, T. R. (1993). A translation approach to portable ontologies. Knowledge Acquisition, 5(2), 199-220.
Guarino, N., & Giaretta, P. (1995). Ontologies and Knowledge Bases: towards a terminological clarification. In N. J. I. Mars
        (Ed.), Towards     very  large knowledge   bases:  knowledge    building  and  knowledge    sharing. Amsterdam,     The
        Netherlands: IOS Press.
Hoeksema,    K.,   Jansen, and  Hoppe,   H.U. (2004).  Interactive processing of  astronomical  observations  in a cooperative
        modelling   environment.   In: Kinshuk,  C.K.  Looi, E.  Sutinen  (Eds.): Proceedings   of the 4th IEEE   International
        Conference on Advanced Learning Technologie. ICALT 2004, Joensuu (Finland), 888-889.
Höök, K., Munro, A., and Benyon, D. (Eds.) (2002). Designing Information Spaces: The Social Navigation Approach.
        Berlin: Springer.
Hoppe, H.U., & Plötzner, R. (1999). Can analytic models support learning in groups? In Dillenbourg, P. (Ed.): Collaborative
        Learning ­ Cognitive and Computational Approaches. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 147-168.
Hoppe, H. U., & Gassner, K. (2002). Integrating Collaborative Concept Mapping Tools with Group Memory and Retrieval
        Functions. In G. Stahl (Ed.): Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative
        Learning. New Jersey, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 716-725.
Jansen, M., Oelinger, M., Hoeksema, K., and Hoppe, H.U. (2004). An interactive maze scenario with physical robots and
        other smart devices. In: J. Rochelle, T.-W. Chan, Kinshuk, S. J. H. Yang (Eds.): Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Inter-
        national Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education. Los Alamitos (USA): IEEE Press, 83-90.
Konstan, J. A., & Riedl, J. (2002). Collaborative Filtering: Supporting social navigation in large, crowded infospaces. In
        Höök, K., Munro, A., and Benyon, D. (2002), 43-81.
Koschmann, T., Kelson, A. C., Feltovich, P. J., & Barrows, H. S. (2001). Computer-Supported Problem-Based Learning: A
        Principled Approach to the Use of Computers in Collaborative Learning. In Koschmann, T. (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and
        Practice of an Emerging Paradigm. Mahwah, NJ (USA): Lawrence Erlbaum, 83-124.
Middleton, S. E., Alani, H., & De Roure, D. C. (2002). Exploiting Synergy between Ontologies and Recommender Systems.
        In Proceedings of the Semantic Web Workshop at the 11th International WWW Conference. Honolulu, HI (USA).
Pinkwart, N. (2003). A plug-in architecture for graph based collaborative modeling systems. In H.U. Hoppe, F. Verdejo & J.
        Kay (Eds.): Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education Amsterdam: IOS
        Press, 535-536.
Pinkwart, N., Jansen, M., Oelinger, M., Korchounova, L., and Hoppe, H.U. (2004). Partial generation of contextualized
        metadata in a collaborative modeling environment. In L. Aroyo and C. Tasso (Eds.), Workshop Proceedings of the
        3rd International Conf. on Adaptive Hypermedia. Technical Univ. Eindhoven (NL), 372-376.
Pinkwart, N., Harrer, A., Lohmann, S., and Vetter, S. (2005). Integrating Portal Based Support Tools to Foster Learning
        Communities in University Courses. In Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Web-Based Education (WBE
        2005). Anaheim, CA (USA): ACTA Press, 201-206.
Resnick, P., & Varian, H. R. (1997). Recommender Systems. Communications of the ACM, 40(3), 56-58.
Sarwar, B., Konstan, J., Borchers, A., Herlocker, J., Miller, B., & Riedl, J. (1998). Using Filtering Agents to Improve
        Prediction Quality in the Grouplens Research Collaborative Filtering System. In S. Poltrock & J. Gudrin (Eds.),
        Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. New York: ACM Press,
        345-354.
Suthers, D., & Hundhausen, C. (2003). An experimental study on the effects of representational guidance on collaborative
        learning processes. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-218.
Uschold, M., & Grüninger, M. (1996). Ontologies: Principles, Methods, and Applications. Knowledge Engineering Review
        11(2), 93-155.
Wassermann, S., & Faust, K. (1994), Social Network Analysis: Methods and Application. Cambridge University Press.
Wickens, C. D. (1992). Engineering Psychology and Human Performance. New York, NY (USA): Harper Collins.
Verdejo, M. F., Barros, B., Mayorga, J. I., and Read, T. (2003). Including collaborative learning designs in a Learning
        Object Repository. In H.U. Hoppe, F. Verdejo & J. Kay (Eds.): Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
        Artificial Intelligence in Education. Amsterdam: IOS Press, 509-511.
Verdejo, M.    F., Barros,  B., Mayorga,  J.I., & Read,   T. (2004). Designing    a semantic portal for collaborative learning
        communities. In R. Conejo et. al. (Eds.): Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 3040. Berlin: Springer, 251-259.

                                                                
