A New Role for Computer-Mediated Communication
   in Engaging Teacher Learning within Informal
                           Professional Communities

                                                Diane Hui
                                         Department of Education
                                   Washington University in St Louis
                                          diane.hui@wustl.edu

     Abstract.  Computer-mediated      communication  (CMC)    implementations,    in particular  among
     teachers, have not lived up to public expectations. This study examines some reasons for this and
     outlines a conceptual     and methodological   framework  for  characterizing the  engagement     of
     experienced and novice teachers in informal network-based professional learning communities. I
     postulate sustainability to positively correlate with what I term "CMC engagement." This study
     addresses  three  key research  questions: (1) What   properties constitute CMC    engagement     in
     professional learning e-communities? (2) Why do some CMC groups sustain themselves, whereas
     others do not? (3) How might the communicative structures of network-based CMC enhance or
     constrain the development of their e-communities, and in turn, pertain to CMC engagement? I
     argue that both the dialogicality of utterances (Bakhtin, 1986) and the use of texts as "thinking
     device[s]" for   generating   new   meanings (Lotman,   1990;  Wertsch,  1991)   are essential   for
     engaging   practitioners' professional life. Using both   qualitative and   quantitative methods,
     longitudinal discursive data from public teacher email lists are subject to microgenetic, discourse,
     and ethnographic analyses, resulting in a novel taxonomy of e-communities and a characterization
     of CMC engagement. The findings provide a new formulation for sustainable learning in CMC-
     based professional teaching and learning environments, in both informal and formal settings.

     Keywords:    Computer-Mediated       Communication    (CMC),   Engagement,    Teacher    Learning,
     Informal Professional Communities

INTRODUCTION
According to a recent report of the National Commission on Teaching and America's Future (2003), one-third
of new teachers leave teaching within their first three years, and one half within their first five. Given the
current fiscal and accreditation constraints in teacher education, any hope of meeting the national challenge of
providing two million  highly  qualified beginning  public schools' teachers by  2009,  while  also   improving
teacher retention by at least 50 percent by 2006, would appear to be unobtainable. Amid this crisis, education
reform advocates have increasing hopes for incorporating information and communication technology when
reforming teacher learning via collective professional e-communities (e.g., Riel & Fulton, 2001).
       However, the outcomes of this to date have varied widely and are yet to live up to public expectations
(e.g., Wade & Fauske, 2004). The literature identifies two general areas that compromise the rich possibilities
of computer-mediated communication (CMC) for professional e-learning: (1) online discourse lacks depth (e.g.,
Putnam & Borko, 2000); and (2) teachers are reticent to use networked peer communication (e.g., Zhao & Rop,
2001). It follows from this that the current claims for the contribution of CMC might be exaggerated.
       This study examines some reasons for this and outlines a conceptual and methodological framework
for characterizing the engagement of experienced and novice teachers in informal network-based professional
learning communities.
       This study has important implications for improving networked communities of teacher learning in
three significant areas. One, it provides a formulation for larger-scale explorations, the results informing both
policy-makers and practitioners in their designing more cost-effective and sustainable models of professional
development. Two, my project provides an alternative to existing professional development approaches. And,
three, this study increases awareness and provides the details of shared professional language or discourse in
analyzing educational practice, therefore filling a void in the American context (e.g., Lampert, 2000). My
analysis will inform proactive ways in which teaching and learning may provide more professionally and

                                                     
intellectually rewarding experiences (e.g., Cochran-Smith, 2003; Nieto, 2003), while simultaneously
acculturating, attracting, and retaining new and experienced teachers in classroom practice (e.g., NCTAF,
2003).

LITERATURE REVIEW
The CMC literature affirms the importance of technology in teacher education reform. It also highlights the
need for robust theory and methodology to inform practice and significant longitudinal study to assess the
effectiveness of such a strategy (e.g., Gunawardena et al., 1997).
         Technology affects all our lives, and its ubiquitous use in education clearly has the potential to change
the future of education (e.g., Tyack & Cuban, 2004). In particular, networked communication itself has proven
a viable tool for mediating teacher education reform, including three frequently stated CMC goals: (1)
information sharing, (2) fostering professional development; and (3) community building (e.g., Berge &
Collins, 1998). Developed in the 1960s, CMC involves the exchange of text messages across time and space via
networked computers, such as online chatrooms and electronic mail. However, its dynamic temporal-spatial
parameters constrain as much as they facilitate conditions for creative communicative action.
         Various methods have sought to characterize CMC interaction. But despite calls for examining the
quality of interaction (e.g., Cazden, 2001), CMC research has remained focused upon structural and discursive
content analyses (e.g., Fahy et al., 2001). Such research is useful. However, it fails to explain how discursive
functions may account for CMC engagement. This is significant, given that CMC engagement involves genuine
interchange, going well beyond simply the transmission of information.
         High-level, in-depth online discourse is rare in educational settings (e.g., Nystrand, 1997) and CMC
infrastructure alone cannot ensure engaging experience. Most studies have covered relatively short time frames,
from week-long conferences (e.g., Gunawardena et al., 1997) to course-duration bases (e.g., Fahy et al., 2001),
but rarely have they been conducted over significantly longer periods, or with larger self-motivated public
communities.
         The current study addresses all these issues and provides a coherent communicative theory and model
of analysis that considers the CMC parameters that both facilitate and constrain high level CMC engagement as
an alternative method for connecting teachers to professional and intellectual e-communities.

CENTRAL THESIS, ARGUMENT, AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS
The central thesis of this study postulates that "sustainability" positively correlates with CMC engagement.
"Sustainability" has been considered an important goal of          educational reform        (e.g., Cole, 1996) and
professional development (e.g., Franke et al., 1998), but little is known of its correlates.
         "Engagement" is considered a crucial inquiry within a learning community among teachers and
educators (e.g., Cochran-Smith, 2003) and will here refer to "genuine" forms of communication that goes
beyond simple transmission-like exchange, as characterized by three principal dimensions: (1) how utterances
are integrated and used for creating new meanings or "dialogicality and functionality," (2) how utterances/texts
are evaluated and elaborated for formulating new ideas or "exploration," and (3) the development of overall
threads, topics and participant activity or "structural characteristic." Each is operationalized by further
indicators.
         I argue that by examining the ways in which our voices and utterances are integrated and used to
comprehend and control communicative action for generating new meanings involve going beyond mere
transmission of information and addressing CMC sustainability. This provides a key foundation for our
understanding of sustainable CMC communities in engaging in quality dialogue and thinking.
         Against this background, I address the following three key research questions: (1) What properties
constitute CMC engagement in professional learning e-communities? (2) Why do some CMC groups sustain
themselves, whereas others do not? (3) How might the communicative structures of network-based CMC
enhance or constrain the development of their e-communities, and in turn, pertain to CMC engagement in
general?

THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
Conceptually grounded in semiotic and discourse theories, the study's theoretical framework has its roots in
sociocultural perspectives (e.g., Vygotsky, 1986; Wertsch, 1991) and communities of practice (e.g., Wenger,
1998). Specifically, my argument is grounded in two critical notions. First, I employ Bakhtin's and Wertsch's
dialogicality of utterances, which refers to the ways we make meaning through engaging and responding to

                                                   
voices and utterances (see also Nystrand, 1997; Cazden, 2001). Second, I draw on Lotman's (1990) theory of
using texts as "thinking device[s]" for creating new meanings. Both these theoretical perspectives emphasize
the dialogic language use underlying my key claims for CMC engagement.

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS
This study is both descriptive and analytical, employing mixed qualitative and quantitative methods. The
qualitative aspects comprise microgenetic (e.g., Wertsch, 1991) and discourse analyses (e.g., Gee, 1999) for
investigating the discursive practice of CMC engagement. Ethnographic (e.g., Carspecken, 1996; Hymes, 1986)
and sociolinguistic perspectives (e.g., Briggs, 1986) are used to analyze communicative action, interview, and
subjective interpretations informing the implicit norms conditioning the social reality of e-communities.
Quantitative inquiry employs post hoc analysis and comparisons to determine the relationships between
interview responses, coding components, and e-community categories.
       Following institutional human subject research guidelines, research data are collected from multiple
sources (i.e., text transcripts, interviews, and field notes) via participant observation.

DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
A total of approximately 1,300 messages comprising 80,000 lines of naturally occurring text message threads
have been collected from experienced and novice teachers communicating via six contrasting public education
email lists over two years. Email lists were chosen for their public access, levels of communicative activity,
national and state representativeness, discipline, and representation of experienced and novice populations.
Each text message is coded for levels of engagement (e.g., "dialogic CMC engagement" or "univocal
informative exchange"), and prototypes are selected for in-depth analyses according to both micro- and macro-
level coding categories. The unit of analysis is the episode or thread, including a minimal unit of individual
message turn or utterance level. Inter-rater reliability check is undertaken.
       Preliminary analysis has shed new light on three major issues: (1) different forms of professional
teacher e-communities, (2) the emergence of engaging e-communities, and (3) characterization of these
engaging teacher discourse e-communities.
       First, two distinct forms of e-communities have been identified as distinguishable by speech genres
(details below). "High engagement" communities are characterized by their "dialogic CMC engagement" level,
resembling genuine conversation, scaffolding thinking and socialization through integrating discourse. In
contrast, and more common, are "low engagement" communities which show a more transmission-like
communication, predominately comprised of "univocal information exchange." For example, two of six target
email lists are "high engagement" communities (41 percent message threads are "dialogic CMC engagement"),
the remaining four are "low engagement" communities (91 percent, "univocal information exchange").
       Second, "high engagement" communities would appear to emerge in the presence of extensive chains
of communication, during the progressive development of topic levels as may be represented by multi-layered
tree diagrams of twenty topic levels or more. Such multiple topic levels are sustained by both high, and mixed
engagement levels of "dialogic CMC engagement" and "univocal information exchange." Furthermore, a high
"dialogic CMC engagement" level correlates with deeper reflection on pedagogy. Conversely, the "low
engagement" communities display a limited development of topics (ranging from one to five levels) and are
frequently characterized by single topic level discourse threads with a few mixed engagement levels. It follows
from this that high and mixed engagement levels afford a greater capacity for sustaining the long chains of
communication more typical of "high engagement" communities.
       Third, the characteristics of speech genres reveal quite different levels of engagement to exist between
"high" and "low engagement" communities. Based on a preliminary analytical framework, I briefly describe
below two excerpts of text transcript that illustrate two (of three) engagement dimensions (i.e., the "dialogic and
functional" and "structural characteristic"). The first excerpt illustrates substantive "dialogic CMC
engagement," a second presents "univocal information exchange." Consider the following cases where the first
excerpt elicited four subsequent responses, but the second elicits none at all.

"Dialogic and Functional" Dimension
The following is an illustration of a "dialogic CMC engagement":
       While I absolutely agree that the teaching of five-paragraph essays and other formulas leads
       to wretched writing and a minimal understanding of organization as only filling in the blanks,
       I also agree that most students need some scaffolding to understand organization. I would,

                                                    
        however, argue that that scaffolding must be more varied than it may have been in many
        classrooms, including the ones in which I learned and some of the ones in which I taught!
        Integrated or interanimated utterances are coded at three levels, namely lexical, phrasal, and clausal.
Consider, for example, "I absolutely agree that [italics added]" and "I also agree that" are integrated utterances
at the clausal level, and the use of "organization" and "five-paragraph essays" at the lexical and phrasal levels,
suggestive of Nystrand's uptake.
        Moreover, the first utterance above uses the word "agree," in "I absolutely agree" and "I also agree,"
indicating the functional use of another's utterances for specific communicative purposes (i.e., as agreement,
with a view to provoking comparison). It also demonstrates the author's awareness concerning the contributors'
appropriation of the speech of others as their "thinking device[s]." Secondly, the use of the word, "argue" as in
"I would, however, argue" clearly demonstrates purposeful use of another's thread utterances as "thinking
device[s]" for generating new meaning.
        In contrast, consider a typical example of a "univocal information exchange":
        I have a book called Activities for Fast Finishers (Scholastic). It comes in Math, Language
        Arts and Vocabulary. I got it at Barnes and Noble. The one I have is for grades 4-8... not sure
        if it would work for your grade level, but you might be able to adapt some of the activities.
        In response to a question, the utterances above are characterized by relatively straightforward and
factual transmission-like exchanges based on personal experience. Although consideration may have been given
to the thread inquirer's status in making the proposal, the respondent makes no reference to the thread's
previous utterances nor does s/he use any text for creating new meaning. Such discourse is typically less
engaging, more univocal and monologic.

"Structural Characteristic" Dimension
Drawing on  the social theories  of Schegloff (1999)     and  Fahy   et al. (2001), a "structural characteristic"
dimension is operationalized using three engagement indicators (two of which will be briefly illustrated below).
        What follows is an overall thread development of a "univocal information exchange."
                                                      1

                             2         3           4      5               6             Time
This figure illustrates linear thread development with only two topic levels, and no development of repeated
turns. Each number represents the chronological order of writing authors through time. Engagement increases
as reflected by a progression of new arrow nodes (noticeably absent in this example) revealing the quantity,
rather than any great depth, of communication. The second excerpt lies in #4.
        The next figure shows a representation of "dialogic CMC engagement."

                                            7                           14 (=16=25=26)

                                                                        15

        8                                 13         17 (=22)           *16
                          12                                                   18 (=27)

        9                            19            20 (=24)          *25         *26

                                                                                 *27
10            11                                   21         *22     23
                                                                                 28
                                                              *24
Note. "*" and "=" refer to repeated authors/turns.
In contrast to the first figure, this one reveals a more complex, multilayered participation pattern, with eight
topic levels, and the development of repeated turns. The flow is relatively non-linear, evolving with greater
bidirectional and dynamic discourse. The first excerpt lies in #20.

                                                       
RESULTS AND CONCLUDING REMARKS
The empirical findings of the study to date affirm the rationale for my taxonomy of e-communities (i.e., co-
constructing "high engagement" versus informational "low engagement" e-communities) on the basis of "CMC
engagement." Higher level mastery of dialogic texts as "thinking device[s]," thus markedly contrast with the
relatively less engaging discourse of "univocal information exchange." The former category characterizes
interaction among sustainable groups.
         Three dimensions have been identified for characterizing CMC engagement ("dialogicality and
functionality," "exploration," and "structural characteristic"), each in turn possessing further identifiable
engagement. Furthermore, CMC engagement as expressed between experienced and new teachers is noticeably
different. Experienced teachers show greater mastery of "thinking devices[s]" and integrated voices in their
speech. In contrast, novice teachers more often appropriate the speech of others, without addressing the
reported voice.
         This study also provides evidence for the emergence of collective e-communities in supporting new
teachers. Conventional boundaries of communities thus needs be reframed as larger dynamic e-communities,
comprising synergies of multiple e-communities (e.g., Snyder & Acker-Hocevar, 2003) when engaging in
"inquiry as stance" (Cochran-Smith, 2003, p. 7). The findings further challenge, and point to the need to
reconsider notions of experts and teaching expertise (e.g., Lieberman & Miller, 2001; cf. Lave & Wenger,
1991), e-learning contexts, and the meaning of putatively objective ontology expressed in critical ethnography
(Carspecken, 1996).
         This new knowledge of CMC engagement within the e-communities of learners has the following
important educational outcomes: (1) a new method for identifying practical ways for e-teacher-educators to
optimize their e-learning environment, and their respective roles for leadership and research in education; (2)
new policy implications for the impact of e-communities and individual member relations to their pedagogical
knowledge    and beliefs; (3) accommodation     of the differential learning  needs of  experienced and       novice
teachers; (4) promotion of empirical explorations of e-research contexts, e-researcher roles, and assessment
awareness; and (5) consideration for updating professional development software and training.

CITED REFERENCES
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). The problem of speech genres. In M. M. Bakhtin, Speech genres and other late essays
         (V. McGee, Trans. & C. Emerson & M. Holquist, Eds.) (pp. 60-102). Austin, TX: University of Texas
         Press.
Berge, A. L., & Collins, M. (Vol. Eds.). (1998). Wired together: The online classroom in K-12: Vol. 3. Teacher
         education and professional development. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, Inc.
Briggs, C. L. (1986). Learning how to ask: A sociolinguistic appraisal of the role of the interview in social
         science research. Cambridge, UK: CUP.
Brown, R. E. (2001). The process of community-building in distance learning classes. Journal of Asynchronous
         Learning      Networks,      5(2),     18-35.      Retrieved      September    15,       2003,        from
         http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v5n2/v5n2_brown.asp
Carspecken, P. F. (1996). Critical ethnography in educational research: A theoretical and practical guide. New
         York, NY: Routledge.
Cazden, C. (2001). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning (2nd ed.). Portsmouth, NH:
         Heinemann.
Cochran-Smith,   M.  (2003).  Learning  and  unlearning: The   education   of teacher  educators. Teaching      and
         Teacher Education, 19, 1, 5-28.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of
         Harvard University Press.
Fahy, P. J., Crawford,  G., &   Ally, M. (2001).   Patterns of interaction in a computer conference   transcript.
         International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 2, 1, 1-18.
Franke, M. L., Carpenter, T., Fennema, E., Ansell, E., & Behrend, J. (1998). Understanding teachers' self-
         sustaining, generative change   in the context  of  professional  development. Teaching   and   Teacher
         Education, 14, 1, 67-80.
Gee, J. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. London, UK: Routledge.
Gunawardena, C. N., Lowe, C. A., & Anderson, T. (1997). Analysis of a global online debate and the
         development of an interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in
         computer conference. J. Educational Computing Research, 17, 4, 397-431.

                                                       
Hymes, D. (1986). Models of interaction of language and social life. In J. G. Gumperz & D. Hymes (Eds.),
         Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography  of  communication   (pp. 35-71). New  York:   Basil
         Blackwell.
Lampert, M. (2000). Knowing teaching: The intersection of research on teaching and qualitative research. In B.
         M. Brizuela, J. P. Stewart, R. G. Carrillo, & J. G. Berger (Eds.), Acts of inquiry in qualitative research
         (pp. 61-72). Cambridge, MA: Harvard Educational Review.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: CUP.
Lieberman, A., & Miller, L. (Eds.). (2001). Teachers caught in the action: Professional development that
         matters. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Lotman, Y. (1990). Universe of the mind: A semiotic theory of culture. Bloomington, IL: Indiana University
         Press.
National Commission    on Teaching and    America's Future. (2003,  January). No dream  denied: A pledge        to
         America's children. Washington, D.C.: National Commission on Teaching and America's Future.
Nieto, S. (2003). What keeps teachers going? New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Nystrand, M. (1997). Opening dialogue: Understanding the dynamics of language and learning in English
         classroom. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Putnam, R. T., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research
         on teacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29, 1, 4-15.
Riel, M., & Fulton, K. (2001). The role of technology in supporting learning communities. Phi Delta Kappan,
         82(7), 518-523.
Schegloff, E. (1999). Talk and social structure. In A. Jaworski, & N. Coupland (Eds.), The discourse reader
         (pp. 107-120). London, UK: Routledge.
Snyder, K. M., & Acker-Hocevar, M. (2003). Building international cultures of synergy through online social
         networks. In F. K. Kochan & J. T. Pascarelli (Eds.), Global perspectives on mentoring: Transforming
         contexts, communities, and cultures (pp. 311 -334). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Tyack, D., & Cuban, L. (2004). Tinkering toward utopia: A century of public school reform. In J. H. Ballantine
         & J. Z. Spade (Eds.), Schools and society: A sociological approach to education (2nd Ed., pp. 459-
         478). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language (A. Kozulin, Ed. & Trans.). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
         (Original work published in 1934).
Wade, S. E., & Fauske, J. R. (2004). Dialogue online: Prospective teachers' discourse strategies in computer-
         mediated discussions. Reading Research Quarterly, 39, 2, 134-160.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practices. Cambridge, UK: CUP.
Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. Cambridge, MA: HUP.
Zhao, Y., & Rop, S. (2001). A critical review of the literature on electronic networks as reflective discourse
         communities for inservice teachers. (ERIC Document No. 459483)

                                                     
