           Preserving Authenticity in CoLs and CoPs:
                    Proposing an Agenda for CSCL
                                                David Hung
                                    National Institute of Education
                                            Der Thanq Chen
                                        University of Canterbury
                                         wldhung@nie.edu.sg

      Abstract. This paper reviews the issues of authenticity in learning and educational technologies.
      Instead  of  undermining  the authenticity of  schools  or   communities of    learners (CoLs),     we
      acknowledge schools as having equally legitimate authenticities compared with communities of
      practice (CoPs). Founded on such an argument, we propose the role of scaffolding learners from
      CoLs and CoPs. A critical review of approaches to authenticity forms a major part of this paper,
      and a recommendation of a framework to scaffold learners from CoLs to CoPs with augmentation
      supports is recommended. We argue that such a process leads to innovation. We recommend an
      agenda for the field of CSCL to consider.

      Keywords:     Authenticity, Communities    of Learners, Communities      of Practice,   Scaffolding,
      Augmentation

COMPUTER-SUPPORTED COLLABORATIVE LEARNING
Computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) has grown out of an integration of computer supported
collaborative work (Ellis, Gibbs, & Rein, 1991) and collaborative learning. CSCL focuses on the learning
dimensions  of what  is being  communicated and   the purpose  is  to scaffold or support   students   in learning
together effectively. Theories undergirding CSCL include distributed cognition (Hutchins, 1991), Knowledge
building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1992), Vygotsky's social-cultural theories of the mind (Vygotsky, 1982),
cognitive flexibility (Spiro & Jehng, 1991), and other social constructivist forms of learning. CSCL aims at
providing both an authentic environment and multiple perspectives that can tie in students' prior knowledge,
holding to the underlying assumption that individuals are active agents that they are purposefully seeking and
constructing knowledge within a meaningful context. One of the central aims of CSCL is to make learning
authentic. In this paper, we argue for the authenticity of both schools and professional practices. We propose an
agenda for CSCL to consider how CSCL technologies can bridge between communities through the concept of
augmentation supports.

AUTHENTICITY
Authenticity can be observed when students construct meanings and use disciplinary-oriented inquiry processes
in their learning (Edelson, 1996).  Authenticity from  this perspective  approximates   what     the real world is
engaged in, that is, the real world of scientists and other kinds of practitioners. Educators have, by and large,
deduced from this that learning contexts should be context-rich just as in real world settings (Greeno et al, 1998).
Although this is a pedagogically sound end, researchers have been confused with the issue of authenticity being
unique in different contexts. We are not denying that perhaps it is into the CoP context that ultimately students
would be developed, but this does not give us licence to reject school or CoL authenticity. We argue for the
existence  of  many types   of context-community    authenticities ­  CoL-based   (school-    or university-based
community of learners) authenticity and CoP-based authenticity. CoLs are commonly referred to as preparatory
communities set up in schools to foster active participation and responsibility for learning goals. By CoPs we
mean the actual and `lived' communities in which practitioners such as scientists engage in their work on issues
that have practical implications for society. We contend that these two different types of authenticity serve
varying complementary functions and that they are both authentic in their own right.
   Constructivist Learning Environments in educational technology (for example, Jonassen 2000, Berman, &
Macpherson, 1999) are, in essence, environments where attempts are made to simulate real world scenarios and
practices. These environments are also known as practice fields (Senge, 1994). Jonassen (2000) has proposed a
framework   of `Constructivist Learning Environments'    (CLEs)    using communities   of  practices   as  activity

                                                        
contexts. A problem is commonly related to situations within real communities of practice (CoPs). The problem
can be represented in the form of a story or simulation with the aim that it should be as interesting and appealing
to the learners as possible. Jonassen argues for a problem where the learners can affect the problem situation
thus enabling it to be more intrinsically motivating. Such a problem would have a context that depicts the social-
cultural and    organizational   context surrounding   the  problem.   A  description   of  the  actors, beliefs, goals,
organization climate, historical and cultural constrains implicit in the context are described. In the same way,
CLEs are simulations because they attempt to transfer problems and processes from CoPs to the classroom. One
major problem with any of the above simulation approaches is that a simulation approach is fundamentally a
simulation, and is therefore not intended to be the same as the actual real world.      However, Petraglia (1998) has
pointed out that these a priori designs ­ that is, simulation approaches ­ of constructivist learning environments
(CLEs) have missed the in-situ epistemological underpinning of situated cognition (Brown, Collins, & Duguid,
1989).    He    argues   that  educational  technologists    have  been   preauthenticating    learning  materials   and
environments to correspond to the real world rather than fostering learners to interact with it.       In essence, only
the  cognitive   dimensions   of CoPs  are possibly   modeled   or  `mirrored' into  CoL    contexts. Recognizing    the
epistemological significance of Petraglia's work, researchers (for example, Barab, Squire, & Dueber, 2000) have
tried to argue for a participation approach ­ that is, instead of bringing the real world into classrooms (that is,
simulation approaches), students are brought to the real communities of practices (CoPs) to be enculturated in
their learning processes with the central participants of that community (Lave & Wenger, 1991).             Thus, from
this radical  perspective, `simulating'   authentic  learning  experiences  other  than  through   enculturation  in the
actual full and situated context is an oxymoron with regards to situated cognition.
    From a different perspective of practice fields and participation approaches which assume the stability and
authenticity of CoPs, relativist approaches address the issue of authenticity from the theoretical groundings of
situated cognition. Situated cognition emphasizes the in-situ occurrence of meanings in authenticity. In other
words, in-situ approaches do not focus on CoLs or CoPs per se, but rather on the processes occurring within the
respective communities. Authenticity, in this sense, is judged by the nature of interactions rather than on the
`real-ness' of reality as from CoPs. In-situ approaches spring from situations where two or more parties, for
example, learners and practitioners are engaged in mutual co-construction of meanings and understandings.
Authenticity therefore emerges from the in-situ processes between parties such as practitioners and learners.
The in-situ approaches emphasize that knowing and context are irreducible and co-constituted, and thus learning
is conceived    of as fundamentally    constitutive of the  contextual  particularities in  which  it is nested   (Davis,
Sumara, & Kieren, 1996). Their concern is not with how the cognising agent comes to know the world, but with
how learner-and-learned, knower-and-known, self-and-other, personal-and-social, experienced-and-narrated co-
emerge, co-evolve, and are co-implicated (Bakhtin, 1981; Davis, Sumara, & Kieren, 1996; Heidegger, 1962;
Merleau-Ponty, 1962; Vygotsky, 1978). Both learners and practitioners are seen as part of the context (e.g.,
CoLs)  rather    than in a context.  Concomitantly,    Merleau-Ponty    (1962)   has studied    patterns of interacting,
describing   the relationships   among   persons   engaged  in conversation as   a coupling.    This  concept has  more
recently been described by biologists as structural coupling (Maturana and Varela, 1987), co-emergence (Davis
& Sumara, 1997), or mutual specification (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991).                 Knowledge-in-action (the
situated, relativist view) is contrasted to knowledge-as-objects (the dualistic, objectivist view). One example is
when K-12 school leaders (as learners) come to the University and co-engage with professors (in the University
as a CoP). Much of what emerges in the interactions is a synergy of practical experiences of school leaders
(from schools) and the wealth of educational and theoretical knowledge from University professors (as CoP
practitioners).  Both  kinds   of knowledge     co-determine   each other  and   can    result in manifold    directions.
University    professors bring   constructivist  epistemologies   while   school  leaders   are  experienced   with  the
possibilities of   implementation   in   practice. In  this case, in-situ interactions   of meanings     occur  because
University professors recognize their limitations in terms of understanding actual school practices, while these
school leaders lack newer theoretical understandings and perspectives. In our discussions above, we have tried
to highlight that the in-situ approach, as in co-interactions, occurs in both CoPs and CoLs. In this sense, the
relativist-process orientation fits into the authenticity of both CoLs and CoPs. Since both CoLs and CoPs are
"equally" authentic, they should exist and not be compared with each other with respect to authenticity. Instead,
our proposition is in considering how we can scaffold learners across communities ­ from CoLs to CoPs.

SCAFFOLDING ALONG THE CONTINUUM OF COLS AND COPS
By adopting Lave and Wenger's (1991) model of legitimate peripheral participation, which is a model grounded
on scaffolding and enculturation, we recognize that the above three models can be seen as a CoP learning
continuum. With effective scaffolding, we envisage the learner treading from simulation to in-situ interactions.
We argue for the need to advance learners through the continuum by appropriating augmented supports through
the learning process, yet preserving the construct of authenticity.       The concept of scaffolding facilitates the

                                                            
learner within   the context   of a community     moving   from    legitimate peripheral  participation  (simulation)   to
central participation   (in-situ) (Lave   &  Wenger,   1991).   In the  same  vein,   as the  learner moves   along    this
continuum, the community ­ which is composed of the learners ­ similarly evolves along this continuum (Figure
1). The learner has the possibility of progressing from being a novice to finally become an active contributor.
These categorizations will be elaborated in the later sections.
  An example of a learner being scaffolded along such a continuum could be seen from the perspective of a
doctor whose training begins at the University where he or she works with non-life practice fields. On the later
years of training, the trainee-doctor begins to contribute alongside qualified doctors in hospital wards, probably
engaged in participation with doctor-practitioners in daily activities. Subsequently, after graduation, the full-
fledged doctor is now ready for in-situ interactions with other doctors as they engage in their own medical cases
and research into the frontiers of medical sciences. Other examples could include pilots under training in flight-
simulators, pilots subsequently as observer-participants in cockpits, and finally as co-pilots in actual flights. In a
similar sense, scaffolding is a systemic approach to supporting the learner (Jonassen, 1999), focusing on the
task, the environment,     the learner,   and  other instructional  persons   such  as   tutors,  teachers, etc. That   is,
scaffolding provides structures and frameworks to support the learning process and students' performances
beyond what is currently possible (Griffin & Cole, 1984).

   Legitimate peripheral participation                                    Central Participation

   Learner is a      novice         observer        participant      active contributor

  Practice Fields                              Participation                          In-situ    emergence    of
                                                                                      meanings

Figure 1: The scaffolding continuum
  A scaffold adapted to the level of the learner ensures success at a task difficult for the learner to do on his or
her own.   Scaffolding envisages a learning structure and framework for a learner to gradually move along a
continuum.   Scaffolding    usually involves    the notion   of gradual   fading and    removal   of supports.   Tools  or
resources are initially needed and may gradually be internalized as learners progress in the learning continuum.
Again,  one  needs   to differentiate between    the supports   afforded  by  scaffolding  and    those that are  used  to
augment   the learner's    capabilities. Once   the  learner is  fully immersed    in the  professional   culture   of the
community, these tools resources can be gradually removed.           In retrospect, the design of simulation-oriented
learning environments is complementary to real communities and not a replacement for them.               Obviously, the
real context (non-simulation) with its embedded nuisances would probably be the best. However, we recognize
that it is not always feasible to have full participation with communities of practice from the initial stages of the
learning process ­ it defies the peripheral to central participation concepts of learning within communities (Lave
& Wenger, 1991).
  An    example   of  a  learning   environment     which  can   scaffold  between    CoLs    and CoPs   is  ChemSense.
ChemSense can be seen as a tool bridging learners from CoL to CoP. Kozma's (2003) ChemSense allows
learners to see chemistry concepts, such as chemical bonds, in multiple representations because the research
findings showed that expert chemists are able to see chemistry meanings in multiple representations. On the
other hand,   novices   or students  are  constrained  in  their ability  to  visualize  and  are generally  not  able  to
recognize chemical meanings in multiple forms, for example, between bond-structures and actual laboratory
chemical experimentations. The background of to such an environment is the recognition that students think
"chemistry" rather differently from "experts" or practicing chemists. In other words, the way students learn
chemistry in schools or CoLs differs from the way chemists "see" meanings in CoPs. Hence, ChemSense,
although not intended to be a bridging CoL-CoP tool can serve this function. ChemSense would augment the
novices thinking by displaying alternative representations to novices ­ chemical equations, real-time graphs
representing  phenomena,      molecular   animations,  and   videos    of lab-based   experiments    (Kozma,   2003).   If
ChemSense is also used in real CoPs where chemists can benefit from, the bridge between CoLs and CoPs is
augmented. In this sense, ChemSense can be used as an augmenting support that helps to facilitate interactions
across both communities. In other words, ChemSense can be used in both CoLs and CoPs and as a mediator
between both communities. Basically an augmentation support mediates the interactions between two or more
communities.   At this stage, we want to conceptualize on the concept of augmentation supports. To our minds,
augmentation   supports,   unlike   scaffolds, do not fade   away   as students  are  scaffolded   from  CoLs    to CoPs.
ChemSense for example, can be appropriated by both CoLs and CoPs ­ used by both students and experts. We
hypothesize   at this   stage  that there   can  be  environments    which    span  both  CoLs    and   CoPs   and   these
environments should be intentionally designed as augmentation supports. In other to preserve the authenticity of

                                                           
both CoLs and CoPs, we recommend that the field of CSCL consider how augmentation supports can be an
integral part of its agenda.

SETTING AN AGENDA FOR CSCL ­ AUGMENTATION SUPPORTS
The work of bridging between communities can be a fruitful agenda for CSCL. We propose that CSCL consider
the work of supports which do not fade away. Augmentation is contrasted with scaffolding. Scaffolding is
depicted by a process where supports are provided to the learner to achieve a certain goal without which the
individual would not be able to attain to. These supports generally fade away after the learner appropriates the
skills and knowledge required. The learner grows out of dependency on these supports. We conjecture in this
paper that there are supports which do not necessarily fade away in the learning process, which we term as
augmentation supports. We propose educational technologies and learning environments where supports are
"superimposed" onto the learning experiences. For example, the learner is engaged in the real authentic problem
case with supporting tools and resources.     We   see a potential in using   simulations  (including   VR  oriented
cognitive tools and information resources) to assist the less experienced to effectively engage themselves in the
community. Such augmentation supports `assist' rather than `instruct'. Instead of fading away, augmentation
supports go with the learner as he or she transits from one form of community, for example home or school, to
another form such as communities of practice (CoP). We make the assumption that learning is progressive when
learners progress from schools to CoP-forms of understanding.
  Augmentation can be in the form of tools, artifacts, and even "persons". Augmented tools are basically
instruments and models which are used by practitioners in communities of practice (CoPs), for example, the
microscope, the various measuring devices, etc. Other kinds of augmented tools include specific instruments for
domain related activities such as devices which compute data for certain forms of activity.     Augmentation tools
can also be in the form of supporting personalized knowledge representations in the context of social spaces in
online collaboration -- personalized representations can be superimposed/augmented onto social and collective
representations. Augmented artifacts are cases, living stories, accounts, and ideas which literally occurred in real
CoPs which can be used in schools as illustrations and resources where students can refer to as examples in their
pursuit  for understanding.   Current knowledge    management   literature strongly  promote  the use   of real case
testimonies and stories as situated examples for learning. Learners need access to relevant cases or stories
pertinent to  them   as they  engage   in context-dependent   situations. Researchers  and  designers   believe that
instructional materials supporting ill-structured problem-solving skills should incorporate cases that represent
(as close as possible) real-world cases and problems in that particular domain (Jonassen, 1999). The use of
stories or cases in problem-solving education increases problem-solving skills, helps address misconceptions,
and contributes to the changing of attitudes. Augmented persons are practitioners who can go into schools and
communicate with students. These augmented persons act as consultants and experts, mentoring the learners by
modeling expert-thinking and behaviors. These augmented persons also help to bridge the gap between schools
and CoPs as the learners move into the context of practices and real work communities. The augmented persons
do not fade away and continue to be a strong influence to the learners from schools to CoPs.
  To summarize, augmented tools are cognitive and physical instruments which learners work or think with in
relation  to their authentic  learning experiences;  augmented   artifacts  are  materials ­ both    conceptual  and
physical ­ which learners work and think upon as exemplars; whereas augmented persons are facilitators and
experts which learners work and think alongside.

REFERENCES
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Barab,   S., Squire,  K., &  Dueber,   W.  (2000). A  co-evolutionary     model  for supporting the  emergence    of
   authenticity. Educational Technology Research & Development, 2, 27-62.
Barrows, H. S. (1986). A taxonomy of problem-based learning methods. Medical Education, 20, 481-486.
Brown,   J., Collins, A.,  &  Duguid,  P.  (1989). Situated cognition and    the culture of  learning.  Educational
          Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Brown, J., & Duguid, P. (2000). The social life of information. Boston: MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Davis, B. & Sumara, D. (1997). Cognition, complexity and teacher education. Harvard Educational Review, 67
          (1), 105-125.
Davis,   B., Sumara,  D.,  &  Kieren,  T. (1996).  Cognition, co-emergence,   curriculum.  Journal   of Curriculum
          Studies, 28(2), 151-169.

                                                         
Edelson, D. C. (1996). Realising authentic science learning through the adaptation of science practice. In B. J.
        Fraser  &   K. Tobin   (Eds.), International   Handbook   of Science  Education.  Dordrecht,  Netherlands:
        Kluwer Academic Publishing.
Ellis, C. A., Gibbs, S. J., & Rein, G. L. (1991). Groupware: Some issues and experiences. Communications of
        the ACM, 34(1), 38-58.
Greeno, J., &  Middle   School   Mathematics   Through    Applications Project Group.   (1998). The  situativity of
        knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53, 5-26.
Griffin, P. & Cole, M. (1984). Current activity for the future: The zo-ped. In Rogoff B. & Wertsch J. (eds)
   Children's learning in the zone of proximal development. (pp. 45-63). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hutchins, E. (1991). The social organization of distributed cognition. In L. Resnick, J. Levine, & S. Teasley
        (Eds.)   Perspectives    of  socially  shared   cognition.   Washington.  DC:    American    Psychological
        Association.
Jonassen, D.   (1999). Designing    constructivist learning   environment. In Reigeluth   C.M.  (ed) Instructional-
   Design theories and models (Vol II): A new paradigm of instructional theory. (pp. 215-239). NJ: Lawrence
   Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kozma, R. (2003). Material and social affordances of multiple representations for science understanding. Learning and Instruction,
    13(2), 205-226.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Maturana,   H. &    Varela, F. (1987). The   tree  of knowledge:  The  biological roots of human  understanding.
   Boston: Shambhala.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception. London: Routledge.
Petraglia, J. (1998). The real world on a short leash: The (mis) application of constructivism to the design of
   educational technology. Educational Technology Research and Development, 46(3), 53-65.
Scardamalia,   M.,  &  Bereiter, C.  (1991).  Higher   levels of agency for   children in knowledge   building:  A
        challenge for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-68.
Schank, R., Berman, T.. & Macpherson, K. (1999). Learning by doing. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.). Instructional-
   Design theories and models (Vol II): A new paradigm of instructional theory (pp. 161-181). Mahwah, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Senge, P. (1994). The fifth discipline fieldbook: Strategies and tools for building a learning organization. New
   York: DoubledSay.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experience.
        Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1982). Mind in society. Cambridge: MA: Harvard University Press.

                                                          
