    V-Share - Video-Based Analysis and Reflection of
            Teaching Experiences in (Virtual) Groups

       Peter Huppertz                               Ute Massler                             Rolf Ploetzner
    University of Education,                University of Education,                  University of Education,
            Freiburg                                   Freiburg                                Freiburg
     peter.huppertz@ph-                    ute.massler@ph-freiburg.de                     rolf.ploetzner@ph-
           freiburg.de                                                                        freiburg.de

       Abstract.   Successful   teacher    education   links methodological    theory   and   teaching  practice.
       Research further indicates that student teachers' development of pedagogical content knowledge
       can  be fostered if  they   are supported    in reflecting on   teaching  experiences   individually  and
       cooperatively.  Time    and  place   independent   pre-    and in-service  teacher   training is  gaining
       importance. Due to long distances between individual student teachers and the limited amount of
       time for  reflection during     face-to-face sessions,   analysis and   reflection processes   cannot be
       realized in blended learning arrangements with the same means available in traditional face-to-face
       teacher  education.  The    project "v-share"   therefore  develops   the methodological    concept   and
       technical support   for video-based    analysis  and  reflection  on  teaching   experiences  in  (virtual)
       groups. The internet-based tool allows student teachers in blended learning arrangements to share
       videos of their own and their fellow student teachers' teaching lessons and to select sequences for
       joint online analysis, annotation and reflection.

       Keywords: video-analysis and -annotation, teacher training, blended learning, reflective teaching

INTRODUCTION
Reflection on practice is of importance because it enables practitioners to assess, understand and learn through
their experiences. A positive active process of reflection that reviews, analyses and evaluates experiences draws
on theoretical concepts and previous learning and so provides an action plan for future experiences (Kemmis,
1985). Instructional  measures    that foster student  teachers'  reflection skills  and  develop attitudes  which   are
considered  necessary  for  reflection  effectively   seem   to be,   among  others:  teaching   student teachers   self-
regulatory strategies such as planning, self-controlling and self-assessing activities, as well as allowing them to
share their experiences and to articulate their reflective thinking processes with lecturers and fellow student
teachers (Dewey, 1938/1986; Schön, 1987). Additionally, the lecturer's role is essential in focusing student
teachers' reflection processes on teaching situations and reflection processes which may pass by without the
participants' awareness (Hovelynck, 2000). Furthermore, several learning-to-teach studies indicate that student
teachers who   are required    to structure and   verbalize   the pedagogical    content  knowledge    underlying   their
teaching succeed   in distancing   themselves    from  their actions  and  are thereby   able to reflect on  them.   The
development of this capacity of reflection-on-action (Schön, 1987) seems to be enhanced by having student
teachers carry out classroom research projects.
    Time and place independent pre- and in-service teacher training is gaining importance. According to the
concepts of experiential and inquiry-based learning, the planning and carrying out of lessons and the inquiry-
based reflection on teaching experiences should be important learning activities of blended learning teacher
training courses, too. Due to long distances between individual student teachers and the limited amount of time
for reflection during  face-to-face    sessions, analysis and   reflection processes   cannot  be realized  in blended
learning arrangements with the means available in traditional face-to-face teacher education. What lacks most of
all is the possibility to reflect cooperatively on shared teaching experiences by engaging in a focused inquiry
dialogue with lecturers and peers.
    The research project v-share is developing the methodological concept and the technical support for video-
based analysis and reflection on teaching experiences in (virtual) groups. The underlying assumption is that the
purposeful  observation and    the guided   sharing  of analyses   and   reflections on  video-recorded  lessons   foster
student teachers' capacity for reflection-on-action and ­ in turn ­ improve teaching abilities.
    In the first part of this paper we describe the pedagogical design of v-share considering the three main aspects
of the research project: using video, collaborative learning and moderation. In the second part follows an outline
of how v-share is used at the University of Education in Freiburg. Thereafter the technical realization of v-share
is described. Finally the use of v-share as a research tool is put forward.

                                                           
PEDAGOGICAL DESIGN

Using video
In the  research  project  v-share, video-recorded      lessons  are   used  for analysis,  annotation  and    reflection  on
teaching  practices.  In   comparison     with traditional  teacher    training   methods     which   make   use   of   direct
observations followed by face-to-face discussions, video analysis has its own challenges. Unless a 360-degree
video camera is available (cf. Roschelle, Pea & Trigg, 1990), video cameras can only capture a limited region of
the whole classroom. Therefore, events taking place outside this region cannot be observed during the video
analysis. This clipping can be minimized, however, by instructing the video grapher by means of a lesson plan
that describes the different parts of the lesson and the main actors. Furthermore, the knowledge of being filmed
can affect the behavior of pupils, teachers and student teachers (cf. Hiebert et al., 2003).
   Although it is very difficult to detect all important classroom events and interactions in real time, the analysis
of video-recorded lessons has several significant advantages in comparison with direct observation. For instance,
without  video   lecturers and  student   teachers have  to rely    exclusively   on written  notes   and   their memories.
Furthermore, video offers the possibility to view a lesson several times and to focus each time on different
aspects of a lesson. This allows observers to adopt multiple perspectives on a lesson (Van Es & Sherin, 2002).
Video-recorded lessons also make it possible for people to participate in the analysis and discussion who were
not able to participate in the lesson itself. According to Clark's (1996) theory on achieving common ground in
communication,    video-recorded    lessons  may   also  serve   as  a shared    external reference   point for   discussion.
Instead of verbally circumscribing the part of a lesson student teachers like to refer to, they can easily refer to it
by showing the corresponding video sequence.

Collaboration
In the project v-share, the analysis, annotation and reflection on video-recorded lessons take place in small
groups. Collaborative analysis of teaching practices results in different perspectives on one and the same lesson.
According to the socio-constructivist theory of learning (e.g., Doise & Mugny, 1984) student teachers learn from
different perspectives when they identify and resolve them, present alternative views as well as provide and ask
for explanations. Furthermore, the theory of cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957) states that the existence of
different interpretations among the members of a group induces cognitive dissonance in the individuals. This
encourages the individual student teachers to reduce dissonance by communicating with their peers and by
revising his/her point of view. Research of Stevens (1997) using the video-analysis-tool "Video Traces" supports
this theoretical background and underlines the importance of collaborative use of video.
   In   contrast to traditional   teacher training   seminars,   the   analysis, annotation   and  reflection  on  teaching
practices take place by making use of a web-based bulletin board. While in synchronous face-to-face settings
only one  student   teacher  can  contribute   to an analysis   at  a  time, a   bulletin board allows   for asynchronous
communication as well as for several contributions to an analysis at a time. This might be of special importance
during  phases in which ideas need to be generated and collected and cognitive blocking of contributions due to
waiting times are to be avoided (e.g., Diehl & Stroebe, 1991). In addition, Quinn et al. (1983) observed that
contributions to asynchronous discussions are more detailed and elaborate than contributions to synchronous
discussions due to the lower frequency of turn taking. Features such as the written elaboration of contributions,
the reversibility of contributions and the lack of time pressure during the formulation of contributions should
further increase  the quality  of contributions    (cf. Clark   &   Brennan,   1991). Furthermore,     cognitive   resources
bound to paraverbal and nonverbal behavior in face-to-face communication is freed and can be allocated to
writing contributions in computer-mediated communication (cf. Matheson & Zanna, 1988).

Moderation
As  described    above, computer-mediated      communication       has   several  advantages    compared    to  face-to-face
communication     but   also  poses   specific    difficulties.  The   missing    synchronicity   in   computer-mediated
communication can easily lead to a mixture of contributions, replies to contributions and the creation of new
threads and thus    produce  a  complex   discussion    structure   that makes   it difficult for the  student    teachers to
construct a coherent    view   of the discussion    and  to reach     shared understanding     (e.g., Levin  et   al., 1990).
Therefore, within the v-share project the lecturer assumes the role of a moderator. She or he assigns tasks to
certain student teachers, encourages student teachers to resolve and to integrate different perspectives, raises
stimulating questions when the discussion makes no further progress and provides summaries in order to foster
coherence building, for example.

USING V-SHARE FOR ANALYSIS AND REFLECTION
Since the summer term 2004 v-share is being used in teacher training seminars at the University of Education,
Freiburg. The seminar's methodological concept is based on the principles that favor the development of student

                                                            
teachers' reflection competence, as described above. During the seminar, various teaching methods are discussed
while taking student teachers' learning biographies into account. Student teachers devise criteria for specific
teaching methods such as the sequence of teaching activities and the role of the teacher as well as the role of the
learners. Based on the above-mentioned criteria student teachers develop lesson plans. They individually select a
reflection focus for their lesson, which might derive from teaching theory, methodological or personal matters.
Building on this, the lecturer and the student teachers jointly develop observation sheets, which help to focus the
observation of the lesson in the classroom as well as the analysis of the video-recorded lesson on the student
teacher's point of interest. The student teachers teach lessons individually or in pairs. Specific parts of the lesson
are recorded by means of a digital camera and are archived in a discussion board. Following the principle of
ownership this is done by the student teacher who taught the lesson in question. The selection is based on the
observation sheet that the student teachers developed in a further step and on personal relevance of specific
scenes for the student teacher. The participants are aided by a tutor who is an expert in using video-cutting
software and has the ability to encode video for internet-streaming. The different video sequences are time-
stamped in the video frame to make clear when a scene took place in the lesson. On the basis of theory-based
feedback, first the student teacher, then his/her fellow student teachers comment on selected video sequences.
Before the student teachers have to comment on the video sequences for a second time, the lecturer focuses the
reflection process on points of relevance. The reflective process concludes with a synopsis written by the student
teacher who taught the lesson in question.
          All steps  just  described     are supported by the internet-based v-share   workspace that  is used by the
student teachers throughout the term. At the beginning of the seminar all student teachers register at the v-share
workspace by entering their personal data (e.g. name, email-address, photo). Using name and password the
student teachers are then able to access the workspace. All content created by the student teachers is now
personalized with the data they entered in the registration process, which increases the degree of environmental
and personal presence (Sadovski & Stanny, 2002). The student teachers use v-share to publish the documents
they  are writing    throughout     the  seminar. This  includes the    writings on their  learning biographies, their
summaries of theoretical articles, the observation sheets and the lesson plans they develop and last but not least
the  synopses  they     write. v-share   supports the  self-creation of documents   in the workspace   as well as the
uploading of existing documents as attachments. The self-creation is aided by a rich text editor which enables the
student teachers to use different fonts, colors, listings, etc. The published content can also be re-edited by the
author ex post which increases reversibility.
    Analyzing and commenting on the recorded video-sequences are supported by a combination of a video-
player and the bulletin board. The video-player on the left hand side (see Figure 1) allows the student teachers to
play back the video-sequences and to select sub-sequences by choosing in- and outpoints. This enables the
student  teachers    to specify    parts of
the lesson which they would like to
comment on and link this comment
to    a     video-sequence.          After
submission,   the comment        is shown
on  the right  hand     side  of the  page
(see  Figure     1).    Every    comment
includes  a    button      to  show      the
corresponding video-sequence in the
video-player     which       enables     the
student teachers to refer back to the
situation in the corresponding lesson.
Furthermore,   student     teachers    can
reply to each other's comments and
quote   comments        of   their  fellow
student teachers.
    All  entries  are   organized     in  a
treediagram with comments as roots
and replies as branches of the trees.
The  board    offers the   possibility   ofexpandingcertaintreesofinterestFigure 1: The v-share workspace (www.v-share.de).
and collapsing all other trees. Every
message shows the author's name and photo in order to personalize the comment at first sight. Video and
bulletin board can be synchronized: In synchronization-mode the comments that belong to a video-subsequence
are highlighted automatically while playing the video. This aids participants of the seminar who want to gain a
first overview of the comments their fellow student teachers have already written. Furthermore, not only can the
comments be linked to the video-sequences but also parts of the synopsis that the student teachers write as a
conclusion of the reflection processes. This makes it easy for fellow student teachers to refer back to parts of the
lesson which the student teacher who taught the lesson mentioned in his/her synopsis. Finally, the integration of

                                                              
teaching theory, lesson planning, video-linked comments and synopsis in one integrated workspace enables
"third-party-students" to "replay" the process.
  A main goal in future developments of v-share will be the realization of easy-to-use functionalities to link all
content elements available. For instance, statements in comments could be verified by linking them to sentences
in a theory article or the synopsis may be linked to comments written by fellow student teachers. This should
encourage  the student teachers to verify   their    propositions and   reduce effects described  in the messaging
threshold approach (Reid et al., 1996).

TECHNICAL REALIZATION
v-share is integrated as a self-programmed extension in the open source application framework Typo3 (see
www.typo3.org). Typo3 allows the creation of complex websites based on HTML-Templates. The pages can
then be filled with different content elements such as texts and pictures without the need for HTML or other
programming skills. Typo3 is based on the open source database MySQL and the popular scripting language
PHP which simplifies the development of the v-share workspace. The Typo3 framework provides a pre-built
administration environment (the backend) for content creation and distribution. Like any other content element
that is provided by Typo3, the v-share bulletin board can be included on any page. Installation and configuration
of the v-share extension is completely handled by the backend which makes it easy for lecturers to use a v-share
workspace. By default, Typo3 already supports user and group authorization and authentication methods which
can easily be used in self-programmed extensions like the v-share workspace. Creation of groups and mapping of
users to groups can be done in the backend, too. There is a wide range of already developed extensions that can
be seamlessly integrated in any Typo3-based web page available for use in the v-share workspace, such as tools
for synchronous and asynchronous communication or for workspace awareness, for example.
  The heart of the v-share workspace is the video-bulletin-board combination. It makes use of different web-
technologies: JavaScript reads out the actual time stamp of the video-playhead when the user selects the in- and
outpoint of the sequence he/she wants to comment on. When submitting the comment, the subject, the text, the
attached files, user information and the corresponding in- and outpoint are passed to the MySQL database using
PHP as a scripting language. This data is retrieved from the database when displaying the bulletin board.
  The configuration possibilities include selection of the video-file that is used in the board, specification of
user-groups with the rights to write, declaration of the moderator of the board who can edit, move and delete any
post and the possibility to allow for replies. For instance, the lesson plan also relies on the v-share board file-
upload functionality without inheriting the reply-function. For research purposes, the use of video is adjustable,
so the board can be used with or without video.
  The recorded video-sequences are coded in the RealPlayer-format for delivery over the web. Real is one of
the most popular media codes and players are freely available for all major operating systems. The surestream
technology provided by Real allows the delivery of videos that suit the bandwidth of the user. When detecting a
high-bandwidth connection like DSL or direct connection in universities the server automatically delivers high-
quality video while concurrently giving the student teachers the chance to show low-quality video over their
low-bandwidth modem or ISDN connection at home. To distribute surestream-videos, the Helix DNA server is
mandatory. It is available under open source license. RealPlayer also supports the Synchronized Multimedia
Integration Language (SMIL). SMIL offers possibilities to combine audio, video, text and graphics in real time
and to control dynamic web pages. In the current version of the v-share workspace SMIL is used for highlighting
corresponding comments while playing the video in synchronization-mode. In future releases, SMIL might be
used to show a combination of video and corresponding comments in one integrated view.

V-SHARE AS A TOOL FOR EMPIRICAL RESEARCH
Making use of v-share as a research tool, we are currently following three lines of research. In the first line of
research, we analytically develop and   empirically    test criteria which allow us to  describe and  assess student
teachers' reflections on teaching experiences. On the one hand, these criteria indicate how well the student teachers
observe their own behavior and the pupils' reactions and how well they succeed in integrating theoretical, personal
and contextual perspectives. On the other hand they illuminate to which extent the conclusions drawn by the student
teachers are related to their reflection process.
  On the basis of the developed criteria, in the second line of research we empirically compare different
arrangements of using v-share. As a first step, we are currently running a three-term long field study (summer
term 2004, winter term 2004/2005, and summer term 2005) at the University of Education, Freiburg. In this field
study, v-share is employed in university courses on developing teaching practices. The three main goals of the
field study are (1) to gather experience with v-share in everyday teaching, (2) based on the lecturers' as well as
the student teachers' experiences, to adjust v-share's design and (3) to enable the development and testing of the
criteria mentioned above. In a second step, more controlled quasi-experimental studies will be conducted in
order to empirically test various assumptions underlying the design and use of v-share. For example, it will be
tested whether videos taken during teaching practices support student teachers' reflection and communication

                                                           
processes to  the  assumed  degree.   Furthermore, as is  well-known   from   research on     computer-supported
collaborative learning, if computer-mediated reflection and communication is to be successful, it needs various
forms of support (e.g., Hron, Hesse, Cress, & Giovis, 2000). This is especially true if the lecturers as well as the
student teachers are not used to collaborating in a distributed setting. As v-share has been designed in such a way
that it allows for the structuring of collaboration in different ways, it will be utilized to empirically compare the
effects of different collaboration structures on the reflection and communication processes.
  In the third line of research, v-share will not only be used to support reflections on teaching practices made
within a small group of student teachers. Rather, v-share will be extended with a database accessible through the
internet that consists of a library of ­ selected and rather short ­ teaching episodes classified according to
specific pedagogical criteria (cf. Derry, Seymour, Lee & Siegel, in press). With respect to such a database, v-
share serves two different purposes. Firstly, it provides a tool for demonstrating and collaboratively discussing
teaching  episodes in courses  and seminars  on  teacher training. Secondly, by   importing     videos of teaching
experiences taken during new teaching practices into v-share, pedagogically interesting video sequences might
be suggested for closer review and ­ if approved ­ be classified and entered into the database.

REFERENCES
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H. & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D.
      Teasley   (Eds.), Perspectives  on  socially shared  cognition   (pp. 127-149).  Washington:      American
      Psychological Association.
Derry, S. J., Seymour, J., Lee, J. & Siegel, M. (in press). From ambitious vision to partially satisfying reality: An
      evolving sociotechnical design supporting community and collaborative learning in teacher education. In
      S. Barab, R. Kling & J. Gray (Eds.), Designing virtual communities in the service of learning. New York,
      MA: Cambridge University Press.
Dewey, J. (1938/1986). Logic: The Theory of Inquiry. In J. A. Boydston (Ed.), John Dewey: The Later Works,
      1925 ­ 1953. Volume 12 (pp. 1 ­ 527). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Diehl, M. & Stroebe, W. (1991). Productivity loss in idea generating groups: Tracking down the blocking effect.
      Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 392-403.
Doise, W. & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Hiebert, J., Gallimore, R., Garnier, H.. Bogard Givvin, K., Hollingsworth, H., Jacobs, J., Miu-Ying Chui, A.,
      Wearne, D., Smith, M., Kersting, N., Manaster, A., Tseng, E., Etterbeek, W., Manaster, C., Gonzales, P.
      & Stigler, J. (2003). Teaching Mathematics in Seven Countries ­ Results From the TIMSS 1999 Video
      Study, Washington: National Center for Education Statistics.
Hovelynck,   J. (2000). Recognising   and Exploring   Action  Theories.   A Reflection-in-Action    Approach       to
      Facilitating Experiential Learning. Journal of Adventure Education and Outdoor Learning, 1(1), 7 ­ 20.
Hron, A., Hesse, F., Cress, U. & Giovis, C. (2000). Implicit and explicit dialogue structuring in virtual learning
         groups. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 70, 53-64.
Kemmis, S. (1985). Action Research and the Politics of Reflection. In D. Boud, R. Keough & D. Walker (Eds.),
      Reflection: Turning Experience into Learning. London: Kogan Page.
Levin, J. A., Kim, H & Riel, M. M. (1990). Analyzing instructional interactions on electronic message networks.
      In Harasim, L. M. (Ed.), Online education (pp. 185-213). New York: Praeger Publishers.
Matheson, K. & Zanna, M. P. (1988). The impact of computer-mediated communication on self-awareness.
      Computers in Human Behavior, 4, 221-233.
Quinn, C. N., Mehan, H., Levin, J. A. & Black, S. D. (1983). Real education in non-real time: The use of
      electronic message systems for instruction. Instruction Science, 11, 313-327.
Reid, F.  J. M.,  Malinek, V., Stott, C.  J. T., &  Evans, J. S.   B.  T. (1996). The  messaging       threshold   in
      computermediated communication. Ergonomics, 38, 1017-1037.
Roschelle, J., Pea, R. D. & Trigg, R. (1990). VideoNoter: A tool for exploratory video analysis (Technical
      Report No. 17.). Palo Alto, CA: Institute for Research on Learning.
Sadowski, W. & Stanney, K. M. (2002). Presence in virtual environments. In K. M. Stanney (Ed.), Handbook of
      virtual environments: Design, implementation and applications (pp. 791-806). Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence
      Erlbaum Associates.
Schön, D. (1987). Educating the Reflective Practitioner. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Stevens, R. (1997). Divisions of labor in computer-assisted design: A Comparison of cases from work and
      school. Proceedings of The Second International Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative
      Learning. University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Van Es, E. & Sherin, M. (2002). Learning to Notice: Scaffolding New Teachers' Interpretations of Classroom
      Interactions. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 10, 571-596.

                                                       
