               CSCL - The Next Ten Years ­ A View from Europe

      Chris Jones                    Lone Dirckinck-Holmfeld                      Berner Lindtröm
 Department of Educational                       Department of                Department of Education,
           Research                              Communication,                   Göteborg University,
   Lancaster University,                Aalborg University,                            Sweden
     United Kingdom                                Denmark                    berner.lindstrom@ped.gu.se
 c.r.jones@lancaster.ac.uk                lone@hum.aau.dk

     Abstract. This    paper reviews some foundational     issues that affect the progress of CSCL.   In
     particular we examine the terms technology, affordance and infrastructure and propose a relational
     approach to their use in CSCL. Following a consideration of networks, space and trust we propose
     an indirect approach to design in CSCL. The paper is based on the outcomes of two European
     networks, E-QUEL a network on e-quality in e-learning and Kaleidoscope, a European Union
     Framework 6 Network of Excellence and the `Conditions of productive learning in networked
     learning environments' project in particular. This paper does not aim to be comprehensive or
     summative rather it provides a view of current issues and perspectives from a European point of
     view.

     Keywords: CSCL, networked learning, ethics , affordance, design.

INTRODUCTION
Computer Supported Collaborative Learning is an emerging field of research and interest still struggling within
itself and arguing over its very name (Koschmann, 1996, 2001,Strijbos, Kirschner and Martens 2004). However,
seen from a sociology of knowledge perspective CSCL is a scientific field and a scientific community with
conferences, journals and educational programs. Due to the very nature of the object of research: Computer
Supported Collaborative Learning, it's an interdisciplinary field drawing on various disciplines such as learning,
anthropology, psychology, communication, sociology, cognitive science, media and informatics.

  We argue that despite the variations in topic and method what knits the field together and what makes it
special is the integration of the four key concepts: computer, supported, collaborative, and learning. However,
in some of the recent work reflecting on CSCL there is a questioning of the necessity for integrating technology
into CSCL:
            "CSCL research has the advantage of studying learning in settings in which learning
            is observably and accountably embedded in collaborative activity. Our concern,
            therefore, is with the unfolding process of meaning-making within these settings,
            not so-called "learning outcomes". It is in this way that CSCL research represents a
            distinctive paradigm within IT. By this standard, a study that attempted to explicate
            how learners jointly accomplished some form of new learning would be a case of
            CSCL research, even if they were working in a setting that did not involve
            technological augmentation. On the other hand, a study that measured the effects of
            introducing some sort of CSCL application on learning (defined in traditional ways)
            would not". (Koschmann 2001 p 19).
Strijbos, Kirschner and Martens (2004 p1, p 246) make a somewhat different point, but they also take a non-
technological stance. For these authors the emphasis in CSCL is on learning and the weakness in CSCL is in
learning and educational design. Unlike Koschmann we think it is necessary and challenging to keep technology
within our focus. Unlike Strijbos et al we see the technological aspect deeply integrated in a socio-cultural
theoretical approach to the understanding of collaborative learning. The technology has to be taken seriously
because this is precisely what makes this research area special. In our opinion it is where CSCL has something
profound to contribute to the field of learning.

  Much of the research that has taken place within CSCL has focused on the micro level of collaborative
learning, on the collaborative learning in single groups. Supplementing these approaches, we would like to
argue for more focus on the meso-level of collaborative learning:

                                                         
x   On how to design for collaborative learning in organisations, school settings, and in networked learning
    environments
x   On what the conditions are for collaborative learning in these settings
x   On how the technology and infrastructure affords, and mediates the learning taking place
In this way we would like to throw light on the field of CSCL from the lenses of educational research, human
centred informatics and social sciences. In doing so:
               "One needs, first of all, the right vocabulary for thinking about the phenomena that
               occur on levels of analysis that we are not familiar with discussing. We need
               appropriate conceptual resources and analytic perspectives. This is what is meant
               here by a ´theory´" (Stahl, forthcoming p. 5).

    In the following, we are not providing a theory, however in line with Stahl, we would like to contribute to
the process    of  establishing a meaningful    conceptual   framework   for the   understanding   of conditions   for
productive   learning in networked   learning   environments.    To  understand  the  new  emerging     practices and
contribute  to the  productive   development  of  them,    we must  develop  conceptual   tools. This   is even more
necessary because of the interdisciplinary nature of the field. Integrating concepts from different disciplines
involves a cost in terms of the intellectual work necessary to ensure that the historically embedded meaning
travels with the concepts, and that the concepts are rethought and integrated in the perspective of the new
practices and the insights from neighbouring disciplines. The general theoretical framework adopted in this
work   can  be described as  socio-cultural  in a broad    sense and it draws   on the works    of Vygotsky   (1978),
Engestrøm (1987), Lave & Wenger (1991), Wenger (1998), Giddens (1984), Castells (1996/2000), and Dewey
(1916). Because these traditions are in some ways contradictory, with regards to epistemology and methodology,
there has to be profound work and discussion., both on ways to solve these contradictions and if it's productive
to try to solve them.

    In the following sections we will be dealing with some of the key theoretical concepts which have emerged
from the work in two European projects and networks, E ­ QUEL, (http://www.equel.net/), and Kaleidoscope, a
European Union Network of Excellence (http://www-kaleidoscope.imag.fr). We will focus on two sets of issues:
firstly, technology, affordances and infrastructure and secondly on networks, space and ethics. These have
emerged in our work as crucial to understanding the conditions for productive learning in networked learning
environments.

TECHNOLOGY, AFFORDANCES AND INSTITUTIONS
We argue that the concept of technology and the relation between the design of technology and the use of
technology is crucial within the CSCL community.        Vygotsky's socio-cultural approach is deeply accepted and
even taken for granted in the CSCL community (Vygotsky 1978, Cole 1996, Kaptelinin, Danielsson and Hedestig
2004).  Both   the material and   symbolic  properties  of  tools  are seen  as having  important   implications   for
understanding how internal processes come into existence and operate (Fjuk, and Berge 2004).               In order to
understand these processes, Fjuk and Berge argue, that analysis and design must consider the individual learner
in  her/his concrete  situation and the mediational     means  employed.   A  similar  position  on the  necessity of
studying practice is elaborated by Orlikowski (2000). Orlikowski suggests making an analytical distinction
between the use of technology, what people actually do with technology, and its artifactual character, the bundle
of material and symbolic properties packaged in some socially recognizable form (ibid. p. 408). Through a
theoretical and empirical analysis she demonstrates that the same artifact used in different institutional contexts
and by different actors, enacts very different actions.

    Theoretically, these different processes are explained by Orlikowski using structuration theory (Giddens,
1984), and she makes a distinction between two discrete approaches (op.cit pp. 405):
a)  which posits technology as embodying structures (built in by designers during technological development),
    which are then appropriated by users during their use of the technology
b)  a  practice-oriented  understanding     where structures   are  emergent.   Structures grow     out of  recursive
    interactions between people technologies and social action in which it's not the properties of the technology
    per se which structure the practice. Rather it is through a recurrent and situated practice over time, a process
    of enactment, that people constitute and reconstitute a structure of technology use. (Orlikowski op. cit. p.
    410).

    The practice-oriented   structurational approach    to technology  (b) suggests  that the technology    embodies
particular symbolic and material properties, but the technology in itself is not a structure, which determines the

                                                           
use and the users. Rather the opposite, the structure ­ understood as resources and rules - is instantiated and
emerges through the users' responses and enactment in relation to the technological artifact. However we would
go on to argue that Orlikowski may present too strong a contrast between the approaches summarized above in
a) and b). Seen from the practice of design, technologies do indeed embody features and properties and they also
carry meaning  having    been designed   with  certain purposes   in mind,  embedding     certain understandings   of
communication,   interaction  and  collaboration.    Furthermore   as Stahl  (2005,  forthcoming)    formulates  the
question, though the designs carry meaning, and the tools have been designed with certain purposes in mind,
how the users respond to or enact the technology cannot be predicted and it is in and through practice that the
structural features will emerge.

  Another    way to deal  with   this question is to examine   how    we conceptualize    technology. In her paper,
Orlikowski counter poses technology thought of as:
   a)   "an identifiable, relatively durable entity, a physically, economically, politically, and socially organized
        phenomenon in space-time" ­ technological artifact
   b)   " a   repeatedly experienced,   personally ordered    and edited version  of the  technological  artifact" ­
        technology in use (op. cit p408)
She makes it clear that this distinction is analytic rather than ontological in character but our work leads us to
question the usefulness of this distinction in relation to certain kinds of technology. In particular we wonder
whether the Web or Internet can usefully be thought of as technological artifacts. We would support the general
position that Orlikowski seeks to maintain but we are concerned that conceptions that apply the metaphor of
artifact to large, complex and composite forms such as the Web and Internet are in danger of reifying a deeply
reflexive phenomenon. In important ways the Web and Internet do not fully conform to Orlikowski's criteria.
Though  relatively durable   they  are  constantly in  flux,  though  organized   they show   an   uncommon     self-
organizational capacity. We suggest that the idea of technology and in particular technological artifact is an area
ripe for further CSCL research, especially in relation to large scale and composite technological forms such as
the Web and Internet.

Affordance
The concept of affordance has been central to thinking about technology within the CSCL tradition and beyond.
It has recently been applied to technology in the sense that:
              "technologies possess different affordances, and these affordances constrain the
              ways that they can possibly be' written' or' read'." (Hutchby 2001 p447)
Affordance used in this way allows for the possibility of technologies having effects and the idea that particular
technologies can constrain users in definite ways. The idea has its origins in the work of Gibson (1977) who was
interested in the psychology of perception. Affordances in Gibson's view varied in relation to the user but they
were not freely variable, the affordances of a rock differed from those of a stream, even though different animals
might see the affordances of each differently. The Gibsonain view is strongly relational and differs in significant
ways from the later application of the idea of affordance by Norman (1990) and Gaver (1996). These authors
have an essentialist and dualist approach in which technologies possess affordances and users perceive them. All
three authors have  recently  been    reviewed by  Kirschner,  Strijbos  and Martens   (2004) who     emphasize  the
distinction added by Norman between an affordance as a property possessed by an entity and an affordance as it
is perceived. Kirschner, Strijbos and Martens (2004) suggest that educational researchers and designers are not
dealing with the affordances of technologies themselves; instead they are dealing with the perceptible (Gaver
1996) or the perceived (Norman 1990).

  Kirschner,  Strijbos   and  Martens   (2004)  propose  a six-stage  model   for a  design  framework    based  on
affordances.  This  sophisticated  and   detailed  model   categorizes   affordances   as educational,   social and
technological. They define educational affordances as "those characteristics of an artifact that determine if and
how a particular learning behavior could be enacted within a given context." (op.cit p14). Social affordance is
defined as "properties of a CSCL environment that act as social-contextual facilitators relevant for the learner's
social interaction." (op.cit p15). Technological affordances, after Norman (1990) are "perceived and actual
properties of a thing, primarily those fundamental properties that determine how the thing could possibly be
used." (op.cit p16). All three definitions rely upon an essential reading of affordance, on the properties and
characteristics of CSCL environments, artifacts and things, even if the affordance relies on being perceived.

  The view of affordance that we have begun to consider and would propose to the CSCL community is one
that returns to a Gibsonian view and treats affordance as a relational property. In this way of thinking about
affordances properties exist in relationships between artifacts and active agents, which would include animate
actors and following Callon and Latour inanimate actants. This view is non-essentialist, non-dualist and does not

                                                        
rely on a strong notion of perception. Affordances in this view could be discerned in a relationship between
different elements in a setting whether or not the potential user of an affordance perceives the affordance.

  In educational settings we are likely to be concerned with reflexive social relationships. A relational view of
affordance would suggest that we could analytically discern features of the setting apart from the perceptions of
particular groups of users. Any actual group of users would have varied understandings and draw out different
meanings from the setting but designers can only have direct influence over those abstract elements, that may
become affordances in the relationship between the designed setting and the participants. An example of such
relational thinking can be found in Kreijens and Kirschner (2004). They point to the affordance of proximity in
encouraging face-to-face interaction and they point to the need for teleproximity in computer networks. The
affordances of both proximity and teleproximity rely on the relationship between participants rather than being a
feature of any particular participant or a feature of the digital or real environment.

Infrastructure and institutions
Implementation of CSCL in higher education is a complex task involving management, administration and ICT
support as well as teachers and learners. Research in CSCL recognises that influences on practice arise from an
organizational as well as a pedagogical perspective (Collis and Moonen 2001; Dirckinck-Holmfeld and Fibiger
2002). Nyvang and Bygholm (2004) draw on the works of Star and Ruhleder (1996). They suggest that we
interpret ICT in use as infrastructures that both shape and are shaped by practice and go on to propose that we
understand infrastructure as a relational concept. "Thus we ask, when ­ not what ­ is an infrastructure" (Star &
Ruhleder 1996, p. 113). This understanding of infrastructure has strong resonance with the earlier accounts of
technology and affordance and we would suggest that the infrastructure for CSCL is a location in which these
general issues find focus for research.

  In a recent case study of a Masters level program Jones (2004a) argues that obtaining a single login to enable
all students on a distance taught program access to digital resources is a multi-level problem. The required
digital resources are enmeshed in a legal framework of ownership concerned with property rights. Access to the
materials and resources available for teaching and learning is not a simple matter as some of the materials are
ephemeral with links moving or disappearing on a regular basis. Secure resources have to be embedded in an
institutional and organizational infrastructure that takes on some of the roles, such as preservation, that libraries
have hitherto fulfilled. This institutional support may be external to the university and even the educational
sector, as with government, NGO and corporate supplied materials. When resources become organizationally
supported they often disappear from the Web's open access behind password protection. The creation of a single
log-on authentication for staff and students and a public `commons' for educational materials is a political, legal
and social process well beyond the control of single educational program.

  We have argued that technology, affordance and infrastructure are terms that the CSCL community may
need to revisit. We have suggested that all three may be better understood using a relational perspective. We
have also set out a number of ways in which we think this approach may lead to new research directions. The
idea of technology and in particular the idea of technological artifact is an area ripe for further CSCL research as
we argue technology and the affordances that may emerge in its use are factors that require investigation at a
more macro level than has been usual in CSCL.

CONDITIONS FOR PRODUCTIVE LEARNING
Castells (2000) writes about  inclusion/exclusion   in networks,  and the architecture     of relationships between
networks, enacted by information technologies, which configure the dominant processes and functions in our
societies. Castells describes the network society as one of `networked individualism' (Castells 2001p129 ff). On
the one hand the new economy is organized around global networks of capital, management, and information,
whose access to technological know-how is at the roots of productivity and competitiveness. On the other hand
he claims that the work process is increasingly individualized:
              "Labour is disaggregated in its performance, and reintegrated in its outcome
             through a multiplicity of interconnected tasks in different sites, ushering in a new
             division of labour based on the attributes/capacities of each worker rather than the
             organization of the task" (ibid. 502).
This general trend raises fundamental questions about the relationship between the networked society and the
organization of learning environments within formal education. We believe it is a significant question for CSCL
whether  the designs   of networked     learning environments   have  to reflect the     trend towards `networked

                                                        
individualism'   or  whether CSCL    may  serve as   a  counter   practice offering  opportunities  for   developing
collaborative dependencies in networked learning environments.

    The idea of networked learning has developed some force within European research, expressed in a number
of publications and a series of international conferences. One definition of network learning from this tradition
is that:
               Networked learning is learning in which information and communication
               technology (C&IT) is used to promote connections: between one learner and other
               learners, between learners and tutors; between a learning community and its
               learning resources (Jones 2004 a p. 1).
The central term in this definition is connections. This definition takes a relational stance in which learning takes
place in relation to others and also in relation to learning resources. Networked learning differs here from CSCL
and Communities of Practice in that it does not privilege relationships such as cooperation and collaboration or
the close  relations of community.   Unlike  CSCL   and  Communities    of  Practice   this definition of networked
learning draws particular attention to the place of learning resources and peer learners in relational terms (For
further elaboration of this view see Jones 2004, Jones 2004 b and Jones and Esnault 2004).

    European research and practice has been heavily influenced by Communities of Practice thinking and other
learning environments for professionals have built more explicitly on ideas of communities of practice and the
pedagogical principles of collaborative learning. For instance in the form of problem and project based learning,
encouraging and expecting students to work together (See for example Dirckinck-Holmfeld, 2002, Fjuk and
Dirckinck-Holmfeld, 1997). The concept of communities of practice is most commonly associated with Wenger
(1998). For Wenger, networks are not necessarily in opposition to the ideas of communities of practice. Wenger
suggests that a network with strong ties resembles a community.
               "Communities of practice could in fact be viewed as nodes of "strong ties" in
               interpersonal networks" (1998 p. 283)
However, he also stresses the difference in purpose:
               "...but again the emphasis is different. What is of interest for me is not so much the
               nature of interpersonal relationships through which information flows as the nature
               of what is shared and learned and becomes a source of cohesion ­ that is, the
               structure and content of practice" (ibid p. 283).
In other words, Wenger is not only concerned with the flow of information between nodes, he also emphasizes
the differences in what flows across the network. Communities of practice are characterized by three related
structural properties, that of a shared enterprise, mutual engagement, and a shared repertoire (Wenger 1998 p. 72
ff), while networks are characterized as interconnected nodes (Castells 1996/2000) or the connections between
learners, learners and tutors, and between a learning community and its resources (Jones, 2004 a p.1) As such
networked     learning is concerned  with   establishing  connections,     and relationships    whereas   a learning
environment based on communities of practice is concerned with the establishment of a shared practice.

    In   some learning  environments this is  dealt with  as  a   combination  of  the networked   perspective  and
community of practice, in the sense that the individual learner is supported in relating learning to his / her work
practices, which are seen as the primary community of practice (Jones 2004 a). However in other learning
environments, different means are used such as team based project work in order to design for, and establish true
interdependencies and mutual engagement between participants (Dirckinck-Holmfeld, Sorensen, et al. 2004).

    The   notion of  networked  learning  and its   practical application  to  the design    of networked   learning
environments resonates strongly with a relational approach and raises several questions:
x   Should researchers in CSCL serve as critical opponents to the overall trends in the networked society and
    stand up against "networked individualism", or should the design of CSCL and education reflect these
    trends?
x   Which models, networked models or community of practice models, are more productive with respect to the
    learning of the individual participant and under what conditions? Is it, for example, more productive for
    busy professionals to be organized through a pedagogical model based on relatively weak ties or is it more
    productive to be organized in a pedagogical model facilitating the development of strong ties?

Space and place in networked environments
Several authors have in recent years pointed to the need to distinguish between space and place in computer
networked environments (see for example Goodyear et al 2001, Jamieson et al 2000, Ryberg and Ponti 2004).
Goodyear et al (2001 Part 8) claim that that we should not try to design the elements that are most closely

                                                         
involved  in learning  itself. They argue    that it is appropriate to  try to design learning  spaces  (the physical
learning environment, including all the artifacts which embody `content') but they point out that we should
expect students to customize these designed spaces to make their own `local habitations' or `nests' (Nardi &
O'Day, 1999; Crook, 2001). More generally they argue for a distinction to be made between space, understood
as a relatively stable and potentially designed environment and place, understood as contingent and locally
inhabited.

  The    distinction between    space and place    is connected  in significant  ways  to  the earlier  discussions of
technology, affordance and networks. Participants in a computer network are simultaneously situated at a real
point in time and space and displaced from that in a space configured through the network. Ryberg and Ponti
(2004) are interested in the development of social context in networked environments. They comment on Lash
(2001) who argues that networks are non-places.
              "Technological forms of life are disembedded, they are somehow `lifted out'. As
              lifted out, they take on increasingly less and less the characteristic of any particular
              place, and can be anyplace or indeed no place.... The Internet is a generic space. It
              is no particular space. Indeed, networks are themselves by definition lifted-out
              spaces." Lash (2001 p113)
The question Ryberg and Ponti ask is:
              "If networks are non-places, with no context at all, how can we create a social
              context to support interaction and sociability?" Ryberg and Ponti (2004 p2)

  The distinction between space and place is fundamentally rooted in the shift toward networked environments
and is one example of a set of problems in which designers only have an indirect control over the intended
outcomes of their design. It is also related to the notion of space as produced through interactions between
individuals and institutions, rather than thinking of space as simply given. Overall we argue that the notion of
space and place is a problem area that could have a major significance for CSCL and practical implications in
terms of design.

Ethical Dimensions of CSCL
Collaboration   is not simply   a technical, pedagogic    or pragmatic  concern.  Collaboration  includes  an ethical
dimension both in terms of the rationale for its use and in terms of the conditions for its success. The question,
`why collaborate?'     cannot  simply  be answered      by   measures   of  success such  as   learning outcomes    or
considerations of alignment with economic goals. Collaboration has an ethical dimension that speaks to the
ways in which we choose to structure our social lives. Too often collaboration is reduced to narrow concerns
that ignore this ethical choice. This can lead to those involved in a CSCL environment not appreciating the
rationale behind activity and comparing it unfavorably with individualized and transmissive methods that flow
from different ethical positions.

  In terms of the considerations for the successful use of CSCL the question of trust is perhaps central. Trust
has been identified as an ethical question at the heart of communication:
              "Regardless of how varied the communication between persons may be, it always
              involves the risk of one person daring to lay him or herself open to the other in the
              hope of a response. This is the essence of communication and it is the fundamental
              phenomenon of ethical life."(Løgstrup, 1997, p. 17).
Rasmussen (2004) has argued from this position that this:
              " is not a question of a concept of trust which stands or falls on whether or not it is
              honoured. It is a matter of the simple form of trust expressed by the fact that we
              cannot avoid surrendering to each other." (Rasmussen 2004 p4)
Furthermore Rasmussen argues that this ethical demand can only be honored spontaneously. As soon as we
begin to think about whether we are really acting as we ought, the focus moves away from acting exclusively in
relation to the other  person  and  towards  ourselves.    This ethical requirement   for spontaneity  can come into
conflict with the demand for self-reflection. In educational terms we often require our students to be critically
reflective in relation to their own work and the work of others. The question then arises as to how this might
affect trust in CSCL environments. In so far as we require actions which are engaged in as a duty these actions
may loose an element that is central to trust and as a consequence to collaboration. If free communication relies
upon spontaneous action and the ability to lay oneself open to others how far does the planful nature of many
CSCL environments and the pedagogic requirement for reflection affect collaboration and communication, and
how might we design CSCL environments to reflect this ethical concern?

                                                           
  A second area of ethical issues affecting the conditions for productive learning arises around surveillance
and control.  Writers from   a Foucauldian   tradition point to CSCL    environments    as environments  in which
participants are  aware that   their actions are under   surveillance (see for example     Land and  Bayne  2002,
Rasmussen 2004). Surveillance comes from other participants in an equal power situation and often from others
who are in a position of actual or potential control. Land and Bayne point out that for the tutor as constituted in
the discourse and practices of computer mediated environments they are both `seers' of their students and `seen'
by their managers in an increasing process of accountability in education. This would suggest that participants
would generally conduct themselves in accordance with the perceived norms of the environment and attempt to
conceal actions that step outside of the accepted norms.

  An example of how issues of trust impact on learning in networked environments can be found in the work
done by the moderator in networked learning environments. Salmon (2000) argues that successful learning is the
result of networking, but it is crucial that networking occur within a safe space. Part of the moderator's role,
according to Salmon, is the creation of this safe space, and addressing any concerns or fears that the learners
may have. Trust is a central element in the provision of both a safe environment for learners and the conditions
for communication and collaboration. An interesting research question for CSCL might be how the condition of
trust affects different types of relationship. It is by no means obvious that the weak links identified in network
analysis are any less dependant upon trust, indeed the maintenance of weak links may require a high degree of
trust just as much as the strong links of community and collaboration require high degrees of trust.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVES FOR CSCL
Throughout this paper we have tried to indicate where we believe our reflections point us in terms of future
topics and issues for CSCL research. Overall we have argued for a relational approach to our understanding of
technology, affordances and infrastructure and we wonder if a network metaphor and an ethical dimension to
our approach may be necessary. We indicated that the question of how technologies simultaneously embed
constraining features, and express relatively fixed properties, including design intentions and are also brought
into use contingently in ways related to and reconfigured by users with differing intentions in a variety of
settings, draws us towards what we describe as a relational approach to technology and its affordances and an
indirect notion of design. Technology within the CSCL tradition has had a relatively narrow focus that places in
the background issues concerning the politics, policies, institutions and infrastructures in which the processes of
CSCL take place. We would argue for a greater focus on what we call the meso-level of collaborative learning.
We would include in this the way in which many of the aspects of the settings in which CSCL is enacted are
beyond the direct control of the individuals and groups involved. We suggest that the concept of technology
itself and in particular the use of the term technological artifact is an area that requires further attention in CSCL
research and we point in particular to the Web and Internet as large scale and composite technological forms
through and in relation to which CSCL now takes place. The past ten years have seen CSCL move on from an
environment in which the Internet was a minority concern and the Web only an emerging form to a time when
the Internet is becoming ubiquitous and the Web a basic platform.

  Our research points us to a number of ethical questions related to our approach to technology. To how the
condition of trust affects different types of relationship, including the weak links identified in network analysis
and the strong links of community and collaboration. We wonder whether the designs of networked learning
environments have to reflect the trend towards `networked individualism' or whether CSCL researchers might
choose to act as a counter practice by offering opportunities for the development of collaborative practices. We
ask whether CSCL should privilege certain models of learning, for example networked learning or communities
of practice, and whether such models are more productive with respect to learning and under what conditions
that might occur. We point to the example of continuing professional development for busy professionals and
wonder if organization using a pedagogical model based on relatively weak ties or one based on the strong ties
in a community of practice is more appropriate. We argue that these are choices that need to be made on the
basis of CSCL research, which can provide good criteria for selection.

  The approach to technology outlined above points to the need for what we label indirect design so that we
can design for learning. The relational view we have of technology and its affordances suggests that designers
have limited direct control over how their designs are enacted. How learners respond to, understand and enact in
relation to any design is a complex, structuration process which has to be studied in practice. Examples of such
studies have been given throughout this paper and in our review of the case studies and theoretical work we had
undertaken it became clear that there was an underlying common theme in relation to design. In order to plan
and design   for learning in CSCL     environments some   degree of   predictability of response to  the design is
required. Our research showed how contingent factors necessarily reduced design capacity in this critical regard.

                                                         
We focused    on exactly  what   we understood   to be  available in terms   of design  as predictable aspects  for
planning. We   suggest that  designers   within CSCL    need to concentrate   less  on the material  aspects of the
designed artifact and more on the relationships that surround the enactment of the design and the mobilization of
technologies and artifacts in that enactment. This approach might also suggest a flexible approach to design in
which designed artifacts are thought of as shells, plastic forms that incline users to some uses in particular but
are available to be taken up in a variety of ways and for which the enactment of preferred forms depends upon
the relationships developed in relation to the design.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper was written as an outcome of a project "The conditions for productive learning in networked learning
environments"  funded    as part of  the EU  Framework     6 Network     of Excellence  Kaleidoscope.  It includes
elements derived from an earlier EU network E-QUEL

REFERENCES
Brown, J. S., and Duguid, P. (2000), The Social Life of Information. Boston MA: Harvard Business School
       Press.

Castells, M. (2000). The Rise of the Network Society. (2nd edition) Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers.

Castells, M. (2001). The Internet Galaxy: Reflections on the Internet, business, and Society. Oxford: Oxford
       University Press.

Cole, M. (1996). Cultural    Psychology: A Once and a Future Discipline. Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press.

Collis, B. and J. Moonen (2001). Flexible learning in a digital world: experiences and expectations. London,
       Kogan Page.

Crook, C.  (2001)  The    Campus    Experience  of  Networked   Learning.   In  C., Steeples and Jones,   C.  (Eds)
       Networked Learning: Perspectives and Issues. London: Springer.

Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L. (2002). Designing Virtual Learning Environments Based on Problem Oriented Project
       Pedagogy. In L. Dirckinck-Holmfeld    and B.    Fibiger. Learning in Virtual Environments Frederiksberg C,
       Samfundslitteratur Press.

Dirckinck-Holmfeld,    L.   and  B. Fibiger, Eds.   (2002).  Learning    in  virtual   environments. Fredriksberg,
       Samfundslitteratur

Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L., B. Lindström, et al., Eds. (2004). Conditions for Productive Learning in Networked
       Learning    Environments.      Aalborg,     Aalborg    University     /Kaleidoscope.    Retreived      from:
       www.ell.aau.dk/kaleidoscope/publications/    28th February 2005.

Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L., E. K. Sorensen, et al. (2004). A Theoretical Framework for Designing Online Master
       Communities of Practice. In Banks, S., Goodyear, P., Hodgson, V., Jones, C., Lally, V., McConnell, D
       and Steeples, C. (Eds) Networked Learning 2004: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference
       on Networked Learning 2004. Lancaster: Lancaster University and University of Sheffield. Retrieved
       from: http://www.shef.ac.uk/nlc2004/Proceedings/Contents.htm 28th February 2005.

Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and Education. New York, Free Press , Macmillan Company.

Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by Expanding - an activity theoretical approach to developmental research,.
       Retrieved    from:     http://communication.ucsd.edu/MCA/Paper/Engestrom/expanding/toc.htm.            28th
       February 2005.

Fjuk, A. and O. Berge (2004). Learning the Process of Programming Through ICT-Mediated Apprenticeship -
       An Activity Theoretical Approach. In L. Dirckinck-Holmfeld, B. Lindström, B. M. Svendsen and M.
       Ponti. Conditions for Productive Learning in Networked Learning Environments.            Aalborg, Aalborg

                                                         
       University / Kaleidoscope. Retreived from: www.ell.aau.dk/kaleidoscope/publications/       28th February
       2005.

Fjuk, A. and L. Dirckinck-Holmfeld (1997). "Articulation of Actions in Distributed Collaborative Learning."
       Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems.

Gaver, W.W. (1996) Situating action 11: Affordances for interaction: he social is material for design. Ecological
       Psychology, Vol 8 (2) pp 111- 129

Gibson, J.J. (1977) The theory of affordances. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds) Perceiving, acting and knowing.
       Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society: outline of the Theory of Structure. Berkeley, CA, University of
       California Press.

Goodyear, P., Jones, C., Asensio, M., Hodgson, V., & Steeples, C. (2001) Effective networked learning in
       higher  education: notes  and guidelines. Lancaster:    CSALT,   Lancaster   University. Retrieved from:
       http://csalt.lancs.ac.uk/jisc/ 28th February 2005

Hutchby, I. (2001) Technologies, Texts and Affordances. Sociology Vol 35, No 2 pp451 ­ 456

Jamieson, P., Taylor, P.G., Fisher, K., Trevitt, A.C.F., Gilding, T. (2000) Place and Space in the Design of New
       Learning Environments. Higher Education Research & Development, Vol 19, No2 pp221 ­ 236.

Jones, C. (2004) Networks and learning: communities, practices and the metaphor of networks. ALT-J, The
       Association for Learning Technology Journal. Vol. 12 No. 1 pp 82-93

Jones, C. (2004 a) Network theory and description - The Lancaster ALT Masters programme. In L. Dirckinck-
       Holmfeld, B. Lindström, B. M. Svendsen and M. Ponti. Aalborg University - Kaleidoscope, Aalborg
       University - Kaleidoscope. Conditions for Productive Learning in Networked Learning Environments.
       Retreived from: www.ell.aau.dk/kaleidoscope/publications/    28th February 2005.

Jones, C (2004 b) The conditions of learning in networks. In L. Dirckinck-Holmfeld, B. Lindström, B. M.
       Svendsen  and M.   Ponti. Conditions for  Productive    Learning  in Networked  Learning   Environments.
       Aalborg, Aalborg University / Kaleidoscope. Retreived from: www.ell.aau.dk/kaleidoscope/publications/
       28th February 2005.

Jones, C., and Esnault,   L. (2004) The  metaphor  of     networks in learning: Communities,    collaboration and
       practice. In Banks, S., Goodyear, P., Hodgson, V., Jones, C., Lally, V., McConnell, D and Steeples, C.
       (Eds) Networked Learning 2004: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Networked
       Learning 2004. Lancaster: Lancaster University and University of Sheffield pp 317 ­ 323. Retrieved
       from: http://www.shef.ac.uk/nlc2004/Proceedings/Contents.htm 28th February 2005.

Kaptelinin, V., Danielsson, K. and Hedestig. U. (2004) Towards Learning -Centered Participatory Design
- Main  Issues and Challenges.   In  L. Dirckinck-Holmfeld,     B. Lindström,   B. M. Svendsen   and M.   Ponti.
       Conditions for Productive Learning in Networked Learning Environments.       Aalborg, Aalborg University
       / Kaleidoscope. Retreived from: www.ell.aau.dk/kaleidoscope/publications/    28th February 2005.

Kirschner, P.A., Strijbos, J., and Martens, R.L. (2004) CSCL in Higher education. In J-A, Strijbos, Kirschner,
       P.A., and Martens, R.L. What We Know About CSCL: And Implementing It In Higher Education. Boston:
       Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Koschmann, T. (Ed.). (1996).   CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm. Mahwah, NJ.:        Lawrence
       Erlbaum Associates.

Koschmann, T. (2001). Revisiting the paradigms of instructional technology. In G. Kennedy, M. Keppell, C.
       McNaught & T. Petrovic (Eds.), Meeting at the Crossroads. Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference
       of the Australian Society for Computers in Learning in Tertiary Education. (pp. 15 - 22). Melbourne:

                                                         
      Biomedical       Multimedia       Unit,   The      University    of     Melbourne.      Retrieved     from:
      http://www.ascilite.org.au/conferences/melbourne01/pdf/papers/koschmannt.pdf 28th February 2005

Kreijens, K., and Kirschner, P.A. (2004). Designing Sociable CSCL Environments. In J-A, Strijbos, Kirschner,
      P.A., and Martens, R.L. What We Know About CSCL: And Implementing It In Higher Education. Boston:
      Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Land, R  and  Bayne,   S (2002) Screen    or  monitor? Surveillance  and disciplinary power   on  online  learning
      environments    in Rust,  C.   (ed) Improving  Student  Learning   using   Learning   Technology.  (Oxford,
      OCSLD). pp125-38

Lash, S. (2001) Technological forms of life. Theory, Culture & Society,   18(1), 105­120.

Lave, J. and E. Wenger (1991). Situated learning - Legitimate peripheral participation. New York, Cambridge
      University Press.

Løgstrup, K.E.  (1997) The Ethical Demand. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dam Press.

Nardi, B., & O'Day, V. (1999). Information ecologies: using technology with heart. Cambridge Mass: MIT
      Press.

Norman, D.A. (1990) The design of everyday things. New York: Doubleday.

Nyvang,   T., and   Bygholm   (2004)      Human   Centered  Informatics   - The   emergence   of  an  educational
      infrastructure. In L. Dirckinck-Holmfeld, B. Lindström, B. M. Svendsen and M. Ponti, Conditions for
      Productive Learning in Networked Learning Environments. Aalborg, Aalborg University / Kaleidoscope.
      Retreived from: www.ell.aau.dk/kaleidoscope/publications/      28th February 2005.

Orlikowski,   W. J. (2000).  "Using  Technology   and   Constituting Structures: A  Practice  Lens   for Studying
      Technology in Organizations." Organizations Science Vol. 11(No. 4): pp. 404 - 428.

Rasmussen, A. (2004) Computer-mediated collaborative processes from an ethical perspective. In L. Dirckinck-
      Holmfeld,   B.  Lindström,   B.   M.  Svendsen   and M.  Ponti.  Conditions  for    Productive Learning  in
      Networked     Learning Environments.      Aalborg, Aalborg  University   / Kaleidoscope.   Retreived  from:
      www.ell.aau.dk/kaleidoscope/publications/     28th February 2005.

Ryberg, T. and M. Ponti (2004). Constructing Place: The Relationship Between Place-Making and Sociability in
      Networked     Environments   - A    Condition for  Productive  Learning   Environments.  In  L.  Dirckinck-
      Holmfeld,   B.  Lindström,   B.   M.  Svendsen   and M.  Ponti.  Conditions  for    Productive Learning  in
      Networked     Learning Environments     Aalborg,   Aalborg University   /  Kaleidoscope.   Retreived  from:
      www.ell.aau.dk/kaleidoscope/publications/     28th February 2005.

Salmon G (2000). E-moderating: the key to teaching and learning online. London: Kogan Page

Stahl, G. (forthcoming). Collaborating with Technology: Mediation of Group Cognition. Boston, MIT Press.
      Retrieved from: http://www.cis.drexel.edu/faculty/gerry/mit/ 28th February 2005

Star, S. L. and K. Ruhleder (1996). "Steps toward an Ecology of Infrastructure: Design and Access for Large
      Information Spaces." Information Systems Research 7(1): 111-134.

Strijbos, J-A., Kirschner, P.A., and Martens, R.L (2004). What We Know About CSCL: And Implementing It In
      Higher Education. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Vygotsky, L. (1978) Mind in Society, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.

Wenger,  E.   (1998). Communities    of Practice  - Learning, Meaning,    and   Identity. New  York,  Cambridge
      University Press.

                                                        
