        Problem Solving as a Complex, Evolutionary
Activity: A Methodological Framework for Analyzing
          Problem-Solving Processes in a Computer-
                Supported Collaborative Environment

                          Manu Kapur1, John Voiklis2, Charles K. Kinzer3
                     Communication, Computing, and Technology in Education
                               Teachers College, Columbia University
          1manu_kapur@hotmail.com, 2jv37@columbia.edu, 3kinzer@tc.columbia.edu

        Abstract.   Viewed   through  the lens of complex     systems  science, one   may   conceptualize problem-
solving interactions among    multiple actors,  artifacts, tools,  and environmental    structures as goal-seeking
adaptations, and problem-solving itself, as a complex adaptive activity. Theories of biological evolution point to
an analogical equivalence between problem solving and evolutionary processes and, thus, introduce innovative
methodological tools to the analysis of computer-supported, collaborative, problem-solving processes. In this
paper, we present a methodological framework for characterizing and analyzing these processes. We describe
four measures that characterize genetic evolution - number, function, fitness, and persistence - to characterize
the process of collaborative problem solving, and instantiate them in a study of problem-solving interactions of
collaborative groups in an online, synchronous environment. Issues relating to reliability, validity, usefulness,
and limitations of the proposed methodology are discussed.

       Keywords: Problem solving, complex adaptive activity, convergence, fitness, persistence

INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we present a quantitative, analytical method for characterizing and analyzing the process of
computer-supported,    collaborative  problem   solving.    Underpinning    our    work   is  a  shared,  situative,
epistemological belief that learning in general, and problem solving in particular, is a continuous, dynamic
process distributed  in space  and   time over  multiple   actors, actions  and  artifacts,  influencing and being
influenced by the environment in a complex, adaptive, and iterative manner. As such, understanding the process
of how multiple actors, artifacts, and environments interact and evolve in space and time on the way to an
outcome ranks among the most important challenges facing educational research (Akhras & Self, 2000; Barab,
Hay, & Yamagata-Lunch, 2001), and measures and methods for tracking the evolution of problem-solving
processes as well   as  the emergence  of  learning are    needed  (Barab  et al., 2001;  Barron,  2003;  Collazos,
Guerrero, Pino, & Ochoa, 2002; Collazos, Guerrero, Pino, & Ochoa, 2004; Derry, Gance, Gance, & Schlager,
2000). Complex systems science is put forth as a framework for understanding the evolutionary dynamics of
problem-solving processes and outcomes. From there, we derive a set of micro-genetic variables - number,
function, fitness, and persistence - for characterizing the problem solving process, including how one might
measure these variables. We situate our discussion and illustration of the proposed measures in a study of
problem-solving  interactions  of collaborative groups     in an  online, synchronous   environment.   Finally, we
discuss issues of reliability, validity, usefulness, and limitations of the proposed methodology.

THE NEED FOR A RECONCEPTUALIZATION
Despite the obvious complexity of problem-solving processes, existing problem-solving models remain linear,
relatively rigid, and limited in scope for they are unable to account for multiple, dynamically changing actors,
contexts, outcomes, and processes. For example, the General Problem Solver (Newell & Simon, 1972) specifies
understanding and search processes as the two sets of thinking processes associated with problem solving. Here,
"understanding" involves procedural knowledge, or an algorithm for solving a problem; "search" involves a
means-ends analysis, or the selection of means (routine or subroutine in the algorithm) that will take one closer
to the  desired end  (the ultimate or  intermediate goal).    A  second   example  is the   IDEAL   problem  solver
(Bransford & Stein, 1993), which describes problem solving as a process involving several phases: Identify
potential problems, Define and represent the problem, Explore possible strategies, Act on those strategies, and

                                                        
Look back and evaluate the effect of those activities. Another example is STAR.Legacy (Software Technology
for Action and Reflection) (Schwartz, Lin, Brophy, & Bransford, 1999), which also makes use of explicit
inquiry cycles to describe problem-solving processes. The STAR.Legacy software shell separates and organizes
complex problem-solving activities as cyclical sub-activities in attempting to help teachers and students manage
complexity, guiding problem-solvers to begin with a challenge, generate initial ideas, consult experts, study
resources, pilot-test, revise, and publish outcomes.
         While the above and similar problem-solving models and cycles are descriptively very useful, they are
limited because   they tend  to treat problem   solving as  either linear or cyclical in  an  effort to  articulate a
generalizable problem-solving process. However, problem solving is not a uniform, step-wise activity; problems
vary in content and context (Jonassen, 2000). More significantly, these problem-solving models and cycles
assume that their problem-solving processes are differentially applied in different contexts and situations but do
not indicate exactly how that occurs.
         An ability to account for the varying contexts and situations is somewhat offered by the prevailing
socio-cultural, constructivist theories such as Activity Theory (AT) (Leont'ev, 1978). This is evident in their
popular and  persistent use   by many   researchers  as a  framework  for  understanding   collaborative/collective
activity. AT, for instance, provides the inclusiveness and plasticity needed to describe collaborative activity as a
product of complex interaction among multiple actors, artifacts, and environment. As a result, working within
the framework of AT, one can describe problem solving as a process of continuous change, development, and
construction. One can also describe systemic structures - people, culture, and artifacts - that emerge through the
process of problem solving as well as the emergent properties of interactions within those systems. Working
strictly within the framework of AT though, one is not able to explain exactly how interactions contribute to the
change, development, and emergence of structures and solutions over time. In other words, AT states that
problem solving evolves over time, but not how it does so. As mathematical sociologist Mark Granovetter
(1978) suggested in his model of collective behavior, an analysis of "norms, preferences, motives, and beliefs"
(as indeed afforded by socio-cultural, constructivist theories such as AT) can account for the necessary but not
sufficient conditions one needs in order to explain how these conditions "interact and aggregate" on the way to
an outcome. We argue that taking a step towards achieving sufficiency, i.e., the theoretical and methodological
tools to explain the problem-solving process and how it evolves in time, one requires a lateral step into complex
systems science.

COMPLEX SYSTEMS SCIENCE
Complex Systems Science provides a framework for studying how interactions among the parts of any given
system culminate in the behaviors of the system as a whole (Crutchfield, 1994). As a theory, complex systems
science enables researchers from both the natural and social sciences to speak the same language as they study
the same or similar macroscopic behaviors and interactions in a range of natural and artificial systems (Bar-
Yam,  1997).   As a  science, complex   systems  science   enables researchers to   reason about  this   uncertainty,
extracting measures and constructs that allow researchers to discover, describe, and predict how interactions
form patterns, how patterns form complex systems, and how those complex systems behave (Crutchfield, 1994).

Problem Solving and Evolution: A Two-Way Analogy
According   to complex   systems   science, adaptation  is  one macroscopic   behavior    shared across   systems   -
biological, physical, and cognitive. A complex adaptive system (CAS) changes its behavior in response to
environmental and internal feedback, often in an attempt to achieve a goal or objective (Bar-Yam, 1997). Goal-
seeking adaptations that occur on a collective scale and/or over multiple iterations emerge as evolution (Bar-
Yam, 1997). Modern synthesis, the prevailing theory of evolution, combines Darwin's theory of variation and
natural selection with Mendel's theory of genetics to characterize evolution as a process of development or
change over time. According to complex systems science, this process extends biological organisms to include
the development   or change   of a culture,  or an   idea. Problem  solving, too, involves    iterative goal-seeking
adaptations (or  operations)  through  which  an agent  (or  collection of  agents) tries  to reduce    discrepancies
between an initial problematic state and an ideal goal state (Newell & Simon, 1972). Thus, a group of people
collaborating to solve a problem can be seen as a complex adaptive system, and evolution entails how the group
interacts to solve a problem and how this interaction develops and changes over time. This facilitates a strong
two-way analogy between problem solving and evolution - evolution may be characterized as a problem-solving
process, and problem solving as an evolutionary process where ordered patterns move, sometimes through
seemingly random paths, toward desired goals.

                                                        
Measures for Characterizing the Problem Solving Process
Modern synthesis may provide useful analogies to describe what one might observe during the process of
collaborative problem solving, but not what one might measure. Cybernetics, a field closely allied with complex
systems  science, provides  three measures    - number,  function, and  fitness of    problem  states -  that prove
informative for describing and explaining the problem solving process (Heylighen, 1988).       When one imagines
the collaborative problem-solving process as a sequence of problem states, the number of states from the initial
state to the goal state can serve both as a temporal and spatial measure: temporally, each state is a tick on the
evolutionary clock; spatially, each state is a step along the evolutionary path (Heylighen, 1988).    In biological
evolution, each mutation reconfigures the gene. Similarly, in problem solving, each interaction reconfigures the
problem state. This reconfiguration may increase or decrease the difference between the reconfigured and goal
states and, thus, the distance (number of ticks or steps) required to reach the goal state. Each interaction, then,
has a positive (acceleratory) or negative (deceleratory) impact on the problem-solving process. In other words,
each interaction aims to perform a telic function, i.e., it operates to reduce the difference between the current,
problematic state and a specified goal state. Thus, one can view problem-solving interactions as operators, goal
directed actions, performing a means-ends analysis in the problem space (Newell & Simon, 1972). However,
with the exception of the initial interaction in a problem-solving episode, the configuration of a problem-state's
properties results from more than one interaction; the configuration emerges from the cumulative impact of all
the interactions up to that particular state. The distance between any intermediate state and the goal state reflects
the cumulative impact of interactions. If problem solving means minimizing this distance between a given state
and the goal (or end) state, then cumulative impact reflects the fitness of the collaborative problem-solving
process at the given state (Heylighen, 1988).
         Furthermore, another sub-domain of complex systems science - artificial life - provides an additional
measure  for characterizing the collaborative   problem-solving process.   In artificial life, a complex   adaptive
system is viewed in terms of the behavior of its constituent components. For example, in biological evolution,
the components are families of genes. Analogously, in collaborative problem solving, these components can be
seen as taxonomic families of interactions or functional categories. Adaptive evolution of the problem-solving
process can be expected to affect the dynamics of these categories (Bedau, Snyder, & Packard, 1998) and
conversely, the dynamics of these categories inform the evolutionary activity structures of the problem-solving
process. The dynamics here refer to the evolutionary activity of these components, how and when they come
into existence as well as their subsequent usage in the system. In other words, by using a measure of persistence
one can identify the traits (functional categories) introduced by each interaction, and then track the use and
usefulness of those traits. When added to fitness analyses, persistence may reveal how multiple evolutionary
processes converge on similar paths without implying a single best path.

METHODOLOGY
We situate our discussion and illustration of the proposed methodology in a study of computer-supported,
collaborative, problem-solving  interactions.   Bearing in mind  that  the goal  of   this paper  is  to advance  a
methodological   framework,  we   briefly describe the  context of  the  study  in which    the  methodology   was
instantiated first before illustrating the process and usefulness of our methodology.

Research Context and Data Collection
Participants included sixty 11th grade students (46 male, 14 female; 16-17 years old) from the science stream of
a co-educational, English-medium high school in Ghaziabad, India. They were randomized into 20 groups of
three and instructed to collaborate with their group members to solve two problem scenarios. Both presented an
authentic car accident scenario that required the application of Newtonian kinematics. The study was carried out
in the school's  computer  laboratory, where    group members   communicated    with   one  another   only through
synchronous, text-only chat. The chat application allowed groups to privately and simultaneously engage in
synchronous discussions and automatically archived the transcript of their discussion as a text file. These 20
transcripts, one for each group, contained the problem-solving interactions of group members as well as the
final solutions produced by the groups and formed the data used in our analyses.

Data Coding: Categorizing Problem-solving Interactions
Quantitative   Content Analysis (QCA)     (Chi, 1997)   was used   to segment   and   code  interactions  using  an
interaction coding scheme developed by Poole and Holmes (1995), namely the Functional Category System
(FCS) (see Table 1). Two trained doctoral students independently coded the interactions; inter-rater reliability
was .85.

                                                        
                                Table 1: Functional Category System (FCS)
                               (Adapted from Poole & Holmes (1995), p. 104)
   1. Problem Definition (PD)
     1a. Problem Analysis: Statements that define or state the causes behind a problem
     1b. Problem Critique: Statements that evaluate problem analysis statements
   2. Orientation (OO)
     2a. Orientation: Statements that attempt to orient or guide the group's process.
     2b. Process Reflection: Statements that reflect on or evaluate the group's process or progress
   3. Solution Development (SD)
     3a. Solution Analysis: Statements that concern criteria for decision making or general parameters for
     solutions
     3b. Solution Suggestion: Suggestions of alternatives
     3c. Solution Elaboration: Statements that provide detail or elaborate on a previously stated
     alternative.
     3d. Solution Evaluation: Statements that evaluate alternatives and give reasons, explicit or implicit,
     for the evaluations.
     3e. Solution Confirmation: Statements that state the decision in its final form or ask for final group
     confirmation of the decision.
   4. Non-Task (NT)
     Statements that do not have anything to do with the decision task. They include off-topic jokes and
     tangents
   5. Simple Agreement (SA)
   6. Simple Disagreement (SDA)

   Table 2: Example of categorizing statements into interaction units and assigning impact values to them
   Statements(I0201, I0202, and I0203 represent the 3 group members)                   Code         Impact
   I0201 DPS > physician says it was a considerable impact                               1a           1
                                                                                         3a           1
   I0203 DPS > yes as the limit was 25km/h                                               1a           1
                                                                                         3a           1
   I0201 DPS > ranging bw 20g to 25g                                                     3b           1
   I0201 DPS > his medical reports r ok                                                  1a           1
   I0202 DPS > Mr rahul might have not been able to see the truck                        3a           1
                                                                                         3b          -1
   I0201 DPS > he wasn't under the influence of alcohol or drugs                         3a           1
                                                                                         3b           1
   I0201 DPS > it might be possible but he should have restricted himself to             3c           1
   speed limit                                                                           3c          -1
   I0201 DPS > it was a blind turn                                                       3a          -1
   I0202 DPS > car has been severely struck                                              3c           1
   I0203 DPS > he was not able to control the car i think                                3b          -1
   I0201 DPS > ya this proves that the impact was pretty hard and thus he was            5           -1
   driving fast                                                                          3c          -1
                                                                                         3c          -1

          The unit of analysis was semantically (as opposed to syntactically) defined as the function(s) that an
intentional statement serves in the problem-solving process.   Therefore,  every intentional  problem-solving
statement was segmented into one or more interaction unit(s) and coded into the functional categories of the
FCS (see Table 2). We illustrate this with an example from our study.
          The statement "he wasn't under the influence of alcohol or drugs" (highlighted in Table 2) was made
by a participant during an interaction within a problem-solving group discussing a scenario involving a car
accident. It serves two functions in the problem-solving process н first, it suggests a new parameter or criteria
(intoxication, which had not been previously mentioned) for consideration in the solution and second, it asserts
that the person being referred to (the driver in the problem scenario) was not intoxicated. Thus, despite being a
single statement within an interaction, it contributes two units of analysis (hereafter referred to as interaction
units) to two different functional categories. On the other hand, the statement "he was not able to control the

                                                       
car I think" serves the sole purpose of suggesting a possible factor in the solution to the problem. Hence, this
statement contributed only one interaction unit. Therefore, by allowing statements to be coded into multiple
interaction units, atomicity was achieved for the unit of analysis, i.e., interaction units can not be further divided
into finer units. This, in turn, strengthens the choice of the unit of analysis (Barab et al., 2001). Bransford &
Nitsch (1978) support the case for semantically-defined units by arguing that to fully comprehend a given
interaction one must not only understand its words and the sentences (syntactic features), but also how it is
situated in a discussion context. Chi (1997) further argued that it is often more meaningful to employ a semantic
scheme, especially if it also provides for a greater correspondence between the grain size of the unit of analysis
and the research questions of the study. Furthermore, recall that from the perspective of complex systems
science, each interaction unit is a functional operator that reconfigures the problem state. Therefore, defining
the  unit  of   analysis as  the    function(s) that   an   intentional   statement    serves  provides    further  logical
correspondence with the theoretical lens used to conceptualize problem solving.
          The result of coding the problem-solving interactions was a representation of each problem-solving
discussion as a time-ordered sequence of functional categories or codes. Table 2 illustrates this sequence for a
small sample of the coded interactions. We are now ready to describe and illustrate convergence, fitness, and
persistence as measures for characterizing and analyzing the problem-solving process.

Convergence & Fitness
Convergence     of  problem-solving    interactions may     be broadly    defined  as  the   extent to  which   the   group
discussion leads to a solution as perceived by the group. To model the telic aim of problem-solving interactions
and develop a measure for convergence, a two-state Markov model was used (Ross, 1996). An a posteriori
impact value of 1, -1, or 0 was assigned to each interaction unit depending upon whether it pushed the group
discussion towards (impact = 1) or away (impact = -1) from the goal of the activity - a solution state of the
given problem, or maintained the status quo (impact = 0). This was done with an inter-rater reliability of .93
(see Table 2 for an example). More formally, let the problem space be defined by n interaction units; each
assigned  an   impact value  of  1, -1, or 0. Further,  let  n1 , n1 , and   n0 denote   the number    of interaction units
assigned the impact values 1, -1, and 0 respectively such that n1  n1  n0              n . Then convergence, Cn , may
be defined as:

                                                    Cn      n1  n1
                                                             n1  n1

          The number of zeros is not factored into the calculation of convergence. This is because interaction
units assigned a zero impact, by definition, maintain the convergence level of the discussion. It is easy to see
that the convergence value will always lie between -1 and 1. The closer the value is to 1, the higher is the
convergence, and the closer the group is to reaching an ideal solution to the problem.
          Note that the numerator in the formulation of Cn is a measure of position, Pn                 n1  n1 . In other
words, if the problem-solving process is a sequence of steps along a straight line - some forward (impact = 1)
and others backward (impact = -1) - then the difference between the total number of forward and backward
steps   gives  the position  relative to  (or distance  from)     the starting  point, i.e., the start of  the discussion.
Convergence then is the mean distance from the starting point.
          Convergence can also be conceptualized as measure of fitness of the entire discussion: the higher the
convergence, the higher the fitness of the discussion. Extending this conceptualization to all problem states and
not just the final one, we can define fitness as the temporal measure of convergence, i.e., at any point in time in
the discussion, how close a group is to reaching the goal state н an ideal solution to the problem. Therefore, the
fitness statistic at an arbitrary point in time in the problem-solving process is defined as the convergence value
up to the interaction unit at that point in time, with the final fitness level of the entire problem-solving process
being the convergence value itself. Recalling that time refers to ticks on the evolutionary clock (i.e. an arbitrary
time  t corresponds to, say, the ith interaction unit), the fitness F t  at time t in the discussion  may be defined  as:

                                              F t   C t      n1 t  n1tn1 t  n1 t
where   n1 t  and n1t  represents   the  number   of interaction    units coded as   1 and  -1 respectively,  up  to and
including the ith interaction unit. Plotting the fitness value on the vertical axis and time (as defined in this study)
on the horizontal axis, one will get a representation (also called the fitness curve) of the problem-solving

                                                            
 Fitness
                                                                            Fitness
process as it evolves in time. Figures 1 and 2, drawn to the same scale, present four major types of fitness
curves that emerged from the 20 problem-solving discussions in our study.

         1.5                                                                 1.5

           1           Group 1                                                      1                                   Group 3

         0.5           Group 2                                               0.5                                         Group 4

           0                                                                        0

         -0.5                                                                -0.5

          -1                                                                        -1

         -1.5                                                                -1.5
                                            Time                                                                Time

         Figure 1. Fitness curves of two short discussions                          Figure 2. Fitness curves of two long discussions

Interpreting Fitness
In our view, there are five aspects to interpreting the fitness analysis.                       First, because the fitness value at a given
time indicates proximity to an ideal solution (with higher values indicating closer proximity), fitness curves that
trend upwards indicate problem-solving processes that are getting closer to an ideal solution (fitness = 1), and
vice versa. Hence, fitness curves provide a quick snapshot of the entire problem-solving process in terms of
how short or long it was as well as how close or far the discussion was from an ideal solution at any given point
in time.
                Second, the shape of the fitness curve is informative about the paths respective groups take toward
problem solution.        For example, groups 1 and 2 converged at approximately the same fitness levels (about 0.65,
indicating positive movement toward an ideal solution), but their paths to this point were quite different. Group
1's discussion moved toward an ideal solution immediately when compared to group 2, whose initial approach
seemingly took them away from the goal (indicated by the negative fitness initially) only to recover later.
Similarly, comparing groups 3 and 4, we can see them settling into different plateaus of fitness albeit after some
chaos (fluctuations in fitness levels) initially. Further, comparing groups 1 and 2 with groups 3 and 4, we can
see that the discussions of groups 1 and 2 ended quickly whereas those of groups 3 and 4 settled into an
"equilibrium" after the initial fluctuations. What is most interesting is that this interpretation of fitness curves
provides a view of paths to a solution that are lost in analysis systems that consider only a given point in the
solution process, thus assuming that similar behaviors or states at a given point are arrived at in similar ways.
As different paths can lead to similar results, unidimensional analyses that consider only single points in time
(often only the solution state) are not consistent with what we know about problem-solving processes and are
not informative about movement toward a goal.
                Third, the fitness curve of groups 3 and 4 also highlight the notion of "fitness inertia," i.e., having
settled into fitness equilibrium, these groups found it difficult to move in new directions. Of course, group 3 did
not      have    a need  to    do so,  as        their high fitness value           indicates  movement   toward     an ideal   solution. But
implications        of fitness    inertia        for groups that  equilibrate          at low  fitness levels indicating  no    or very   little
movement toward higher fitness levels, such as what occurred with group 4, are grave. It follows from this that
the      eventual   performance     of   groups        exhibiting fitness inertia          can be  predicted  early   on  in the   discussion.
Because our analyses showed convergence (and not the position) to be a significant predictor of group solution
quality (F = 50.245, p = .000), it preliminarily suggests that the net number of positive steps (the position) is not
as critical to the success of a discussion (F = 0.012, p = .915) as convergence is. This can be explained by the
mathematical property a ratio, which is how convergence is operationalized, i.e., it is more sensitive to initial
steps, both positive and negative, than steps that are taken later on in the process. Said another way, "good"
contributions       made    earlier   in  a       group  discussion potentially           do  more good   than  if   they were   made   later.
Similarly, "bad" ones potentially do greater harm if they come earlier than later in the discussion. Hence,
convergence takes into account not only the number of positive and negative steps (contributions), but also the
order in which they are taken. This temporal order is perhaps what is missing in many studies of collaborative
problem solving, which typically focus on the number of steps - both positive (such as frequency counts of
higher-order thinking, questioning, etc.) and negative (such as frequency counts of errors, misconceptions, lack
of cooperation, etc.) - as indicators of the quality of the discussion. Because convergence takes into account of

                                                                        
both the number as well as the temporal order of the units of analyses, it utilizes greater amount of information
present in the data, making it inherently a more powerful measure - both conceptually and statistically. Hence,
as indeed our results preliminarily indicate, connections to learning and problem solving as evidenced by group
solution quality are stronger when seen through the measure of convergence than through frequency measures
commonly used in computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) research.
           Fourth, the end-point   of the    fitness curve   represents              the final fitness level or    convergence   of the
discussion. From this, the extent to which of a group was able to solve the problem can be deduced. In other
words, we can deduce that, comparatively, group 3 did the best followed by group 1, group 2, and finally group
4. Furthermore, the final fitness levels can also be compared with the maximum fitness level of 1. One might
imagine that an ideal fitness curve is one that has all the pushes in the right direction, i.e., a horizontal straight
line with fitness equaling 1. However, the data suggests that, in reality, some level of divergence of ideas may in
fact be a good thing. Note that, at present, one can only extract a comparison either between groups or with the
upper and lower bounds of fitness (1 or -1). But, with repeated application in other research contexts and
settings and over multiple studies, norms for absolute values of convergence and fitness will begin to emerge.
           Finally, based on the above analysis of the characteristics of fitness curves and what they tell us about
the problem-solving process, we can begin to conceptualize how collaborative, problem-solving discussions
may be scaffolded to achieve optimal outcomes. For example, the fitness curves of groups 2 and 4 suggest a
need for scaffolding early on in the discussion.

Persistence
In addition to looking at the fitness characteristics of a discussion as a whole, one can also examine how ideas
or families of ideas emerge and persist during the course of the problem-solving discussion. In our study, these
families of ideas are represented by the 6 major functional categories - problem definition, orientation, solution
development, non-task, simple agreement, and simple disagreement (see Table 1) н into which all interactions
were categorized. Treating each functional category as a component of the problem-solving system, its usage
(or persistence) can be tracked as a measure of evolutionary activity. The central assumption is that components
of a complex system that persist and continue to be used make greater contribution to the system. However,
nothing is implied about the quality of that contribution. Equivalently, functional categories that persist and get
used repeatedly make greater contribution to the collaborative, problem-solving activity. Therefore, it makes
sense   to choose    these taxonomic     functional  categories                as components    because    adaptive   evolution  of the
problem-solving      process  can be  expected    to  affect  the              dynamics   of  these  categories and   conversely,   the
dynamics of these categories inform the evolutionary activity structures of the problem-solving process (Bedau
et al., 1998). Having established functional categories as the components of the problem-solving system, their
contribution can be measured by their usage; the idea being that the longer a functional category persists in a
system, the greater its adaptive value,. Conversely, by examining the persistence of functional categories, we
can gain insights into the problem-solving process that would otherwise remain elusive. More formally, let
f k t denote whether the kth functional category exists in the problem-solving system at time t:

                                     f k t  1по0 if  component                 k exists at time  totherwise
           f k t is simply   an  activity   indicator function                that "switches  on"   each  time    an interaction   unit
belonging   to a   particular functional    category  exists  in              the discussion.  In order to  measure      the usage  of a
functional  category,  we    can  define   a corresponding    function               н an   activity incrementation   function   н  that
increases by 1 each time the indicator function "switches on." Then, the value of the incrementation function for
the kth functional   category at time t, say ak t,  reflects its             cumulative  usage   up until time t, i.e., the persistence
of the functional category up until time t. Formally,

                                                                            t
                                                     ak t    ж f k t
                                                                            0

           Figure 3 shows the persistence curve of the problem definition and solution development functional
categories for two groups. We decided to illustrate persistence using these two categories because they had the
most manifest interactions compared to the other four categories.

                                                             
                          Cumulative Activity
                                                                       Persistence
                                              90

                                              80

                                              70

                                              60                                SD: Group 1

                                              50

                                              40
                                              30          SD: Group 2         PD: Group 2
                                              20

                                              10                                       PD: Group 1

                                               0
                                                                               T ime
            Figure 3. Persistence curves of Problem Definition (PD) & Solution Development (SD) functional
                                                                        categories

Interpreting Persistence
First, being a cumulative function, it is a non-decreasing curve whose end-point indicates the total activity in a
given functional category, i.e., the number of interaction units in that functional category. Often, it is this
number that is used as a frequency measure in quantitative content analysis. However, the number alone does
not indicate anything about the evolutionary activity of the functional category it represents because, as argued
earlier, it does not utilize                     the temporal information   embedded      in the   data. Persistence curves utilize that
information and provide a trajectory from which meaningful insights may be drawn.
          Second, a plateau on the persistence curve of a functional category indicates a period in a discussion
where no interactions of the type that the functional category represents take place. Therefore, persistence
curves that plateau often and for long periods are indicative of a passive functional category. Similarly, a
persistence curve that does not plateau is indicative of an active functional category. For example, the problem
definition (PD) functional category for group 1 is an example of a passive functional category whereas the PD
functional category for group 2 is an active one. In other words, this suggests that group 1 either did not see the
need to define the problem or was able to define it quickly and move on, whereas group 2 seemed to need much
more time and discussion for problem definition. Note that, in either case, this does not indicate whether or not
the problem definition was correct, which can be revealed by cross-validating persistence curves with fitness
curves.
          Third, persistence curves bring out the notion of competition among functional categories. For group 1,
only the SD functional category is active whereas both PD and SD functional categories are active for group 2.
This suggests that the problem-solving process was by and large linear for group 1: they defined the problem
early on and then worked on developing a solution. There was little or no competition between the PD and SD
functional categories. However, the process was quite the opposite for group 2: their attempts to define the
problem and develop a solution were iterative and intermingled making the process non-linear and chaotic.
There was high competition between the two functional categories. At this point, it is difficult to use the level of
competition to make inferences about the quality of the discussion or the resulting solution. However, repeated
application in other research contexts and settings and over multiple studies will provide greater validity for the
inferences.

USEFULNESS AND LIMITATIONS

Coding Reliability and Validity
The inferences that can be drawn from the new measures are strong in so far as the coding scheme is reliable
and valid. In this study, we opted to use an existing coding scheme, namely the functional category system
(FCS) developed by Poole and Holmes (1995). The reasons for choosing the FCS as the interaction coding
protocol for this study are:
i.   The FCS was developed specifically for the purpose of studying small-group collaborative interactions in
     problem-solving contexts.

                                                                            
ii.  The FCS categories are theoretically well-grounded in the cognitive and educational theories of problem
     solving thereby increasing their content validity.
iii. The FCS has been tried     and tested in several research studies (for   example,  Poole  & Holmes, 1995;
     Jonassen & Kwon, 2001) making it inherently more reliable and stable than developing an entirely new
     coding scheme (Gall, Borg, & Gall, 1996).
iv.  From a broader perspective of research design and measurement, using a pre-existing interaction coding
     scheme adds to the validity of the inferences drawn from the results (Rourke & Anderson, 2004).
     This gives us reason to trust the reliability and validity of our quantitative content analysis using the FCS.

Usefulness of the Methodology
A major advantage of the proposed methodology is that it takes into account temporality of the problem-solving
process and extracts measures that utilize that information. As such, when compared with existing measures
commonly used in CSCL research, our research suggests that the measures of convergence and persistence are
potentially more powerful in characterizing and tracking the evolution of problem-solving processes and how
they lead and relate to outcomes. Further, while we situated our illustration and discussion of the proposed
methodology   in   the collaborative problem-solving     efforts of  science  students mediated    by an  online,
synchronous environment, the methodology can easily be applied to other settings and contexts. We argue that
the  proposed methodology    would   be  applicable to  the analysis of any  process that is  a) goal-directed,     b)
complex and adaptive, and c) well-manifested through rich and meaningful artifacts (which we broadly define
to include not only physical behaviors, actions, and products but also conceptual artifacts such as concepts and
ideas). As such, the methodology may be applied to individual or collaborative problem-solving, in domains
other than physics, with other populations, in a modality other than online, synchronous chat, and using other
categorization coding schemes.

Limitations
As with any new methodology, its repeated application and modification over multiple data sets is needed
before strong and valid inferences about the underlying cognitive processes can be made (Rourke & Andersen,
2004). Another limitation includes the requirement of capturing rich and meaningful data in which there is
ample opportunity for evolutionary structures and goal-seeking adaptations to occur. In our study, we ensured
this by making the objects of the activity н the problems н rich in context. Also, we did not impose any time
limit on the group discussions. While capturing the data was made easy due to the technology itself, analyzing
the data was time consuming. As such, this approach is a useful analytical framework for education researchers
but not for classroom teachers. However, inferences drawn by researchers while using our methodology will
have   meaningful  implications for  the classroom,  especially   with regard to the   design and  scaffolding      of
instruction and learning environments for problem-solving tasks.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
As we move forward, we plan to apply the proposed methodology in other contexts and settings. From a
repeated application and modification of the measures over multiple data sets will emerge indications of the
validity and reliability of the proposed methodology. In turn, this will lead to fine-tuning of the measures in an
iterative fashion.
         Concomitantly, we also see the need for developing new measures, especially at a macroscopic level of
analysis. In particular, we will focus on stable interaction phases that a discussion goes through. In other words,
a problem-solving discussion can be conceptualized as a temporal sequence of phases. One can use several
methods to isolate evolutionary phases, including measures of genetic entropy (Adami, Ofria, & Collier, 2000),
intensity of mutation rates (Burtsev, 2003) or, in the case of problem interactions, the classification of coherent
phases of interaction. Whether these phases involve genetic mutations or problem interactions, sequences of
phases  often alternate  between  stable  phases,   with  chaotic  phases interspersed  throughout:   these often
correspond to low vs. high mutation rates, clustered vs. unclustered interactions. With the phases identified, one
can calculate and predict the probabilities of moving from one phase to another using Hidden Markov Models
(HMM). As a result, one may begin to understand when and why phase transitions, cascades and catastrophes
(sudden mass change), as well as stable phases emerge; more importantly, one may begin to understand how the
configuration of one phase may influence the likelihood of moving to any other phase.   Whether one can  control
or temper these phases, or whether such control or temperance would prove a wise practice remains an open
question which, even if only partially answered, will be a major breakthrough in characterizing and modeling
the problem solving process.
         Through such an endeavor, education researchers who wish to study the problem solving process will
find choices among several lenses at several resolutions. With measures to analyze number, function, fitness,

                                                         
sequencing, and transition of states, as well as the evolutionary activity of components (functional categories),
one can zoom from the micro- to macroscopic properties and behaviors of the problem-solving process.

REFERENCES
Adami, C., Ofria, C., Collier, T. C. (2000). Evolution of biological complexity. Proceedings of the National
        Academy of Sciences, 97, 4463-4468.
Akhras, F.  N., &  Self,  J. A. (2000).   Modeling the  process, not the   product, of learning. In   S. P. Lajoie,
        Computers as cognitive tools, volume two: No more walls (pp. 3-28). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
        Associates.
Barab, S. A., Hay, K. E., & Yamagata-Lynch, L. C. (2001). Constructing networks of action-relevant episodes:
        An in-situ research methodology. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 63-112.
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Bar-Yam, Y. (1997). Dynamics of complex systems. Perseus Publishing: New York.
Bedau, M. A., Snyder, E., & Packard, N. H. (1998). A classification of long-term evolutionary dynamics. In C.
        Adami, R. Belew, H. Kitano, & C. Taylor (Eds.), Artificial Life VI (pp.189-198), Cambridge: MIT
        Press
Bransford, J.D., & Nitsch, K. E. (1978). Coming to understand things we could not previously understand. In J.
        F. Kavanaugh and W. Strange (Eds.), Speech and language in the laboratory, school, and clinic.
        Harvard, MA: MIT Press.
Burtsev, M. S. (2003). Measuring the dynamics of artificial evolution. In W. Banzhaf, T. Christaller, P. Dittrich,
        J. T. Kim, & J. Ziegler (Eds.), Advances in Artificial Life. Proceedings of the 7th European Conference
        on Artificial Life, Dortmund, Germany, September 14-17.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. The Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 6(3), 271-315.
Collazos, C.,  Guerrero,  L.,  Pino,  J., &   Ochoa, S.  (September, 2002).    Evaluating  collaborative    learning
        processes.  Proceedings  of   the 8th International Workshop    on Groupware   (CRIWG'2002),      Springer
        Verlag LNCS, 2440, Heidelberg, Germany.
Collazos, C.,   Guerrero, L.,Pino,   J.,  & Ochoa,   S. (2004).  A  method   for evaluating   computer-supported
        collaborative  learning  processes.   International Journal  of   Computer  Applications   in Technology,
        19(3/4), 151-161.
Crutchfield, J. P. (1994). The calculi of emergence: Computation, dynamics, and induction. Physica D, 75, 11-
        54.
Derry, S. J., Gance,  S., Gance,   L. L.,   & Schlager, M.  (2000).  Toward   assessment   of knowledge-building
        practices  in technology-mediated     work   group  interactions. In S. P.  Lajoie (Eds.), Computers    as
        cognitive tools, volume two: No more walls (pp. 29-68). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gall, M., Borg, W., & Gall, J. (1996). Education research: An introduction. White Plains, NY: Longman.
Granovetter, M. (1978). Threshold models of collective behavior. American Journal of Sociology, 83(6), 1420-
        1443.
Heylighen F. (1988). Formulating the problem of problem-formulation. In R. Trappl (Ed.), Cybernetics and
        Systems '88 (pp. 949-957). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Jonassen, D. H. (2000). Towards a design theory of problem solving. Educational Technology, Research and
        Development, 48(4), 63-85.
Jonassen, D. H. & Kwon, H. I. (2001). Communication patterns in computer-mediated vs. face-to-face group
        problem solving. Educational Technology, Research and Development, 49(1), 35-52.
Leont'ev, A. N. (1978). Activity, consciousness, and personality. NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Poole, M. S., & Holmes, M. E. (1995). Decision development in computer-assisted group decision making.
        Human Communications Research, 22(1), 90-127.
Ross, S. M. (1996). Stochastic processes. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Rourke, L., & Anderson, T. (2004). Validity in quantitative content analysis. Educational Technology, Research
        and Development, 52(1), 5-18.
Schwartz, D., Lin, X. D., Brophy, S., & Bransford, J. D. (1999). Toward the development of flexibly adaptive
        instructional designs. In C. M. Reigeluth (Eds.), Instructional design theories and models: A new
        paradigm of instructional theory (pp. 183-214). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

                                                         
