            Anonymity Options and Professional
Participation in an Online Community of Practice

                 Peter G. Kilner                                    Christopher M. Hoadley
       Instructional Systems Program,                         College of Education, and School of
          Penn State University, and                           Information Science & Technology
             U.S. Military Academy                                     Penn State University
                pgk111@psu.edu                                       cscl05-anon@tophe.net

       Abstract. In this paper, we analyze a natural experiment regarding anonymity options and
       participation in a large, successful online community of practice (CoP) for U.S. soldiers. We
       study   the impacts  of changes   of  anonymity   options on  comment   quality     for productive
       discussion   and  professionalism.    Four  levels of   personal  attribution   or  anonymity  of
       comments     are significantly correlated  with   comment    quality  under   some,  but  not  all,
       circumstances.   Eliminating   anonymity    options    produced   significantly fewer    antisocial
       comments     and  fewer  comments     overall, although   it did  not  affect overall   peripheral
       participation as measured by logins and page views. Online identity or reputation appears to
       be   more   of a factor  than  external  culpability in  shaping  user behaviors.    Attitudes of
       participants and the evolution of norms over time are presented, and implications for the
       design of online learning communities are discussed.

       Keywords: Community of practice, anonymity, norms, flaming, facilitation, moderation,
       participation, online discussion, asynchronous discussion

 INTRODUCTION
 The development of the theory of communities of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Orr, 1990; Wenger,
 1998) has led to numerous attempts to create, support, and shape online communities of practice for social
 learning. Communities of practice are networks of practitioners who interact socially to become more
 effective in their practice individually and collectively. Through such networks, novices are initiated into
 the practices of  the  group, norms  for   the practice  are negotiated  and communicated,      and  increasing
 expertise in and identification with the practice is accompanied by more centrality in the community. The
 model is linked to Vygotskian notions of social appropriation of knowledge (Newman, Griffin, & Cole;
 Wertsch, 1985).
     Although many communities of practice do occur naturally without external intervention or initiation,
 their deliberate facilitation as a means to learning, especially in professional contexts, has been widely
 proposed and sought. Oftentimes, such approaches rely on the use of technology to support or sustain the
 community, especially in fields where the practitioners may be isolated from each other, for instance
 among teachers (Schlager, Fusco, & Schank, 2003; Barab & Duffy, 2000), engineers and international
 development experts {Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002}, U.S Army officers (Dixon, Allen, Burgess,
 Kilner, & Schweitzer, 2005), Canadian educational coordinators (Gray, 2004), and globally distributed
 scholars (Scardamalia, 2003).
     Communities of practice differ from some other forms of online learning in that they are primarily
 centered on   learning via   apprenticeship or  legitimate   peripheral participation,   and  thus there  is  no
 "teacher."  Any member of the community sufficiently central to the practices of the community can
 support the learning of other, less enculturated members, and even the questions and errant comments of
 novices can spark learning across the community.       The relevant knowledge is presumed to reside in and
 among the minds of the practitioners themselves (Dixon, et al.; Wenger, 1998), and CoPs are valuable to
 the extent that they draw out, share, and generate that knowledge.
     What, then, drives individuals to learn in a CoP? Identity is an important component of learning in a
 community   of practice. Indeed,  identity  can  be  viewed  as the  driving factor   that connects  individual
 cognitive experiences to joining, or repulsing, a community of practice, and hence, learning (Nasir, 2002).
 Individuals perform    their  expertise to  legitimize  and  more   fully  realize  their  membership     in the
 community.

                                                      
  Technology plays a powerful mediating role in how identity is developed and expressed (Turkle,
1995), and thus provides a lever for changing what kinds of behaviors and norms develop within online or
blended communities. Technology provides new opportunities for attribution and anonymity, and may
permit the construction of alternative identities in a learning context (Chester & Gwynne, 1998). This
fluidity may create a safe space for individuals to explore identity development, which is an important
component of development and learning (Halverson, 2004), but it also has implications for social norms
and standards. In particular, personal responsibility for one's actions and social norms such as reciprocity,
honesty, trust, and so forth may be damaged in environments where identity is too fluid (Chester &
Gwynne, 1998; Herring, 1996).
  Research on the impact of anonymity on participation in an online learning community is inconclusive.
Chan, Bandar, Oh, & Chan (2004) found that the use of actual identities in an online community increased
participation, a position  supported   by  Millen and    Patterson  (2003). In contrast, Chester  and  Gwynne
(1998) found   that anonymity     increased participation,  especially among   minority  students.  In Hsi   and
Hoadley (1997), anonymity was not found to significantly affect the amount or quality of participation,
although it did alter the students' perceptions of social safety. But later work found that the possibility of
anonymity  could    contribute to  perceptions   of social  safety, without  actually  being   commonly  used.
Moreover, anonymity can erode effective participation in online learning conversations; later work in the
same context   found  that   learners were  less  likely to read   comments    that were posted   anonymously
(Hoadley, 2002,    2004).  Because    this  is hypothesized  to    challenge the conditions    of a productive
discussion (Hoadley, 1999; Hsi, 1997), anonymity can be of mixed value in fostering learning in an online
community.
  A    significant  challenge  to understanding   the interplay    of anonymity,    identity, participation, and
learning in an online community of practice is the many varieties of CoPs (educational, professional,
distributed, blended, etc.).  Comparisons of the effects of relative anonymity are difficult to make when
the CoPs being compared are themselves different. In our review of the literature, we did not find any
study like this one, which examines how a change in anonymity options affected a single, robust online
community.

METHODS
In the following sections, we explore the results of a natural experiment with anonymity options in an
online community of practice for peer learning among soldiers in the U.S. Army. First, we describe the
online community as a context for professional learning. Next, we describe how circumstances led to
policy changes on anonymity. These policy changes created a natural experiment for different kinds of
identity options ranging from full anonymity to linkage with a user's online identity to linkage with the
user's offline identity. Finally, we examine the impacts of these shifting options on participation and
learning-oriented behaviors in the online community, and discuss the relationship between identity and
communities for learning.

The PlatoonLeader community
PlatoonLeader is an online community of practice of platoon leaders in the U.S. Army.           Platoon leaders
are responsible for groups that typically include 20-40 people, and being a platoon leader is usually a
newly commissioned officer's first job in the Army after completing initial training. The Web site brings
together past, present, and future platoon leaders in an open exchange of leadership experiences, tools, and
ideas related to becoming more effective leaders.      The purpose and values of PlatoonLeader are stated
across the top of its homepage:

     PlatoonLeader is the professional forum for United States Army platoon leaders--current, past,
     and future. We support each other's efforts to become more effective platoon leaders.

     Professionalism is our watchword. We speak candidly, but always with respect to each other
     and loyalty to our commission. We tackle our leadership challenges with a positive voice,
     focused solely on building and leading combat-ready teams.

  PlatoonLeader was launched in 2001 as a private, non-profit effort by Army officers who recognized
that their own professional learning developed primarily through experience and through conversations
with their peers, rather than formal training.    They sought to connect current platoon leaders with each
other for mutual support and learning, and to connect experienced platoon leaders with novice ones to
promote the sharing of experiential knowledge.       The community was successful, and in 2002 the Army

                                                     
began  to  fund  its operations.    As of this   writing  in  November     2004,   PlatoonLeader      has  over 16,000
registered members and is growing consistently at a rate of 25 new members per day.                     In the 30 days
prior to  this writing,   the  site averaged  more     than 700   unique   visits, 9000   page     views,  and  50   new
discussion comments per day.        Membership and participation in PlatoonLeader is entirely voluntary.
  In   its initial two  years  of   operation,   PlatoonLeader    was   open  to   the   public   and  did  not require
participants to login.  Participants could post anonymously. By August 2003, however, the moderators of
the community were frustrated by frequent "flame" comments that threatened to give the community a
negative tone.     Online behavior was becoming inconsistent with the community's stated purpose and
values. Several community members told the moderators that they no longer participated because of the
unprofessional behavior of some participants, almost all of whom posted anonymously.                  In an attempt to
promote productive professional conversation by discouraging anti-social comments, on September 15,
2003 the moderators changed the rules of the site to forbid anonymous postings.               Members had to login to
post, and their usernames appeared with their comments. This change led to an immediate and noticeable
decrease   in  anti-social comments.    In   the   spring of  2004,  in  response   to   concerns   about  information
security in a time of war, the moderators of the site restricted access to PlatoonLeader to members of the
U.S. military.   Beginning in March 2004, all new members had to register using their military email
address (linked to their real name), and in April 2004 all existing members were told to update their
accounts with their military email addresses. In May 2004 all accounts not linked to a military email
address  were   purged.    Because   military email    addresses  include   the soldiers'     real names   and  official
contact information, by June 2004 participants in PlatoonLeader were aware that the moderators of the site
(although not the site's other members) had access to their real identities. The purpose of this study was to
determine   if the   tone  of  the  conversation   had  indeed    improved,  and,   if   so,  the  likelihood   that the
improvement was due only to chance.

Data sources and coding
In the section that follows, we describe our participation data from the PlatoonLeader community under
the three different anonymity conditions. The primary data came from the comments produced during
three sample    months:    August    2003    (when   anonymous       posts were    still permitted),    October    2003
(immediately after the requirement that participants had to be logged in to post a comment), and June
2004  (immediately     after  all   accounts  that didn't   link  to the   member's      real identity  were   purged).
Comments from every third discussion thread were collected and analyzed (threads 1, 4, 7, and so on).
Only comments produced during the months of analysis were considered (many threads have comments
spanning several months.)

Table 1: Conditions Determined by Months and the Policy Rules in Place
  Sample                  Month              Policy-Determined Minimal Level of Attribution
Condition 1          August 2003       Anonymous comments permitted
                                       (Guests can post messages without logging in at all)
Condition 2          October 2003      Comments required to have handles/usernames
                                       (Users must register with a valid email address, and must be logged in
                                       to post,    but profile  information  is    not validated;   all comments     are
                                       linked to username)
Condition 3          June 2004         Comments required to have usernames linked to actual identities
                                       (Users    must  register  with email  addresses    provided      by the  military
                                       which     are   linked  to real   identity;  all   comments      are  linked   to
                                       username, and administrators can uncover real names)

  In addition, users participated in an online poll (survey) linked off the opening page of the website
which was available for nine days in April 2004. User comments from this survey (and in some cases,
follow-up email comments) shed light on participant attitudes towards the site. These polls were, however,
a self-selected sample of the users of the website; members were not forced to respond to the poll in order
to participate in the online community. Finally, site logs were used to help determine overall rates of
participation on the site.
Coding rubrics: Anonymity and comment quality
Each  of   the comments     in the   sample   was  coded    on  two  dimensions:    attribution    or anonymity,     and
comment quality (with respect to professionalism and productive discussion).
  Comments were coded for one of four levels of anonymity. Level-1 (anonymous) comments were
made by guests who weren't logged in to the system and were thus completely anonymous. Level-2

                                                        
(pseudonymous) comments required user login and were linked to a username, but weren't linked to a
user's real name or identity. Level-3 comments were attributed to an individual because the member had
chosen a username that indicates his or her real name (e.g., johndoe).    Level-4 attribution occurred when
a user explicitly highlighted their real name in the body of the post itself by signing it or including their
signature block. The system permitted such a signature to be configured as a default for each comment,
but users could easily turn this feature on or off for each post.

Table 2: Coding Rubric for Anonymity of Discussion Comments
Level of Anonymity     Description                                 Example identifier
Level 1                Anonymous                                   Anonymous
Level 2                Username only                               Rogue6
Level 3                Username that indicates real name           Timsmith
Level 4                Signed with real name                       s/Timothy Smith, 123rd Armor Bn

  Comments were also coded for quality, a construct that captured what effect they would be expected to
have on professional conversation and other members' willingness to participate constructively.     Level-1
comments were very negative posts that included vulgarity as they demeaned another member, were
obvious "flame bait," or were cynical toward the profession. An example Level-1 comment is, "Yeah, it's
called CTLT, dumbass. I hate to say it, but that `don't need to eat shit' nut job was right. Now shut up and
go back to ROTC." Level-2 comments were negative posts that criticized another participant (criticism of
ideas was acceptable) or were cynical toward the profession but did not include vulgarity.    An example
Level-2 comment is, "Please tell me you're joking when you say you can't remember if live rounds are
crimped or not.  No one can be that dumb.  One round is missing the projectile, one isn't."    Level-3
comments were positive posts that asked a relevant question, answered a question, encouraged or
validated a previous poster, chatted in a friendly way, redirected a discussion positively, expressed thanks
to another member, or added humor to the discussion.    A typical Level-3 comment was, "I think it's
division policy here that no one can wear contacts. You set yourself up for problems with all the sand
getting in your eyes. You have a greater risk of infections, etc. Maybe check with the eye doctor on post
for their take or the official policy." Comments deemed neutral in their effect were coded as Level-3, on
the assumption that any participation that isn't negative at least involved a member and is thus a positive
act. Level-4 comments were very positive posts that included two or more of the criteria for a positive
post, were exceptionally long with quality information, or included specific information (e.g., a link to a
specific part of a regulation) that indicated a commitment of time and effort to help another member. A
Level-4 comment that immediately followed the example Level-3 comment was, "You can get LASIK
and PRK done by the Army depending on where you are stationed. Be aware that after surgery you are
non-deployable during healing (~6 months). You can find more info at... [URL to information resource]"
Table 3: Coding Rubric for Comment Quality
Quality of    Description                                            Example
Comment
Level 1       Very negative: demeans with vulgarity                  Get lost you dumbsh*t!
Level 2       Negative: critical of another, or cynical              You're as screwed up as the Army.
Level 3       Positive: supportive of another or Army                The way I did it was...
Level 4       Very positive: include multiple positive criteria      Here's the url you need...good luck!
Research ethics
  Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB) approval    was   obtained    for this study.   Informed  consent was
obtained from   those  who completed the  survey.   The    discussion   comments    were treated as publicly
available data.  Under conditions 1 and 2, they were directly available to the worldwide public.            In
condition 3, they were available to over one million U.S. Department of Defense personnel.      All data was
aggregated, and no effort was or will be made to link it to anyone's identity.
Intercoder reliability
A volunteer not related to the study but who is a member of the PlatoonLeader community independently
evaluated 100 of the comments based on the quality rubric to determine intercoder reliability.          This
second coder had 93% concurrence in terms of whether comments were positive or negative, and 84%
agreement on the intensity of the comments (i.e., exact coding match).

                                                   
RESULTS
Below, we discuss the results of three distinct analyses. First, we describe patterns of anonymity and
participation in each of the three conditions. Then, we discuss the relationship between anonymity and
comment quality (productiveness or professionalism). Finally, we discuss the results of the user poll and
provide some participants' beliefs on anonymity in the community.

Patterns of anonymity and participation by condition
In the first condition, where users were permitted free choice of whether to comment anonymously or not,
nearly half  of all posters did so anonymously.       In   our  sample,  348 of 707 comments     were   made
anonymously (Level 1) in August 2003 (Condition 1). This may have been due to an explicit desire to
remain anonymous, or due to the ease of commenting without bothering to log in to the system.
                                  Figure 1: Attribution by condition

  Figure 1 shows the patterns of anonymity in each condition. In Conditions 2 and 3, most users still
preferred to stick  to Anonymity  Level 2, in     which   their words   were identified by only a handle   or
username, and this username did not reflect their real name. This would be the default choice provided by
the system, assuming the user had not selected a username that contained their real name. Even so, the
percentages of comments linked to identities did go up over time (13% in Condition 1, 20% in Condition
2, 22% in Condition 3).
  Elimination of the option to post anonymously appears to have led to a substantial decrease in overall
comments    posted  in the community   and to     a moderate    increase in  peripheral participation.  2,148
comments were posted under Condition 1 in August 2003.           Under Condition 2 in October, only 1,283
comments were posted, a 40% decrease.      Yet, measures of peripheral participation increased. Between
August  and   October,   unique visits to  the      site and   page views    increased  approximately   10%.
Unfortunately, a server crash resulted in the loss of participation data from January-July 2004, so we
cannot report participation data for Condition 3.
                                 Table 4: Condition and Participation
             Anonymity Rules and Month      Unique Visits/ Page Views         Posts Contributed
             Condition 1: Augusts 2003              46,040 / 339,067               2,148
             Condition 2: October 2003              51,374 / 371,029               1,283
             Condition 3: June 2004                        N/A                     N/A

Anonymity and comment quality
Comments in the system were generally positive and helpful, with a mean of 3.1 (n=1501, sd=0.47). In
particular, only 90 (6%) of the 1501 comments were "flames" (coded as negative or very negative), and
only three earned the worst rating. 248 comments (17%) were coded at the highest quality level.

                                                    
  Overall, there is a strong relationship between anonymity and our measure of quality (professionalism
and productive discussion). Anonymity as measured on our four-point scale correlated significantly with
the quality measure r=.217, N=1501, p<.0001. Of the 90 negative comments (Quality Levels 1 and 2), 84
(93%) were made with some level of anonymity (Anonymity Level 1 or 2), and only six were linked to the
participant's real name (Anonymity Level 3 or 4). On the other hand, 73 (29%) of the 248 most positive
comments (Quality Level 4), were linked to the participant's real name, and 40 (16%) were explicitly
signed by the   contributor (Anonymity   Level  4).   Clearly, people prefer to  make  negative  comments
anonymously.

Quality by condition
How did the change in anonymity policies affect the professionalism or productiveness of the comments?
Elimination of the option to post anonymously achieved the moderators' desired effect: flaming decreased
sharply, from 11% to 2% of all comments. An ANOVA on condition revealed a significant main effect
F(2, 1498)=19.48, p<.0001. Using Fisher's PLSD, Condition 1 was significantly different than each of
Conditions 2 and 3, but these last two conditions were not significantly different from each other. See
Tables 4 and Table 5.
Table 5: Comment Quality by Condition
                       1-Very         2-Negative        3-Positive     4-Very          Mean
                       Negative                                        Positive
Condition 1 (n=707)    0%    (2)      11%      (77)     75%     (530)  14%    (98)     3.02
Condition 2 (n=386)    0%    (0)      2%        (7)     79%     (306)  19%    (73)     3.17
Condition 3 (n=408)    0%    (1)      1%        (3)     80%     (327)  19%    (77)     3.17
Table 6: Effects of condition on quality
Fisher's PLSD for comment quality
                                  Mean         Crit.      P-value
                                  Diff.        Diff.
  Condition 1, Condition 2        -.147        .058       <.0001*
  Condition 1, Condition 3        -.152        .057       <.0001*
  Condition 2, Condition 3        -.005        .065        .8678

  The relationship between quality and anonymity varied across the three conditions. The correlations
between quality and anonymity in Conditions 1 and 3 were significant and positive (r=.215, N=707,
p<.0001; r=.166, N=408, p=.0007) while the correlation in Condition 2 was positive but insignificant
(r=.057, N=386, p=.2650).

Participant reactions: In their own words
In April 2004, after the option to post anonymously had been removed but before most accounts were
linked to personal identifiers available to the administrators, we polled members on their preferred level of
anonymity for the community and offered them the chance to explain their vote.        Sixty-three members
participated in the voluntary poll, and forty-six of them added comments. Although 17% of respondents
preferred total anonymity, twice that percentage (36%) preferred options that attributed the contributor's
real name to each comment.    Almost one-half of the respondents, however, indicated a preference for a
middle-ground position in which posts were attributed to the contributor's username.   The preferred level
of anonymity, then, was the one used most often by users under all contributions during the course of this
study--comments attributed only to the contributor's username.
Table 7: Member Preferences on Anonymity Policy
Anonymity Policy                                Respondents Preferring
Total anonymity permitted in posts              17.2%
Username only                                   45.3%
Username with real name available in profile    18.8%
Actual name required in posts                   17.2%

The reasons respondents offered reflected a tension between the dual community goods of candor and
responsibility.   Those   who    thought  that  anonymous      comments   should   be  permitted   appealed
overwhelmingly    to the perceived  need  to   speak  candidly   without being  constrained by   a fear of
retribution. "The forum should be a place where leaders can vent and express opinions without fear of

                                                    
repercussions," said one respondent.     Another member commented, "I'd be reluctant to say what I truly
feel, especially if it's unpopular, if I thought it may come back to haunt me. You never know who you can
[anger] out there or whose command you wind up in later on down the road."
    At the other end of the spectrum, respondents who thought that all posts should include the member's
real name justified their position in terms of promoting responsible online behavior and credibility of
information. One member put it this way:
       I object to anonymous posting for several reasons. The first is a matter of trust. This is a
       professional forum; if you place enough value in your opinion to have posted it for
       everyone to read, you should be brave enough to attach your name. Anonymous messages
       have -zero- credibility: if you don't have the integrity to attach your name to your opinion,
       why should I take the time out of a busy day to read it?     Secondly, I have seen the effects
       of anonymous posting back when it was allowed on platoonleader. This led to thousands
       upon thousands of stupid, time- and resource-wasting 'joke' messages. I come to the site to
       discuss serious things with serious people, not read ten thousand anonymous messages
       about [stupid topics].    There are supposedly benefits to having anonymous postings. I
       have heard the 'worrying about repercussions' argument, among others, but it just doesn't
       seem to hold water. The benefits, if any, are minuscule; the problems anonymous posting
       creates are enormous and wasteful.      Please don't bring it back.
Nearly  half of  the  respondents  supported   the option  for pseudonymity   in  their community.      Their
comments emphasized that this option facilitated candor while reigning in the excesses of total anonymity.
As one member put it:
       While I think that the anonymous posters, as a group, detracted from the professionalism of
       the site, I still think a limited amount of anonymity is a good idea. It fosters a more heated
       debate forum where real opinions, rather than the "party line" can be expressed. Anything
       dangerous or truly unprofessional can be pursued by a moderator of the forum through the
       user's army.mil address, but for the most part, this site should still remain a vaguely
       anonymous arena for honest and candid discussion.
Interestingly, the arguments for anonymity generally argued from the point of view of the poster, while
the arguments for attribution argued from the point of view of the reader. We return to this issue later.

DISCUSSION
To sum up, attribution or anonymity policies can have a significant effect on the professionalism and
productiveness of comments posted in an online community of practice.        Eliminating the option to post
anonymously nearly eliminated negative comments, reducing their occurrence by 89% during a period in
which member visits and page views increased approximately 10%. By increasing attribution within the
community dialogue, a higher percentage of productive comments were read by more members more
often.
    Interestingly, pseudonymity is compatible with responsible online behavior. There was no statistically
significant change in comment quality when actual identities were linked to usernames. This helps shed an
important light on why attribution matters. In Condition 2, users had the option to participate online using
a "throwaway" email account, such as a hotmail or yahoo email address. Thus, it is unlikely that there
would  be any    real-world negative  repercussions  to inappropriate   behavior. And,  given   that  the vast
majority of  comments     posted were  at Anonymity    Level   2, users were  unlikely  to obtain   real-world
recognition for their positive behavior. Why then did behavior change radically between Conditions 1 and
2, but not between Conditions 2 and 3?     Online social reputation may be more significant than concern
for adverse  repercussions  in   shaping participant behavior.  In other   words, these results  suggest  that
building and maintaining an identity within the community of practice may be more important than real-
world professional rewards or sanctions such as raises or disciplinary actions.
    Two incidents that occurred outside the direct scope of this study corroborate this interpretation.     In
the course of this research, we discovered one section of the site that the moderators had overlooked when
they turned off the option to post anonymously and thus allowed users to violate the standard site policies
about attribution.  That section had 13 posts, 4 of which were posted anonymously.       Of those 4 posts, 1
would have been coded as negative in quality.    So, 1 of the 13 comments, or 7%, were negative, which is
well above   the rate for the rest of the site during that time   period.  This anecdote, while statistically
insignificant, is nevertheless consistent with our finding that many members will post anonymously if
given the option, and will be more likely to make negative comments if they post anonymously.
    A second incident reveals the importance of online reputation in a pseudonymous environment.            In
October 2004, an active member (179 posts) uncharacteristically posted a very negative comment about
another member.    Immediately, other members of the community pointed out the inappropriateness of the

                                                    
comment, and the poster edited it.        The target of the libel, however, contacted the moderators of the site
to request the poster's identity to pursue legal charges.       When the moderators contacted the wayward
poster about the issue, the member had a two-fold response.        On the one hand, he took responsibility for
his actions, expressed his willingness to face legal punishment, and contacted the person he had libeled
and apologized.     On the other hand, he asked that his username be changed, saying, "People will hold it
against  me.   I need    a fresh  start."  Remarkably,   he seemed  more    concerned   about his  status  in the
community than he was about facing possible legal proceedings.
   The latter story provides insight into a strength of the PlatoonLeader community--the high level of
trust between the moderators and the members. The strong support for pseudonymity in the member
survey was augmented by statements of confidence in the moderators' role in addressing bad behavior.
Absent this confidence that the moderators would protect them from flamers and protect their identities,
members might be more inclined either to demand more attribution (to deter flames) or to want more
anonymity (to protect their own ability to speak candidly). This moderation may be the key to negotiating
the differing goals of the posters and the readers that were evident in the poll.
   A natural constraint that increases the validity of this natural experiment is that the moderators did not
have  the  option   to delete  member     accounts;  doing  so  would have  caused   any threads   the members
participated in to crash.    The improved member conduct in Conditions 2 and 3, then, is apparently not due
to "culling the herd" of troublesome members.
   In this   study,   we   measured    "comment    quality" in  terms of its   professionalism  and  impact   on
productive discussion, but we did not attempt to judge its quality directly in terms of learning value.
Coming from the perspective of social learning theory (Wenger, 1998), we believe that learning occurs
through participation in a community of practice.        Through members' legitimate peripheral participation
in a community, they come increasingly to adopt the community's practices, identify with it, and find
meaning in it.    In this study, we see that increased levels of online identification (through the elimination
of online  anonymity)      led to a higher  ratio of professional  interaction among    members   and  increased
peripheral participation by members.       Those are indications of increased learning value in the community.
   An interesting question for further research is the role that a community's maturation has on whether
anonymity levels affect productive behavior and learning.        The relatively short duration of this study in a
community that was already two-years old would seem to limit the impact of maturation as a conflating
variable.  Still, it's unknown how the community would have reacted to the elimination of anonymity if it
had been less mature. There is need for further study to gain a better understanding of the relationships
between online anonymity, online behavior, identity formation, community maturity, and learning in an
online community of practice.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to thank the Center for the Advancement of Leader Development & Organizational Learning at
the U.S. Military Academy for its support for this research and the PlatoonLeader community of practice.
We could not have conducted this research without the efforts of PlatoonLeader support team--Patrick
Michaelis, Steven Schweitzer, and Tim Wright.            We also want to thank those here at Penn State who
helped us.     Justin  Corbett   provided   hours of administrative support,   and Rob   Griggs  conducted    the
intergrader reliability.   As always, the graduate students of the Design of Learning, Collaboration, and
Experience lab (DOLCE Lab) provided us encouragement, probing questions, and helpful feedback.

REFERENCES
Barab, S. A., & Duffy, T. (2000). From practice fields to communities of practice. In D. Jonassen, & S. M.
      Land.      (Eds.).   Theoretical foundations   of  learning  environments    (pp. 25-56).  Mahwah,      NJ:
      Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chan,   C. M.,   Bhandar,    M.,  Oh,  L.,  &  Chan,  H.  (2004).  Recognition   and participation  in a  virtual
      community. Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (January
      2004, Hawaii), IEEE Computer Society, 1-10.
Chester,   A., &  Gwynne,      G. (1998).   Online  teaching:   Encouraging collaboration  through  anonymity.
      Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication [On-line], 4(2).
Dixon, N., Allen, N., Burgess, T., Kilner, P., & Schweitzer, S. (2005). CompanyCommand: Unleashing
      the   power   of   the   Army profession.   West   Point, NY:  Center  for the Advancement       of Leader
      Development & Organizational Learning.
Gray, B. (2004). Informal learning in an online community of practice. Journal of Distance Education,
      19(1), 20-35.
Halverson,   E.  R. (2004).    Narrative   and Identity: Constructing Oppositional   Identities in Performance
      Communities. In Y. B. Kafai, W. A. Sandoval, N. Enyedy, A. Scott Nixon & F. Herrera (Eds.),

                                                       
       Sixth international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2004): Embracing diversity in the
       learning sciences (pp. 246-253). Los Angeles, CA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Herring, S. (1996). Posting in a different voice: gender and ethics in computer-mediated communication.
       In C. Ess (Ed.), Philosophical perspectives in computer-mediated communication (pp. 115-146).
       Albany, New York: State University of New York Press.
Hoadley, C. (1999). Scaffolding scientific discussion using socially relevant representations in networked
       multimedia. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, CA.
Hoadley, C. (2002). Creating context: Design-based research in creating and understanding CSCL. In G.
       Stahl    (Ed.), Computer  Support  for   Collaborative Learning  2002   (pp. 453-462).   Mahwah, NJ:
       Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hoadley, C. (2004). Methodological alignment in design-based research. Educational Psychologist, 39(4),
       203-212.
Hsi,  S. (1997).    Facilitating knowledge     integration in science  through   electronic discussion:  the
       Multimedia Forum Kiosk. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, CA.
Hsi, S., &      Hoadley, C.   (1997). Productive  discussion  in science: gender  equity  through  electronic
       discourse. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 10(1), 23-36.
Lave,    J., &   Wenger,   E. (1991).  Situated  learning: Legitimate peripheral  participation.  New York:
       Cambridge University Press.
Millen, D. R., & Patterson, J. F. (2003). Identity disclosure and the creation of social capital. Proceedings
       of CHI '03 (Fort Lauderdale, FL, April 2003), ACM Press, 720-721.
Nasir, N.    I. S. (2002). Identity,  goals, and learning:  Mathematics   in cultural practice. Mathematical
       Thinking & Learning, 4(2/3), 213-248.
Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1989). The construction zone: Working for cognitive change in
       school. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Orr, J. E. (1990). Sharing knowledge, celebrating identity: Community memory in a service culture. In D.
       Middleton & D. Edwards (Eds.), Collective remembering (pp. 169-189). Newbury Park, CA: Sage
       Publications.
Scardamalia, M. (2003). Knowledge Society Network (KSN): Toward an expert society for democratizing
       knowledge. Journal of Distance Education, 17(3), 63-66.
Schlager, M., Fusco, J., & Schank, P. K. (2003). Evolution of an online education community of practice.
       In K. A. Renninger & W. Shumar (Eds.), Building virtual communities: learning and change in
       cyberspace. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: identity in the age of the Internet. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wenger, E., McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating Communities of Practice: A guide to
       managing knowledge.       Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Wertsch, J. (1985). Vygotsky and the Social Formation of Mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
       Press.

                                                      
