   AGQ: A Model of Student Question Generation
 Supported by One-on-One Educational Computing

                 Sung-Bin Chang                                               Kuan-Jung Tung
   Department of Computer Science and                              Department of Computer Science and
              Information Engineering                                    Information Engineering
   National Central University, Taiwan                             National Central University, Taiwan
              legend@cl.ncu.edu.tw                                       tgz0819@lst.ncu.edu.tw

               Hsien-Ming Huang                                                Tak-Wai Chan
         Degree Program of E-Learning                           Graduate Institute of Network Learning
  National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan                                          Technology
         mozart@mail.clhs.tyc.edu.tw                               National Central University, Taiwan
                                                                             chan@cl.ncu.edu.tw

     Abstract.    One-on-one    educational computing    refers    to 1 student 1 computing      device, which
     means every student in a group uses a digital learning device. In this paper, we present a model of
     student question generation called AGQ, which stands for "asking a good question," supported by
     one-on-one     educational computing   in the  classroom      settings. AGQ  is    designed  for engaging
     students    in a challenging   learning  activity   that   potentially  involves   higher-level  cognitive
     processing operations. We shall describe the general design of AGQ, called Product Evolution,
     and that the current version is a variation of it.

     Keywords: One-on-one educational computing, peer question generation, question posing

INTRODUCTION
Development of various forms of computing devices connected with wireless and wired network has advanced
to a stage that these technologies have become an important part of learning environment for teachers and
students (Weiser,   1998). Their   advantages   in  supporting     learning   includes    increasing  availability and
accessibility of information,   engaging  students in   learning-related    activities in diverse physical  locations,
supporting group work on projects, and enhancing communication and collaborative learning in the classrooms
(Gay et al., 2001, Goldman et al., 2001).
  One-on-one educational computing classroom (1:1 classroom) refers to a classroom in which every student
uses a digital learning device, such as personal digital assistant, notebook, tablet PC, etc., to participate in
learning activities. WiTEC or its subsequent DCE (digital classroom environment) system (Huang, et. al., 2001;
Liu, et. al., 2003, 2002, 2003) are examples of 1:1 classroom that can potentially reduce time for the teacher to
do tedious logistic work such as dispatching and collecting worksheets, grading quiz, recording teaching and
learning processes as portfolios, engaging students in learning activities, enabling teacher to monitor student
learning states, and facilitating group collaborative learning.
  In this paper, we describe a CSCL model for supporting learning by asking questions in 1:1 classrooms
called AGQ. We explain the rationales of its general design, called Product Evolution, which intends to make
AGQ engaging, like a social game, while at the same time be able to elicit student cognitive operations. After
delineating the technology support for AGQ, we discuss observations of a pilot study in a graduate course and
future improvement.

AGQ: ASKING GOOD QUESTIONS
"Did you ask a good question today?" Isidore Rabi's mother always asked, instead of asking "Did you learn
anything in school today?" by others' mothers. Rabi, a Nobel laureate in physics, credited this difference, asking
good questions, as the reason why he became a scientist (Ciardiello, 1998). Einstein also mentioned "The mere
formulation of a problem is far more essential than its solution, which may be merely a matter of mathematical
or experimental skills. To raise new questions, new possibilities, to regard old problems from a new angle
requires creative   imagination and marks    real  advances     in science."  For emphasizing     the  importance    of

                                                         
questioning, he also said, "Learn from yesterday, live for today, hope for tomorrow. The important thing is not
to stop questioning." (http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/authors/a/albert_einstein.html)

PRODUCT EVOLUTION METHOD AND DCC PROCESS
The essential learning is to engage students in the meaningful activities. Questioning is a valuable learning tool,
not only for the answerer, but also for the questioner. It is important for students to create their own explanations
of the information around them (Geelan, 1997). The activity of designing question and answer (Q&A) helps
students retain and relate new information to prior knowledge. It gives students a chance to start to formulate
answers by retrieving information from long-term memory. When students engage in the task of constructing
and self-assessing Q&As     they composed,    students  need to  construct a question  and  build   the answer
corresponding to the question, indicate which part of the learning material is important and worth to test and
clarify his comprehension of the learning material. In sum, questioning is a strategy to guide students to develop
a repertoire of cognitive abilities (Balajthy, 1984; Ciardiello, 1998; Yu et al., 2002) ­ recall prior knowledge,
search or inspect the learning material, identify the main ideas and concepts, make connections between them,
and so forth. In this paper, we discuss the questioning in the situation which students design to test their peers.
  Questioning can be of various modes (Gadamer, 1990). AGQ, which stands for "asking a good question," is
the current version of a series of our effort in designing penetrating questions and evaluation of answers (Yu,
2004). AGQ   adopts  a cognitive  conflict resolution  process, called DCC   process, consisting of three  sub-
processes, differentiated products, cognitive conflict, and  common    product. "Differentiated  products" is       a
deliberate strategy for creating individual differences by summoning individuals to generate ideas, questions,
articles, and so forth, which we term as products. In the case, AGQ encourages students to produce Q&As. This
requires prior knowledge and creative thinking of individuals and because of uniqueness of individual past
experiences, the products generated must be different in some aspects. "Cognitive conflict" is to put individuals
together and demand them to develop some common consensus on their generated products. Because of the
differences in their products, they have to explain, analyze, evaluate and discriminate their products. This sub-
process commands critical thinking. Finally, "common product" calls for ability of modification and synthesis of
their differentiated products into a common product.
  Applying DCC, individuals generate their differentiated products. And then, small teams of a class are
formed from individuals and finally generate their common products. If we apply DCC again, then larger teams
are formed merging smaller teams in the previous round and the common product could in general be better than
the previous one. We can repeat DCC process until the final round in which either there is only one team left,
that is, the whole class, or the teams in the final round are competing teams and these teams participate in a
contest for evaluating their final products. We call such a method of successively applying DCC as product
evolution method (PEM).
  Of course, there are various versions of PEM. According to the learning material, the teacher may assign
types of questions based on the six categories of cognitive domain (Bloom, 1956). Also, PEM can be applied to
other small group learning other than generating questions. For example, in the Reciprocal Teaching method
(Palinsar & Brown, 1984) for text reading comprehension, a small group of students take turn for questioning,
clarification, summarization, and prediction. Now, suppose we require a small group of 4 students, instead of
having them all generate questions, every member has to conduct a different prescribed task, such as those
described in Reciprocal Teaching. Then the product evolution method will become a variant of Jigsaw method.

CURRENT AGQ PROCEDURE
Since there are not many students in the graduate course for the pilot test, the current version of AGQ is a simple
form of PEM and DCC is applied only once. There are five phases: (1) Teacher-led presentation of learning
material; (2) Self-study of learning material and individual Q&A generation; (3) Q&A assessment; (4) Small
group formation and conflict resolution; and (5) Teacher-led class-wide discussion. Noticed that the (2), (3), and
(4) is a DCC process. To carry out AGQ, one or two class periods are needed.
  We choose multiple choice questions as the form of our questioning since multiple choice question items are
the most familiar type of questions for students. A multiple choice item includes a question stem, an exactly
correct option and three alternatives. To construct a multiple choice question, a student has to design a question
stem with clear and definite description, make an exactly correct option corresponding to the question stem and
three alternatives with well-attractive description. In other words, they have to understand the concept involved
in the question and the relations between the correct option and the other alternatives. And the orders of four
opinions are needed to be well-arranged. Figure 1 below delineates the interface for a student to design a
multiple choice question item.
  After every student generates her Q&A, there is a reflection process. First, a student self-assesses her Q&A
with a set of rubrics. Following that every Q&A is sent to two anonymous peer reviewers for peer-assessment.

                                                        
This also means that every student anonymously reviews two Q&As from two other students'. Anonymous
reviews are judged more critically than those made in the identifiable condition (Zhao, 1998). After that, all the
mutual reviewers are told to form triads and now every student knows who two other students review her Q&A
previously. The objective of each triad is to send two items for the class-wide discussion led by the teacher.
They have to determine which two items to be sent from the three they have. In order to resolve the conflicts,
each student in the triad has to elaborate, justify, or clarify possible confusions on the ideas of her own item, and
correct the  item according to her  teammates'  comments.    They      try  to reach    their best consensuses in  this
negotiation process--not just finish the task. Some revisions might be needed before sending them out. (Figure
2) illustrates the interface of the self and peer assessment form.

                              Figure 1. Work space of individual question design
    In the phase of teacher-led class-wide discussion, every student has to answer and give scores to all Q&As
from every triad. Teacher also scores for all the products with explanation, but possibly with weight different
from a student. Viewing products from other teams broadens the horizon of their thought. Teacher points out if
there are misconceptions and misunderstandings. Finally, the system sums up the scores given by students and
the teacher. The  teacher's role in this class-wide discussion      is  necessary   for  pointing  out some  common
misunderstandings   with clarifications and  explanations   in     time for    the whole   class,  avoiding the   same
misunderstandings to happen in the future.

                             Figure 2. Self-assessment and peer-assessment forms
    Follow from that, every student has to answer all questions composed by other groups individually and then
compares his/her answers with the answers given by others and then rank all the Q&As. The teacher also ranks
all the Q&As   with explanation. Based   on the rankings    by     students and    that by the  teacher, possibly with
different weights, the ranking of the teams can be decided.

ONE-ON-ONE CLASSROOM SUPPORT FOR AGQ
The information could be effectively transferred from the handheld network to social network in a mobile
computer supported collaborative learning activity (Zurita et al., 2004). Advancement of technology enables
CSCL to extend the traditional collaborative learning activities to include computing capabilities, offering new
possibilities for achieving more effective and attractive learning activities. The emerging of mobile technology
even provides the potential that every learner has her owned personal devices for participating learning activities
all the time and at different locations. In such a mobile learning environment, it is easer for learners to exchange
information and more social interactions allowed (Jansen et al. 2003; Zurita et al., 2003).

                                                        
  Integration  of digital devices  with wireless and wired network     connection provides  an environment  for
computer-mediated face-to-face interactions. This environment empowers the conflict resolution process when
every member can look at what she has done from individual view or what they have done from the integrated
view on demand with annotation facilities. The movements among students in the classroom are at ease with the
support of wireless communication. It is also a simple task for the teacher to assign students into small groups
and every member of a small group can generate their questions and answers in the AGQ procedure.
  Without the support of the digital devices and related technologies, there are some tedious works to run
AGQ using flash cards or papers. For example, a student needs a piece of paper to construct her question and
answer (Q&A). After copying the Q&A with several pieces of papers for self-assessment and peer-assessment
of the items, some more papers will be used in the small group collaboration. Dispatching papers is also a time
consuming process. One-on-one classroom can address these problems and much easier for some logistic task.
For example, in the anonymous peer-assessment process, system can distribute Q&As directly to anonymous
reviewers in a second.

TRIAL TEST
A trial test of AGQ was conducted in a graduate course. There were twenty-one graduate students with Table
PCs to participate in the experiment. Before starting the procedure of AGQ, a collaborative presentation of
learning material was carried out by some students. And then, each student composed a multiple choice about
the learning material as their learning task in the first phase. After the composing phase, each student had to
anonymously assess two items composed by other students. Then, there are eight trials formed in the whole class
to proceed the next phase. With the display of the results of the peer-assessment on their Table PCs, they
discussed face-to-face to elaborate their evaluations, choose two items as their small group items and revise
them before submitting. Next, two trials were formed as a large group. Four large groups were formed in the
phase. The peer-assessments and item choosing were repeated again. Because of absences and the problems with
the connection between a few devices and the server, only seven items were sent to the phase of class-wide
discussion. It totally took two hours to finish the procedure of AGQ.
  According    to our  observation, the activity was engaging and     they participated in actively through the
process. Unfortunately, because most participants were unfamiliar with the operations of the system, much time
was spent on trying to find out how to operate the system correctly. Refinement of the system is needed for
ensuring smooth run of AGQ procedure.
  We note that questions generated in this experiment were mainly fact-based questions. Many stems of the
items are excerpts selected from the important parts of the learning material. Students also use concepts which
are titles and sub-titles of sections and subsections, respectively, in the learning material. Also, they adopted
some sentences in the presentation given by the teacher at the beginning phase. We also noticed that there were
substantial number of similar Q&As generated by different students in the experiment.

SUMMARY
AGQ is a model of CSCL testing how student learning can be enhanced in 1:1 classroom. The current version of
AGQ  applies  PEM   and   involves  one DCC  process: individual Q&A     generation, self-assessment  and peer-
assessment, small group conflict resolution and modifications to reach common consensus. Finally a teacher-led
class-wide discussion enables students to have a global view of the learning material digested by the class. A
trial test was performed with the system and some observations were discussed. In next round of study, we shall
incorporate guided questioning strategy to facilitate student understanding of the material and encourage and
scaffold them to construct higher-level questions, not just factual questions (King, 1992, 1997). And some
evaluations will be conducted at the next stage, such as the students' perceptions of processing the procedure of
AGQ and the use of the technology, how usefulness and effectiveness of the procedure of AGQ and the support
of software.

REFERENCE
Balajthy, E. (1984) Using Student-Constructed Questions to Encourage Active Learning. Journal of Reading,
     27, 5, 408-411.
Bloom, B.S. (1956) Taxonomy of educational objectives. Handbook 1: Cognitive domain. Longman, New York.
Ciardiello, A. V. (1998) Did you ask a good question today? Alternative cognitive and metacognitive strategies.
     Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 42, 3, 210-219.
Gadamer, H. G. (1990) Truth and method. New York: Seaview.

                                                        
Gay,  G.,  Stefanone, M.,  Grace-Martin,  M., and   Hembrook, H.(2001)   The effects of wireless computing    in
        collaborative learning environments. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 13, 2, 257-
        276.
Geelan, D. R. (1997) Epistemological Anarchy and the Many Forms of Constructivisim. Science & Education,
        6, 15-28.
Goldman, P. and Kaufman, B. (2001) How to push an elephant through a straw: Using wireless technology in a
        web-enhanced skills program. International Review of Law Computers and Technology, 15, 3, 281-299.
Huang,  C.W.,   Liang,  J.K. &  Wang,   H.Y.  (2001)  EduClick: A   Computer-supported  Formative   Evaluation
        System with Wireless Devices in Ordinary Classroom. In Proceedings of International Conference on
        Computers in Education (ICCE), 2001, pp. 1462-1469.
Jansen, M., Oelinger, M., Hoeksema, K., & Hoppe, U. (2003) An Interactive Maze Scenario with Physical
        Robots and Other Smart Devices. In J. Roschelle, T. W. Chan, Kinshuk, & S. J. H., Yang (Eds), The 2nd
        IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education, (pp. 83-90). The IEEE
        Computer Society Publications, Los Alamitos, CA.
King, A. (1992) Facilitating Elaborative Learning Through Guided Student-Generated Questioning. Education
        Psychologist, 27, 1, 111-126.
King, A. (1997) ASK to THINK-TEL WHY®©: A Model of Transactive Peer Tutoring for Scaffolding Higher
        Level Complex Learning. Education Psychologist, 32, 4, 221-235.
Liu, T. C., Liang, J. K., Wang, H. Y., Chan, T. W., & Wei, L. H. (2003). Embedding EduClick in Classroom to
        Enhance Interaction. In Proceedings of International Conference on Computers in Education (ICCE),
        117-125.
Liu, T. C., Wang, H. Y., Liang, J. K., Chan, T. W., & Yang, J. C. (2002). Applying Wireless Technologies to
        Build a Highly Interactive Learning Environment. In M. Milrad, U. Hoppe & Kinshuk (Eds), IEEE
        International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education, (pp. 63-70). IEEE Computer
        Society Publications, Los Alamitos, CA.
Liu, T. C., Wang, H. Y., Liang, J. K., Chan, T. W., Ko, H. W., and Yang, J. C. (2003) Wireless and mobile
        technologies to enhance teaching and learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19, 3, 371-382.
Palinsar, A.S. & Brown, A.L. (1984) Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and monitoring activities.
        Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117 ­ 175.
Weiser, M. (1998) The future of ubiquitous computing on campus. Communications of the ACM, 41, 1, 42-43.
Yu, F.Y., Liu, Y.H., and Chan, T.W. (2002) The Efficacy of a Web-based Domain Independent Question-
        Posing and Peer Assessment Learning System. Proceedings of ICCE'02.
Yu.  F.Y., Liu,   Y.H., and  Chan, T.W.   (2004)  A  Web-based  learning system for  question-posing and peer
        assessment: Pedagogical design and preliminary evaluation. To appear in Innovations in Education and
        Teaching International, 42 (2).
Zhao,   Y. (1998)  The  Effects of Anonymity     on Computer-Mediated  Peer  Review.  International Journal   of
        Educational Telecommunications, 4, 311-345.
Zurita,  G.,  and   Nussbaum,    M.   (2004)  Computer    supported  collaborative  learning  using  wirelessly
        interconnected handhelds computers. Computers & Education, 42, 3, 289-314.
Zurita, G., Nussbaum, M., & Shaples, M. (2003). Encouraging Face-to-Face Collaborative Learning through the
        Use of Handheld Computers in the Classroom. In L. Chittaro (Ed.), Fifth International Symposium on
        Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, (pp. 193-208).

                                                         
