    The Evolution of the Intellectual Partnership with a
Cognitive Tool in Inquiry-Based Astronomy Laboratory
                    Beaumie Kim                                               Kenneth E. Hay
 NASA-Sponsored Classroom of the Future                        Learning and Performance Support Lab
           Wheeling Jesuit University                                   The University of Georgia
                    bkim@cet.edu                                              khay@coe.uga.edu

       Abstract. This paper describes a study focused on the longitudinal application of a cognitive tool
       by observing a pair of learners' interaction with it over a semester. This study intended to develop a
       deeper  understanding   of the   process whereby    learners   become   more   capable  of engaging   in
       scientific inquiry with the tool in order to advance technology-enhanced, inquiry-based approaches
       to instruction. In an effort to understand how learners move toward coherent knowledge structure,
       eccentricity  of planet's orbit  emerged  as one    of the main  themes.    The  findings are  discussed
       focused on how the pair used, understood, and elaborated the concept of eccentricity.

       Keywords: Distributed cognition, expertise, cognitive tool, inquiry-based learning, modeling

Inquiry-based pedagogies focus on the question of how people solve problems and create explanations about the
world (Greeno, Collins, & Resnick, 1996). Advances in technology have introduced computerized modeling and
visualizations to scientific inquiry practices, which can be considered as cognitive tools of scientists. Hoping for
the result of better instruction, recent research   examines    how   the inclusion  of technology    in inquiry-based
learning supports people's inquiry processes. Adopting these tools for educational use has a lot of advantages in
engaging students in cognitive activities that are similar to those of scientists.
    The failures of adopting this approach come from our assumption that learners will automatically have rich
experiences as novice scientists (Pea, 1993; Perkins, 1993). The intervention of modern inquiry tools does not
guarantee  learners' engagement    in  modern   scientific inquiry. It  often gives  learners  multiple  challenges of
understanding  the  tools and  inquiry  processes in addition   to  the scientific  contents. However,   there are  not
sufficient investigations regarding how learners come to use tools in profound ways, how learners' growing
expertise in use of tools for scientific inquiry impacts their development of intellectual partnership with it, and
how this partnership evolves over time. As a result of the partnership, the ways in which students construct their
understandings with their tools should become consistent with scientists' practices. Therefore, questions about
learners' development of cognitive partnerships should be explored to adopt these approaches in the classroom.
    The purpose of this study was to develop a deeper understanding of the process whereby learners become
more capable of engaging in scientific inquiry with a computer tool over time. A second goal was to learn how to
improve technology-enhanced, inquiry-based approaches to instruction. We assumed that modeling-based inquiry
and the use of the Astronomicon program would result in students' acquiring practices that resemble those of
scientists. With the theoretical belief that a certain activity, like an inquiry, task forms a particular kind of a
learner-tool joint system, the overarching research question was this: Over an entire semester how do groups gain
expertise in the use of the tool for scientific inquiry and develop intellectual partnership with it?

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK: COGNITIVE TOOLS FOR SCIENTIFIC THINKING
Cognitive tools can be defined simply as aides for cognitive tasks such as complex calculations (Lajoie, 1993) or
more sophisticatedly as "technologies that enhance the cognitive powers of humans during thinking, problem
solving, and learning" (Jonassen & Reeves, 1996). The theoretical foundation of cognitive tools comes from the
theory of distributed cognition, which regards cognition as residing not only in a person's head, but distributed
among people, artifacts, and symbols (Salomon, 1993b). A computer becomes a cognitive tool when it performs
cognitive tasks together with learners. Computer is no longer perceived as a mere delivery medium, but as a tool
with unique capabilities that complement learners' cognition (Kozma, 1991). As computers have been described
as "partners in cognition" (Salomon, Perkins, & Globerson, 1991), we regard learners and cognitive tools as
intellectual partners that have reciprocal interactions during learning activities. The conceptual framework of this
research started with the ideas of distributed cognition and was elaborated with the theory of expertise.
    Expertise is diversely defined as a standard of expert performance (Ericsson & Smith, 1991), as a relative
degree of  excellence   for an activity (Salthouse,  1991),   and  as some  degree   of proficiency   in our everyday
activities (Carlson, 1997). Experts rely on the environment and technology, and capabilities of using them are
part of their expertise (Stein, 1997). Within the field of instructional technology, however, expertise has been
discussed and employed mostly in such areas as intelligent tutoring systems and expert systems. These systems
model and perform the experts' cognitive processes. In contrast to the approach to represent the expert processes,
we should focus more on the roles of technology in experts' practices.
    The expertise view of technology adds specificity to the distributed notion in that the technology becomes one
of the most important assets of the involved activities. With these two theories together, the interactions among

                                                         
learners and tool within an activity represent the expertise of the distributed cognitive system. In other words,
cognitive tools can be regarded as having some kind of expertise, forming a joint system of learning.

Joint Learning System for Scientific Inquiry
Cognitive tools for scientific inquiry are developed by emulating or modifying scientists' tools. These tools
complement the scientific investigation process during the learners' inquiry as if experts use computers for their
professional activities. The main purpose of a cognitive tool varies from organizing and representing learners'
thinking to creating actual products (Ericsson & Smith, 1991; Perkins, 1993). Activities using cognitive tools
should  promote   the ways   in which  tools  are used    in  the world   because   the capabilities of a   tool become
worthwhile only because of the activities the tool affords (Salomon, 1993b).
   How    a joint learning  system   works  in  concert   with scientific   inquiry  should then be   given   significant
emphasis for our research and development. The Learning Through Collaborative Visualization (CoVis) project,
for example, has gone through the iterations of research and development in order to promote open-ended inquiry
within constructivist learning environment (Edelson, Pea, & Gomez., 1996). The major component of the CoVis
project is its investigation tools for learners, such as World Watcher. World Watcher allows users to select units,
examine visualizations at varying scopes, customize the display of visualizations, and analyze and create data
with mathematical operations or other metaphors (Edelson et al., 1999). This opens up a novel opportunity for
learners to dynamically observe different parts of the world, which is impossible to do without such tools. In their
global  warming   curriculum,   students prepared   briefings  of   their investigations  for a fictitious  international
conference, providing authentic experiences as novice scientists (Edelson et al., 1999).

Development of the Joint Learning System
The cognitive growth of an individual cannot be understood without understanding the development of joint
relationships, because  a  person's  growth  is indeed    the result of   the distributed work  with    the environment
(Karasavvidis, 2002; Salomon, 1993b). The outcomes of cognitive tasks include not only constructed knowledge
or performance, but also resulting cognitive process and distributed structure, which are important parts of the
cognitive development      (Salomon,  1993).  When   the   participants   of  distributed cognition   continually  work
together, this particular distributed system is likely to develop into a stronger one. Individuals discover more
affordances  of  the  tool and  even  bring  out  more    abilities of    themselves as  they  develop  the  distributed
relationships. Therefore, the tool and learners better contribute to the performance (Pea, 1993).
   This idea of joint learning system development becomes much more perceptible by applying the concepts
from  the theory  of  expertise. The  elements    characterizing    performance   of  experts  can   be summarized   as
knowledge,  functions,  and  representations.   Experts   process   their knowledge   during  performance    from  more
deductive ones (e.g., rules and formulas) to more inductive ones (e.g., information about exemplars) (Patel &
Groen, 1991). They use cognitive functions varying from simple information search and rule execution to higher-
ordering thinking and problem solving (Ericsson & Charness, 1994; Perkins, 1993). Experts generate complex
representations about problems they encounter, which provide images to support constant reflections on and
improvements in their decision making and actions (Ericsson, 1996; Glaser, 1996; Winn & Snyder, 1996). These
three elements   work  together  with significant   roles in  expert  performance    and  development.   In  developing
expertise, especially in early stages, one should develop a basic structure of expertise in the domain, which
involves better use of a learner's cognitive functions, gained knowledge structure and external representations,
and some automaticity in the performance processes (Keating, 1990; Schneider, 1993; Winn & Snyder, 1996).
Knowledge
In structuring knowledge, novices first make cognitive efforts to understand the nature of tasks in the domain and
to find important information and then to organize their knowledge into more accessible structures (internal
representation of knowledge) (Schneider, 1993). To develop expertise, learners constantly face problems that
challenge the current level of knowledge and competences, requiring them to reorganize the existing fragmented
knowledge and connect with new concepts. Cognitive functions are better facilitated for use when knowledge is
organized in a coherent way (Glaser, 1996). As a joint learning system, learners' knowledge, the tool, and the
current setting  (activity and   environment)   are organized     and  accessed   at  the time  of   performance.   This
organization changes each time they come together as their activity changes and their knowledge develops.
Functions
The learners' growing expertise in the domain and increasing familiarity with the tool are important to perform
better in inquiry activities. The partnership of the joint system remains weak for some time, and then learners
gradually make more effective use of the tool, developing into a stronger joint system (Pea, 1993). Suggested by
scholars in distributed cognition, higher-order thinking such as problem-solving and pattern recognition and
executive functions such as deciding what to do and where to go are the main roles of the learners to perform
tasks  (Perkins, 1993). The   technology   processes  rules,   such  as   producing  representations    with inputs and
retrieving information, but cannot understand the meanings of representations and activities (Salomon, 1993b).
   Novices approach problems with strategies that are based more on concrete information, and then they use
more abstract reasoning as they gain expertise (Anzai, 1991; Patel & Groen, 1991). Novices rely on the surface
features of the problem, commonsense knowledge, and trial-error approaches due to the lack of their domain-
specific knowledge base. They start using a weak method, which uses observation and problem reduction, instead
of starting with  underlying   principles. Experts  approach    problems    with  a  strong method,   using  a   working
hypothesis and relying on the systematic representation and their domain-specific knowledge (Anzai, 1991; Patel

                                                          
& Groen, 1991). Experts focus selectively on relevant information and switch between weak and strong methods
depending on the problem (Anzai, 1991; Patel & Groen, 1991; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991). The processes of
giving selective attentions and using appropriate strategy are automatized by repeated performances on problem-
solving, which enable them to use their cognitive resources to the novel aspects of a problem (Schneider, 1993).
With gained expertise, learners would no longer need to make cognitive efforts to understand the tool itself, but
the cognitive functions of the learners and the tool should become well-coordinated to perform a task.
Representations
The ability to use external representations of knowledge and cognitive process plays an important role in the
performances of many domains (e.g., Anzai, 1991). The internal structure of knowledge is often revealed and
enhanced by the development of external representations, which learners use more efficiently with more expertise
(Patel & Groen, 1991). Especially in science, one of the important inquiry approaches nowadays is to find
patterns using visual representations, such as modeling and visualizations (Pagels, 1988). As a joint system,
learners and the tool produce visual representations together, which are used not only to help others to understand
their findings, but also to help themselves to reflect on their activities (Glaser, 1996).

RESEARCHING THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE JOINT LEARNING SYSTEM
This study intended to examine some of the assumptions about the joint learning system based on the above
conceptual framework (a detailed discussion on this framework can be found in Kim & Reeves, in press; a
relevant study can be found in Hay, Kim, & Roy, in press). First, cognition is distributed within a joint learning
system during students' learning (Salomon, 1993). Second, the way a joint learning system develops through
students' extended  learning experience could  be similar      to the learning   process   of developing  expertise  by
gaining knowledge   structure, problem-solving strategies,     and automaticity   (Keating,   1990;  Schneider, 1993;
Winn & Snyder, 1996). Third, the primary expertise components of a person are knowledge, functions, and
representations, and those of a joint learning system can be regarded as the same (Ericsson & Charness, 1994;
Patel & Groen, 1991; Perkins, 1993). The main questions were: 1) How does the joint learning system develop
intellectual partnership? 2) How does it gain expertise over an entire semester in scientific inquiry using the tool?

Research Set-up
As an undergraduate astronomy reform effort at the University of Georgia, the Virtual Reality Modeling Project
(VRMP) implemented a unique learning approach to an introductory astronomy lab. It covers basic astronomy
concepts of orbits, time, phases, eclipses, and seasons. This course is characterized by a modeling-based inquiry
(MBI)   pedagogical approach   and a three-dimensional   (3D)      model   construction    tool  called Astronomicon.
Learners build and simulate their own models of solar systems within Astronomicon's 3D environment (see
Figure  1). The learner-created  models are used  not  only       as  surrogates of our    solar system,  but also   as
experimentations of nonexistent systems. Modeling tools become very powerful when students build models with
underlying  principles and dynamically  modify    them while       running and   observing     them. Learners   gain a
fundamental understanding about the system through reasoning to make models and observing their created
patterns (Kozma & Shank, 1998; Penner, 2001). Figure 1 shows the overhead view of the Earth (at the center)
and the moon orbiting around the Earth--the big circle is the moon's orbital disk. Astronomicon modeling
interface (Figure 2) facilitates learners' creation of models.

 Figure 1. Astronomicon (overhead view of the Earth)              Figure 2. Astronomicon modeling interface
  Learners worked collaboratively in pairs throughout the semester with an individual laptop computer. They
usually used one of the computers for modeling and the other for information search within a group. In this study
a pair of students was examined as a case to focus on the transitions and changes of their learning. The in-class
observation was focused on the overall process, and the detailed interaction was analyzed using the video data.
This required an in-depth investigation of the learning process and development, for which a complex digital
system was used for data collection and analysis. Integrated Temporal Multimedia Data (ITMD) research system
(Hay & Kim, in press) records, stores, and simultaneously plays the activity of each group, screen captures of the
computer, and the voice of each participant. This approach provides unlimited access to the detailed interactions
among learners and technology, maintaining a contextual richness close to the original. For this study a camera
was set up for the group, and an extra camera was at the back of the classroom to capture any events happening
beyond the group level. Other sources, such as learners' lab notes and written reports, provided a more complete

                                                        
understanding. The results of pre/posttests indicated overall improvements in basic astronomy knowledge. Test
items were focused on light and planetary motion selected from three previously developed and validated tests:
Force Concept    Inventory   (Hestenes,   Wells,    &   Swackhammer,     1992), Project    STAR-Astronomy      Concept
Inventory (Sadler, 1998), and the Astronomy Diagnostics Test (Zeilik, Schau, & Mattern, 1998).
Betty and Allen
The pairs were randomly formed or assigned at the beginning of the semester, and this group (Betty and Allen)
was selected based on the overall attendance and the working relationship between the two. Even though learners
were paired to work together, some chose to work individually, some dominated the work, and/or one of the pair
had too many absences to make any contribution. The other factor of the selection was the balance between the
two learners, including their confidence level, being co-ed, and interest and knowledge about astronomy.
  Betty was taking the lab as her first college-level astronomy as a sophomore, whereas Allen was a senior
retaking  the course after   several years. Both   were  social  science  majors. Betty   was somewhat    interested   in
astronomy  whereas   Allen   read   magazines and    books   about astronomy    and   was  interested in furthering   his
understanding of the universe. Betty did not feel confident in the pretest, in which she correctly answered about
38 percent (the class average was approxiamtely 44 percent). Allen felt confident enough to do the lab work, but
was uncertain about how well he did on the pretest (53 percent correct), which showed some misconceptions.
Betty had the common misconception that the seasons are caused by the changing distance between the Earth and
the sun due to the Earth's elliptical orbit around the sun. Similarly, Allen related the idea of Earth's tilt with the
distance to sun (parts of the Earth would get closer when they are tilted toward the sun).

EVOLVING EXPERTISE AND PARTNERSHIP
The potential roles of the learner(s) and the tool as intellectual partners are implied by knowledge, functions, and
representations embedded in the tool and the learner activities. The framework of the expertise structure guided
the analysis within a meaningful chunk, such as modeling and observing lunar phases, exemplified in Table 1.
Learners gather information to create their models, make decisions on the models and observations, and gain
knowledge about the solar system. Learners use and produce various representations to assist their process. With
the embodied rules, the tool provides the modeling interface that can collect and operate the inputs from learners.
This knowledge and functions of the tool eventually contribute to the working representation of a system, which
is continuously modified or viewed from different perspective throughout the modeling and observation process.
Table 1. The Expertise Structure of the Joint Learning System
                                        Learner(s)                                      Tool (Astronomicon)
                         Defined                       Example                Defined                  Example
Knowledge       Provided/Acquired            Data of the Earth and the   Rules embodied in    Three-dimensional
                information;                 moon (size, mass, etc.);    the software         configuration of the space
                prior/acquired knowledge     cause of the phases
                and understanding
Functions       Decisions about modeling     Observing the moon from     Operations           Producing planetary motion
                and observations;            the Earth;                  performed with       of the moon around the
                inquiry strategies           trial-and-error             learner inputs       Earth
Representations Provided/gathered            Solar system data sheet;    Modeled system       Modeled reality from a
                information materials;       images of the moon going    processed with       specific viewpoint (the
                sketches/notes/reports;      through phases seen from    learner inputs       moon seen from the Earth)
                images from Astronomicon     the Earth
  Novices are characterized by their fragmented knowledge structure and weak approaches to the problems,
which may turn their attention to tangential or unimportant aspects of the situation (Alexander, 2003). During the
process of learning with Astronomicon, learners transform their fragmented factual knowledge from lectures and
textbooks into an experienced one, situated in a coherent structure. During their initial model exploration with
Astronomicon, Betty and Allen focused on surface features, practiced trial-error approaches, and depended on
their common senses, as are characteristics of novices (Anzai, 1991; Patel & Groen, 1991). A typical mistake,
coming from their underestimation of the space scale, was to make the distance between objects too short. Their
initial models had objects being inside of their parent objects or orbiting in and out of it. They started changing
properties, such as semi-major axis (the distance from the planet to its parent object) and eccentricity. Betty and
Allen also maintained their interest on the surface features and their manipulations at the beginning. When first
practicing model building, Betty made planets with various available planet textures and gave them cute names
like Blue and Sharpie. When they first worked together and made four different Earths, Allen applied multiple
kinds of Earth's textures to the planets (e.g., the Earth's topographical image, the satellite image with clouds, and
images with different resolutions).
  We explored the interactions within the joint learning system in order to understand the evolving expertise
structure and overcoming novice traits. Working as a pair with one computer, learners also negotiated their roles
within the team and went through the familiarization process with the 3D tool. We will focus our discussion on
the growth of the expertise structure outlined above; nonetheless, the role negotiation and tool familiarization
process are inherently part of the episodes. One of the constructs that determine the planetary motion of the solar
system is eccentricity (the extent to which an elliptical orbit departs from a circular one. Eccentricity ranges between 0 and
1, 0 being a circle.). Eccentricity was the very first concept that learners explored in the class and continuously
dealt with for their inquiry and was emerged as one of the main themes that continuously appeared. As one of the
examples of the change in knowledge structure and inquiry approaches of the joint learning system, we will look
at how Betty and Allen used, understood, and elaborated the concept of eccentricity.

                                                           
Episode One: Making Meanings of Eccentricity
On the first day of working with Astronomicon, learners were asked to explore the differences made by changing
the orbital eccentricity: What is eccentricity?
    -   Create a sun with four almost identical planets.
    -   The only difference should be the eccentricity.
    -   Explain the concept of eccentricity to your instructor using the taken data (pictures).
Before doing this activity, eccentricity () was a word without much meaning, and its input values were numbers
without any concept association. Watch Betty and Allen first started playing with Astronomicon:
    1.  [Betty keeps getting error messages when clicking on OK button, trying to finish adding a new planet.
        Error message: Please enter a number between 0 and 1.]
    2.  Betty: Huh... between 0 and 1... Is my eccentricity wrong? [currently 5]
    3.  Allen: Yes. Because eccentricity 1 means circle. To make it elliptical you have to make it less than 1.
    4.  Betty: Could be that? [putting in .00002].
    5.  Allen: You can try. I don't see why not. I guess that's the whole point of the program.
Earlier in class, Betty had trouble with her input for eccentricity [1-2]. Allen gave her the right value range (<1),
but incorrect information that eccentricity 1 meant a circle [3]. Allen had a much better sense of the concept,
knowing that eccentricity values had to do with shapes. At this point, however, the input of the .00002 value did
not mean more than a random experiment to Betty, nor did to Allen [4-5].
    Later, when they worked on the above task together, Betty and Allen started to make the connections between
the numbers and the actual    shapes of  the    orbits.              Their initial  model      consisted  of the four    planets    whose
eccentricities were very close to zero (E1, =.01; E2, =.03; E3, =.05; and E4, =.07). All four planets were
closely lined together, almost overlapping with each other [6-11].
    6.  Allen: I don't know what that did. I guess we will find out.
    7.  Betty: I guess maybe it is hiding behind another one, maybe.
    8.  Allen: Let's try... [making a new waypoint, E1 to E3]
    9.  [As he runs the model, E3 moves forward and backward from very close view and other planets are also
        seen from very close positions.]
    10. Allen: What in the world?
    11. Betty: I think they are running into each other...
A waypoint is a viewpoint defined by observer location and target direction. Learners choose where to "look
from" and "look at" as in [8]. Using orbital disks, they realized that the differences among eccentricities values
were not significant enough to have noticeable differences in orbits [12-16]. As they changed the values to have
bigger differences, they saw the differences in shapes [17-21].
    12. Betty: Maybe we should view it with the orbit thing. You know what I am saying?
    13. Allen: Oh, ah, good! [going to the menu and turning on orbital disks for planets]
    14. [As the orbital disk of each planet is turned on, the shapes of orbits show, which are all close to circles.]
    15. Allen: OK, let's do this... actually make the eccentricities further apart.
    16. Betty: OK, good call.
    17. Allen: 'Cause it can be between 1 and 0, so we got a lot to play with.
    18. Betty: And we will be able to see it better.
    19. Allen: [modifying E2 (=.1)] Now, orbital disk... [turning on its orbital disk] Little bit better?
    20. Betty: Yeah. [Allen changing the eccentricities of E3 (=.3) and E4 (=.8), turning on disks.] (Figure 3)
    21. Betty: OK, the closer to zero, the more circular they are.
    22. Allen: Yeah, it was zero, not the other way around.
                                                   Table 2. Eccentricity pre-exercise
                                                                            Betty and Allen                       Astronomicon
                                                                    Eccentricity;                        Underlying physics;
                                                                    Its values and orbit shapes          Modeling interface;
                                                                                                         Eccentricity value range;
                                                                                                         Waypoint interface;
                                                                    Decisions about input values/        Rule executions with learner inputs
                                                                    observation tools (orbital           to create planets and create views
                                                                    disks)/perspectives;                 for waypoints;
                                                                    Trial-error approach (inputting/     Simulate motions of planets
                                                                    observing/judging  values)
                                                                    Notes about the task on the board;   Modeled system with 4 planets;
                                                                    Data taken from Astronomicon         Visualized orbital disks;
                                                                    demonstrating differences in         Waypoint, E1 to E3;
                                                                    eccentricity (similar to Figure 3)   Waypoint, Overhead view (Figure
 Figure 3. A screen capture from Betty and                                                               3)
Allen's 09/08 video: Eccentricity pre-exercise
Here, Betty played a significant role in creating a meaning of eccentricity. She suggested utilizing visual
representations of orbits [12-13], which enabled them to see the actual shapes of the orbits. This helped them to
understand the eccentricity values [21]. Allen realized the information he provided earlier was incorrect [22].
Development
Through the process of working with new partners, definitional, numeral, and visual meanings of eccentricity
started to be associated together in their knowledge structure. Allen played a main role of manipulating

                                                                      
                                                    RepresentationsFunctionsKnowledge
Astronomicon, Betty facilitated their observation, and Astronomicon produced models and visuals with inputs.
For this activity they used the most basic problem-solving strategy, which is trial-error approach. This activity
allowed learners to take this weak method, with which learners start with no testing hypothesis and make claims
based on pure observations of what is produced in Astronomicon with their uninformed inputs. They became
familiar with using visual representations (orbital disks) by the exploration of one variable (eccentricity). These
comprised their first step toward the development of expertise as summarized in Table 2.

Episode Two: Orbital Motion and Eccentricity
The subsequent four weeks (exercise 1 & 2) prepared Betty and Allen with basic modeling and observation skills
and system variable knowledge (e.g., mass, distance, rotation rate, and orbital period). Their understanding of
underlying relationships helped them to see the variables' relevance to the current observations. Building a model
for exercise 3 (Orbital motion), Allen did bother to input some of the values accurately, such as size and rotation
rate. They knew that most of the planets would look as small as dots when observing the orbital motions so that
they only needed to focus on the values that would affect orbits, such as eccentricity.
   In the following Betty and Allen had just finished making their initial model for an alternative theory on
orbits: All planetary orbits are quite elliptical. By modeling and operating this theory, Betty and Allen gained
knowledge about orbital motions and elaborated the concept of eccentricity. They first made Mercury (= .3),
Venus (= .4), Earth (= .5), the moon (= .3), and Pluto (= .25), but did not see much difference among planets.
They then changed the eccentricity of the Earth [23-24] and started seeing extreme effects [25-26].
   23. Betty: They still look pretty circular.
   24. Allen: I am going to actually change them more elliptical [changing Earth's eccentricity to .9]
   25. Allen: [pointing to the screen]  Look    how               close it is   to the sun.   It's actually  inside of Mercury        and
       Venus... 'cause it's point nine. [running the model] It's kind of crazy.
   26. Betty: [watching the screen] Yeah... crazy.
   27. Allen: [Earth moving from the far side of the orbit around the sun] See how slow it goes...
   28. Betty: So where is the Earth now?
   29. Allen: [selecting Earth and running and accelerating the model] Faster... I just want to see what happens
       when it gets back closer. It's going to be speeding up here. [pointing to the screen, the closest point of
       the Earth's orbit to the sun]
   30. Allen: [Earth moving much faster closer to the                 sun] Shook!      [stopping   and resetting the  model]   I guess
       we need to do some waypoints actually.
   31. Betty: Yeah. Well, hang on... OK, we are trying to prove that one of these is wrong and one of them is
       not. Oh, we probably take a picture of the Earth orbit with Mercury highlighted? So... 'cause you could
       see that that can't be how it really is because Earth would not be inside of Mercury.
   32. [Allen nods his head and turns on the orbital disks of the Earth and Mercury.] (Figure 4)
                                                 Table 3. Eccentric orbit s and planetary motions
                                                                        Betty and Allen                       Astronomicon
                                                                  Eccentricity;                   Underlying physics;
                                                                  solar system data;              modeling input interface;
                                                                  changing speed on an orbit;     relationships among time and planetary
                                                                  orbital motions and             motions
                                                                  relationships among planets
                                                                  Decisions about input values/   Rule executions with learner inputs to
                                                                  observation tools (orbital      create planets and create views for
                                                                  disks)/perspectives;            waypoints;
                                                                  evidence-based claims           timed motions of planets
                                                                  (observing/finding evidence)
                                                                  Solar system data sheet;        Modeled system of sun, Earth, and
                                                                  data taken from                 Mercury with modified eccentricities;
                                                                  Astronomicon to disprove the    locating unobservable planets (blue box
  Figure 4. A screen capture for exercise 3                       alternative theory (figure 4);  in Figure 4); visualized orbital disks;
 report by Betty and Allen: Eccentric planet                                                      waypoint, overhead view (Figure 4)
     orbits (Earth, 0.9; Mercury, 0.3)
Beyond the relationship between the orbital shape and the eccentricity value, they realized the changes in Earth's
relationships with other planets and the sun. The first thing they noticed was the changing position of the Earth in
relation to Mercury and Venus, which was an important differentiating factor from the real system [25, 31].
Another observation was on the effect that the eccentricity had on the planet's speed of movement [27-30].
Development
From this episode we can find some indications for the development of distributed expertise. In Table 3 the
expertise structure with this activity is summarized and these observable indications are especially italicized.
They elaborated their knowledge structure by associating speed and positional relationships with the concept of
eccentricity. They used less of basic trial-error approaches but observed with some expectations of the results
[29]. The use of the representations is in support of their arguments, having clear purposes [31]. Specifically,
timing became a highly relevant aspect of their observation because Earth with eccentric orbit can be inside of
Mercury at one time, but outside of it at other times. Betty and Allen utilized the blue selection box in order to
demonstrate this time element and disprove the alternative theory (Figure 4) [31]. Allen was more interested in
how the model works, whereas Betty was more focused on how to use the images in order to support their claims.

                                                                    
                                                  RepresentationsFunctionsKnowledge
                                                      RepresentationsFunctionsKnowledge
Episode Three: Eclipses and Eccentricity
Learners  show   the   qualitative and   quantitative  changes               in    their  knowledge     structure   when     gaining  more
competencies in a specific area (Alexander, 2003). When Betty and Allen made the four Earths with different
eccentricities during the first episode, they did not know what they would get from that change. During the
eclipses exercise (the  ninth   week  from   the first                episode), however,    Betty    and   Allen  made   changes     to   the
parameters with certain expectations about the results because they became able to deduce possible effects or no
effects on the phenomena. They brainstormed the changes they could make, disregarded the ones that would not
affect the phenomena, and tested the ones that they expected to cause some changes. In the following episode
they were about to reason about eccentricity as one of the variables for the frequency of solar eclipses [36].
    33.  Allen: If we change... how much the moon goes around the Earth, it might change...
    34.  Betty:  OK...Rotation     rate? No, that's  rotation             around     the   axis,  isn't it? Oh,   could  we    change     the
         eccentricity to be smaller?
    35.  Allen: I don't know what that would do.
    36.  Betty: No, it wouldn't 'cause it is already almost circular. Or we could make the eccentricity bigger.
    37.  Allen: More elliptical?
    38.  Betty: It would reduce the number of eclipses, wouldn't it?
    39.  Allen: Do you want to make it really eccentric? [opening the Moon edit window]
    40.  Betty: Yeah, like point seven.
    41.  Allen:  [putting in .7 and  running   the   model              from    the moon    to   Earth  view] Let's    look  and see  what
         happens at 121.
    42.  [The timer count passes day 121 and they do not see any shadow going by.]
    43.  Allen: [stopping the model] No eclipse. So do you want to take a picture here when we do not have one?
    44.  Betty: I don't know. Let's wait until we see the first one. It might never happen.
    45.  Allen: Well, that's part of the question too.
They decided    that a more  elliptical  orbit would   change              the     frequency     of solar  eclipses and  started  making
observations [36-41]. They checked the day (about 121 days) when they had the first solar eclipse in the real
system [41-43]. They found that a more elliptical orbit would take a lot longer to have sun, moon, and Earth in
line. Figure 5 is the image used in the lab report of Betty and Allen, which demonstrates the Earth and the moon
were in line with the sun using orbital disks.
                                                     Table 4. Eclipses of planets with eccentric orbits
                                                                                Betty and Allen                     Astronomicon
                                                                      Eccentricity;                       Modeling interface;
                                                                      eclipses;                           waypoint interface;
                                                                      planetary motion and light;         relationships among time, planetary
                                                                      relationships among planets         motions, and light
                                                                      (alignment)
                                                                      Decisions about input values/       Rule executions with learner inputs
                                                                      observation tools (orbital          to create planets and create views
                                                                      disks)/perspectives;                for waypoints; timed motions of
                                                                      abstract deduction;                 planets
                                                                      time-relevant pattern observation
                                                                      Data taken from Astronomicon to     Modeled sun-Earth-moon system
                                                                      show the rare alignment they        with highly elliptical orbit of the
                                                                      encountered (Figure 5);             moon; visualized orbital disks;
   Figure 5. A screen capture from Betty and                          data taken from Astronomicon to     waypoint, overhead view of the
 Allen's exercise 5: The moon (=.7) in line                           show the Moon shadow cast on        Earth (Figure 5); light effects; timer
         between the Earth and the sun                                the Earth                           (day counts)
Development
In this  episode Betty  and  Allen   associated  another               aspect   (eclipses)  to   their  knowledge    of  eccentricity.    As
emphasized in Table 4, they were utilizing Astronomicon's embedded knowledge about time, planetary motions,
and light in order to understand eclipses' frequencies. They observed the patterns of the phenomenon as well as
when things happened. As their problem-solving strategies, Betty and Allen deduced what would happen when
changing certain variables without actually trying it out [33-38]. This indicates their developed understanding
about inner workings of solar system. In their reports for this exercise, they used multiple image data taken from
various perspectives in Astronomicon in order to show 1) the shape of the moon's orbit and its alignment, 2) the
eclipse occurring seen from the Earth, and 3) the eclipse trail on the Earth, seen from the moon. This shows the
culmination between Astronomicon's capabilities to represent modeled system from various perspectives and the
learners' abilities to utilize the representations to support their claims and demonstrate their understanding.

Episode Four: Seasons and Eccentricity
Betty and Allen developed their knowledge structure about the solar system and various factors regarding its
inner workings throughout the semester. Through the last exercise (seasons), they added another dimension
(temperature/luminosity) to their understanding. They explored how the change in eccentricity affected seasons
on a planet due to the variations on the orbit's speed and distance. Betty and Allen were able to abstractly reason
through  the model's   operation   based  on   their knowledge                  of  inner  workings.    In  the   following   episode   they
brainstormed to model an alternative theory of Earth's seasons: seasons are influenced by the Earth's changing

                                                                        
                                                  RepresentationsFunctionsKnowledge
speed in its orbit. Allen opened the edit window of the Earth (Figure 2) to think of different parameters to change
[46-47]. He considered eccentricity because they had seen the speed variations from previous exercises [47-49].
   46. Betty: Alright, how do you change the speed of the orbit?
   47. [Allen selects the Earth, opens its edit window, and clicks on the eccentricity box.]
   48. Betty: Now how would that change?
   49. Allen: You see,... it has an average speed, but remember when it's really elliptical, it slows down when
       it gets away from gravity, and it gets faster as it goes close by it. [drawing an orbit with an index finger]
   50. Betty: Right... now that would change it because that would make it go farther away from the sun?
After changing the eccentricity of the Earth from .02 to .7 and attaching an orbital path (Figure 6), they talked
about other factors [51-53]:
   51. Allen: OK, in order for it not to be affected by anything else but speed...
   52. Betty: No tilt.
   53. Allen: No spinning.
   54. Allen: [changing the rotation rate from 1 day to 365 days] If it spins once every 365 days, then the same
       side is facing the sun 'cause it goes around in 365 days. [lifting his right hand as if holding a ball up;
       moving it from right to left and rotating it counterclockwise at the same time] Now, the same side is
       facing the sun... that means the other side won't get any...
   55. Betty: Sun?
   56. Allen: Right... so I don't think that would work.
   57. Betty: Yeah, change it back to normal. [Allen changes it back to 1 day]
   58. Allen: [watching the screen] With that elliptical orbit, I think it will still be the same. (see, Figure 6)
   59. Betty: You mean, seasons?
   60. Allen: I mean the tilt... if the Earth is that close to the sun [pointing to the right part of the orbit], it will
       still burn up, and here it will be super cold [pointing left, away from the sun].
   61. Betty: So, the summer will be much shorter than the winter.
Allen thought about the rotation of the Earth as a factor. Without observing the model, however, he was able to
dispel that idea by reasoning through it using his hand as a representation [54-57]. As Betty had the knowledge
that the tilt affects the seasons on Earth, she considered it to be the main factor [52]. They finally came to realize
that the tilt should no longer matter in a different condition (extremely elliptical orbit) [58-61].
                                                 Table 5. Seasons of planets with eccentric orbits
                                                                         Betty and Allen                        Astronomicon
                                                                  Eccentricity; changing speed on    Modeling interface;
                                                                  an orbit; cause of seasons;        relationships among time, planetary
                                                                  tilt of the Earth;                 motions, and light;
                                                                  changing distance to the sun;      luminosity
                                                                  lengths of seasons
                                                                  Decisions about input values/      Rule executions with learner inputs
                                                                  observation tools (orbital paths,  to create planets and create views for
                                                                  pattern visualization)             waypoints;
                                                                  /perspectives; abstract deduction; timed motions of planets
                                                                  time-relevant pattern observation
                                                                  Data taken from Astronomicon       Modeled sun-Earth system with a
                                                                  demonstrating differences in       highly elliptical orbit;
                                                                  eccentricity (Figure 6);           visualized Earth's orbital path;
 Figure 6. A screen capture from Betty and                        Hands                              luminosity pattern visualization;
 Allen's exercise 6 reports: The Earth (=.7)with its luminosity pattern and orbital path             waypoint, overhead view (Figure 6);timer (day count)
Development
We can infer that the intellectual partnerships of Betty and Allen with Astronomicon had changed throughout the
semester. They were    less  dependent on pure   observations             for        their reasoning  and more    dependent       on   the
knowledge structure that they gained by working with Astronomicon. Betty and Allen approached their tasks
through a different kind of thinking; they were asking, "What value can we change to make a certain thing
happen?" instead of "What happens if we change this value to something else?" For the former they needed to
know the underlying principles, but not for the latter. This kind of abstract reasoning is possible only when
learners have the coherent knowledge. Emphasized in Table 5, eccentricity became a relevant concept with tilt,
distance, and speed in relation to cause and lengths of seasons. During this time Betty and Allen chose to use
orbital path instead of orbital disk in order to see better and did not bother to add texture for the sun (Figure 6).
This indicates that they were now focused on using representations in support of their inquiry.

FACILITATING THE DEVELOPMENT OF JOINT LEARNING SYSTEMS
The above account illustrated the process of a group's gaining expertise and developing the partnership as a joint
learning system. The complex process of their development was reconstructed and exemplified with the concept
of eccentricity with four episodes. Overall, Betty and Allen started the semester as novices in their skills for
inquiry and the tool with some differences in their interest and knowledge levels. As a team, they gradually
gained expertise in modeling-based inquiry, and clearer knowledge and mental models about the solar system.
  From the perspective of expertise theory, Betty and Allen showed their progress in their knowledge structure,
problem-solving strategies, and automaticity (Keating, 1990; Schneider, 1993; Winn & Snyder, 1996). Through

                                                                    
investigating phenomena by building and testing models each week, they associated the underlying principles of
the solar system with their understanding of the Astronomicon models' inner-workings (knowledge structure).
Their inquiry strategies moved from trial-error approaches toward more focused inquiries of making predictions
and devising Astronomicon features to understand relationships (problem-solving strategies). They gradually
found their roles in this team and internalized their inquiry process as well as the procedure of building and
observing models (automaticity). As exemplified in the episodes, the gains from each week became important
foundations for their performance in the following week, making their partnership stronger little by little.
   The changing pattern of knowledge structures for Betty and Allen was consistent with the changes indicated
in expertise literature moving from a more fragmented knowledge to a more cohesive and deeper one (Alexander,
2003). Betty and Allen's knowledge about astronomy was initially based on their common sense and some bits
from their former science classes. They were dependent on the Astronomicon interface to know the needed input
variables without understanding what each value meant for the model. They gradually gained a better knowledge
structure of the solar system and learned how some of the values related to model properties such as eccentricity
to orbital shape. The way they worked with Astronomicon and conversed during the class indicated cohesiveness
in their knowledge structure. They often recalled some values that were frequently used and differentiated some
of the factors that would not affect their current modeling and observations from the relevant ones.
   They came to better understand the fundamental relationships among underlying factors and their effects on
the patterns of planetary light and motion. Their knowledge was constructed in a situated manner; that is, it was
used, tested, and visualized within their modeling activities. They broadened the observer's viewpoints as they
investigated from one planet to another and even from (or to) specific spots on a planet. Betty and Allen's
improvement as novice scientists can be also noticed from their maturity of writing their lab reports, which
moved from demonstrating their creation of model to making evidence-based claims with collected image data
from Astronomicon. In their posttests Betty made 29 percent of improvement (67 percent of correct answers) and
Allen made 20 percent of improvement (73 percent correct).
   Through Betty and Allen we saw a joint learning system in action, partnering and evolving. The designed
curriculum had supported the process of gaining expertise in modeling-based inquiry for basic astronomy. Both
learners became confident in and good at their tasks and roles, and their report grades started as average and
reached perfect points. Betty and Allen, however, had multiple challenges, had some concepts never completely
clarified, and had inquiry strategies not fully internalized. Betty and Allen, unfortunately, did not expand their
understanding about the solar system much beyond the sun-Earth-moon system. For their last activity in exercise
6, seasons, they first  experienced how  Venus  would        be different from what they  had   been   modeling  and
observing mainly with the Earth and the moon. Their standard conceptions of time, such as day and night,
seasons, and  year, were  completely  overthrown  by        making the factual  numbers   of Venus    take action in
Astronomicon. However, this activity became the very last one that they briefly encountered. Astronomicon was
designed in a way that allows a learner to expand his or her perspective centered on the solar system, and such
activity could be easily incorporated with any current tasks.
   The baseline activities need to be more focused and expanded in order for learners to have fundamental
understandings of underlying relationships, not just within our sun-Earth-moon system, but beyond. Focused
activities, such as investigating the factors that affect the lengths of a day--not only for Earth's day, but also for
days of other planets, would engage learners in exploring with their models and have an experienced and solid
knowledge   structure. Another challenge that  needs to      be addressed  is learners' lack of engagement    in  the
scientific discourse using right terms and theoretical underpinnings. In addition to making connections among
various phenomena with eccentricity, some theoretical discourse including, aphelion/perihelion, Kepler's third
law, and foci of elliptical orbits, should be more tightly embedded within their inquiry activities.

CONCLUSION
Through this study, we have gained a deeper understanding of the process whereby a pair of learners develops
their intellectual partnership with a cognitive tool for scientific inquiry. We found that all the successes as well as
the challenges that they had were interrelated throughout the semester and that each success or challenge has its
own individual history. In order to better facilitate cognitive partnerships, the tool and the activities should
support gaining expertise on the aforementioned aspects. In other words, the tool should be designed in a way
such that its capabilities are apparent, not hidden to the learners, and the activities should support mastering those
features in addition to addressing important concepts. Why the learners interact in a particular way could not
have been explained without considering learners' histories, because every action they took was the consequence
of their prior interactions with the tool and with each other (Hutchins, 1995). The future research on intellectual
partnerships of joint learning systems should be expanded to comparing groups with distinctive characteristics, as
different learners will form different joint relationships.

REFERENCES
Alexander,  P. A.   (2003). The  development   of expertise:       The journey  from    acclimation   to proficiency.
         Educational Researcher, 32(8), 10-14.
Anzai, Y. (1991). Learning and use of representations for physics expertise. In K. A. Ericsson & J. Smith (Eds.),
         Toward a general theory of expertise (pp. 64-92). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Carlson, R. A. (1997). Experienced cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

                                                        
Edelson, D. C., Pea, R. D., & Gomez., L. (1996). Constructivism in the collaboratory. In B. G. Wilson (Ed.),
        Constructivist learning environments: Case studies in instructional design (pp. 151-164). Englewood
        Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Ericsson, K. A. (1996). The acquisition of expert performance: An introduction to some of the issues. In K. A.
        Ericsson (Ed.), The road to excellence: The acquisition of expert performance in the arts and sciences,
        sports, and games (pp. 1-50). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ericsson, K. A., & Charness, N. (1994). Expert performance: Its structure and acquisition. American Psychologist,
        49(8), 725-747.
Ericsson, K. A., & Smith, J. (1991). Prospects and limits of the empirical study of expertise: An introduction. In
        K.  A. Ericsson   &   J. Smith   (Eds.), Toward  a general  theory of   expertise (pp. 1-38). New  York:
        Cambridge University Press.
Glaser, R. (1996). Changing the agency for learning: Acquiring expert performance. In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.), The
        road to excellence: The acquisition of expert performance in the arts and sciences, sports, and games
        (pp. 303-319). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Greeno, J. G., Collins, A. M., & Resnick, L. B. (1996). Cognition and learning. In D. C. Berliner & R. C. Calfee
        (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 15-46). New York: Mcmillan.
Hay, K. E.,  &  Kim, B.   (in press). Integrated   Temporal   Multimedia  Data  (ITMD)    Research System. In R.
        Goldman & R. Pea & B. Barron & S. Derry (Eds.), Video research in the learning sciences.
Hay, K. E., Kim, B., & Roy, T. C. (in press). Design-based research - more than formative assessment? An
        account of the Virtual Solar System project. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhammer, G. (1992). Force concept inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30(3), 141-
        158.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jonassen, D. H., & Reeves, T. C. (1996). Learning with technology: Using computers as cognitive tools. In D. H.
        Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational communications and technology (pp. 693-719).
        New York: Macmillan.
Karasavvidis, I. (2002). Distributed cognition and educational practice. Journal of Interactive Learning Research,
        13(1/2), 11-29.
Keating, D. P. (1990). Charting pathways to the development of expertise. Educational Psychologist, 25(3/4),
        243-367.
Kim, B., & Reeves, T. C. (in press). Reframing research on learning with technology: In search of the meaning of
        cognitive tools. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Kozma, R. B. (1991). Learning with media. Review of Educational Research, 61(2), 179-211.
Kozma, R. B., & Shank, P. (1998). Connecting with the 21st century: Technology in support of educational
        reform. In C. Dede (Ed.), ASCD year book 1998: Learning with media (pp. 3-27). Alexandria, VA:
        ASCD.
Lajoie, S. P. (1993). Computer environments as cognitive tools for enhancing learning. In S. P. Lajoie & S. J.
        Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 261-288). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Pagels, H. R. (1988). The dreams of reason: The computer and the rise of the sciences of complexity. New York:
        Bantam Books.
Patel, V. L., & Groen, G. J. (1991). The general and specific nature of medical expertise: A critical look. In K. A.
        Ericsson & J. Smith (Eds.), Toward a general theory of expertise (pp. 93-125). New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Pea, R. D.  (1993). Practices    of distributed  intelligence and designs for  education.  In  G.  Salomon (Ed.),
        Distributed  cognitions:    Psychological   and  educational  considerations (pp.   47-87).   New  York:
        Cambridge University Press.
Penner, D. E. (2001). Complexity, emergence, and synthetic models in science education. In K. Crowley & C. D.
        Schunn  &   T.  Okada    (Eds.), Designing   for science:  Implications from everyday,    classroom, and
        professional settings (pp. 177-208). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Perkins, D. N. (1993). Person-plus: A distributed view of thinking and learning. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
        cognitions:  Psychological    and  educational   considerations  (pp.  88-110).   New  York:   Cambridge
        University Press.
Sadler, P. M. (1998). Psychometric models of student conceptions in science: Reconciling qualitative studies and
        distractor-driven assessment instruments. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(3), 265-296.
Salomon, G. (1993b). No distribution without individuals' cognition. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions:
        Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 111-138). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Salomon, G., Perkins, D. N., & Globerson, T. (1991). Partners in cognition: Extending human intelligence with
        intelligent technologies. Educational Researcher, 20(3), 2-9.
Salthouse, T. A. (1991). Expertise as the circumvention of human processing limitations. In K. A. Ericsson & J.
        Smith (Eds.), Toward a general theory of expertise (pp. 286-300). New York: Cambridge University
        Press.
Schneider, W. (1993). Acquiring expertise: Determinants of exceptional performance. In K. A. Heller & F. J.
        Monks & A. H. Passow (Eds.), International handbook of research and development of giftedness and
        talent (pp. 311-324). Oxford: Pergamon.
Stein, E. W. (1997). A look at expertise from a social perspective. In P. J. Feltovich & K. M. Ford & R. R.
        Hoffman (Eds.), Expertise in context: Human and machine (pp. 182-194). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Winn, W., & Snyder, D. (1996). Cognitive perspectives in psychology. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of
        research for educational communications and technology (pp. 112-142). New York: Macmillan.
Zeilik, M., Schau, C., & Mattern, N. (1998). Misconceptions and their change in University-Level Astronomy
        Courses. The Physics Teacher, 36(2), 104-108.

                                                         
