       Weak Guidance with "Look" Functionality in
                Handheld-Based Classroom Activities

                                 Kibum Kim and Deborah G. Tatar
                                 Center for Human-Computer Interaction
                                    Department of Computer Science
                                               Virginia Tech
                                      kikim@vt.edu, tatar@vt.edu

       Abstract. Wireless handheld technologies can be used to move technology into the classroom
       framework  rather than    to move  classrooms       into the technology framework.   To make   such
       technologies effective, we support activities and teaching practices crucial to children's creativity
       and competence. However, because of the small screen size and distributed nature of some of the
       activities, it can be hard for teachers to engage in formative assessment, that is, finding out what
       students know and can do. The current work reports an idea about how to solve this problem and
       the first assays of this idea in the classroom. We try to enable what we call weak guidance during
       collaborative activities, by implementing a system feature called "Look."

       Keywords: Mobile Computing, Constructivist Pedagogy

INTRODUCTION
  Ms. Smith was using a handheld-based math activity called "Match-my-Graph" with one of her eighth-grade
classes. Students were grouped into pairs. Alice drew a line on an animatable velocity graph on her handheld.
Brian's goal was to produce the equivalent function on a position graph on his handheld. To do this, he beamed
each of his guesses to Alice, who gave him progressively more refined hints, until the graphs described the same
trajectory. The challenge was    for  Alice to devise      useful hints describing position change based     on the
relationship between two velocity graphs, and for Brian to interpret velocity-based hints in terms of required
changes to the position graph. In this case, Alice had the hypothesis that velocity graphs below the x-axis meant
that the object had a negative position, leading to systematically incorrect hints.  Both students were becoming
frustrated when the teacher came by. She watched them argue about whose mistake it was. She glanced at one
screen, when the student was not drawing or beaming.        Then she said, "Is everything all right?" Both students
responded yes.  She moved on.    Ten minutes later, they were still working on the same problem when time ran
out, each quite distressed at the failure of the other.

  This scenario is taken from a month-long intervention using NetCalc with 8th grade students, which showed
considerable gain scores and, even achievement on qualitative AP-calculus problems (Tatar, Roschelle, Vahey &
Penuel, 2003; Vahey, Tatar & Roschelle, 2004). The class wide consequences of the study were overwhelmingly
positive; therefore, arguably, the time the students spent struggling on the problem was well spent. However, at
the same time, compared to when observing the use of manipulatives, worksheets or desktop, the teacher's
ability to gauge the nature and seriousness of the problem was curtailed. Wirelessly-connected handheld PDAs
hold great potential for the classroom because they are portable, easy-to-maintain and relatively inexpensive
(Tatar, et al, 2003; Soloway, Grant, Tinker, Roschelle, Mills, Resnick, Berg & Eisenberg, 1999). It may be
affordable to provide a handheld for every student, when it is too expensive to provide a desktop computer or too
bothersome to go to the computer lab.
  Handhelds can be used many ways in the classroom.             For example, employing both handhelds and large
screen displays, Wilensky and Stroup (2000) use a distributed programming language, StarLogo, to allow
students to explore complex distributed systems.        Kaput and his colleagues (Kaput and Hegedus, 2003; Kaput,
Roschelle, Vahey, Tatar & Hegedus, 2003) also emphasize aggregation activities, highlighting the individual's
contribution to the whole class. In these situations, there is a relatively close relationship between the acts of
individuals and their publication to the whole classroom, including the teacher.       This  publication provides
opportunity for formative assessment.  However, another class of activities involves a slightly longer tether.  For
example, students may develop complex and sophisticated idea-networks using Picomap, a concept-mapping
tool, before uploading them to a desktop or large screen formats (Luchini, Quintana, Krajcik, Farah, Nandihalli,
Reese, Wieczorek  &  Soloway,    2002).  Likewise, the Sketchy tool (www.goknow.com) and elaboration in

                                                           
ImageMakers (www.projectwhirl.org) allows students to produces animations of science processes.               Indeed,
ImageMakers has formative assessment as a goal; nonetheless, it primarily supports uploading at the end of the
activity, using HotSyncing. In the NetCalc project, activities moved between whole class, small group, and
individual work. The students had a clear idea when they had finished the tasks, but there were barriers to fine-
grained formative assessment (Davis, 2002).
  In this paper, we describe the beginning of an investigation of how formative assessment can be integrated
into the classroom using Infrared-based (IR) communication (e.g. beaming). We focus on IR in this work for the
same reasons we used it in the NetCalc project: IR machines are less expensive, and require no server. On the
other hand,  any   success we have  with  implementing    formative   assessment tools with   IR should     only  be
amplified with radio-frequency (RF) communication.     Since, unlike IR, RF is not directed at a particular other
person, overhearing can be accomplished less intrusively.
  To abstract the issue of overhearing, we created a game that is an electronic variant of the Tangram game so
widely used to explore the creation and maintenance of common ground in the CSCW and psycholinguistic
literature (Clark,  1996a; Clark, 1996b).   Indeed,  the  NetCalc Match-My-Graph     activity was       based on  the
structure of the Tangram game.    Like Tangrams, our game involved two participants, a matcher and a director.
For each round, the director had a sequence of images in a new random order.   The matcher also started with the
same sequence of images in a random order.     By discussing each one in turn, the matcher was able to put the
images on his screen into the same order (see Figure 1) as the director. The game is complete when the matcher
and director agree that they have the images in the correct order. In our game, KCM, the images were Korean
characters. The KCM game system runs on a Palm OS handheld computer and uses a stylus for drag and drop
characters from one place to another and to initiate task actions, such as "shuffling" the image order.

                                Figure 1. Korean characters matching (KCM) game

WEAK GUIDANCE WITH LOOKING IN CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES
KCM is a coherent activity in which participants are trying to understand what the other one is talking about, in
other words, in which they are learning. However, the purpose of our study was to investigate another feature,
Look.  In activity-based classroom environments, the ideal teacher has often been characterized a "guide on the
side" rather than a "sage on the stage" (National Research Council, 2000). This pedagogical goal is based on the
idea of constructivism, that active engagement in knowledge creation is vital to deep understanding. From a
psycholinguistic   point of view,  teachers engaged    in  coaching   would  ideally be  characterized      as "side
participants" to the interaction they are observing.  Their job is to assess and provide weak guidance, not to
distract the students from their focused work. Typically, side participants enter in to a conversation about an
object by watching the interaction until they can make an informed contribution.     Of course, it is the teacher's
prerogative to ask students for an explanation of what they are doing, but typically, she picks her moment.
Additionally, KCM provides a chance for the teacher to introduce secondary information, including the names of
the Korean character
  Look     supports formative assessment  by allowing     the teacher to capture objects from  other      screens by
beaming to them (Figure 2). Instead of having the owner of the information beam stop on-going activity to beam
to the newcomer, the newcomer could request data from the students' handhelds without disruption.
   In  our   project, Look was implemented   using Exchange      Manager in the   Palm OS API.    The      Exchange
Manager provides a high-level interface to use the exchange socket structure. We embedded and tested this Look
functionally as a component for the KCM game.

                                                        
   Figure 2a. Initiating a Look to capture data from          Figure 2b. What the teacher sees after a Look.
                student's handheld.

PROOFS-OF-CONCEPT
In April 2004, during the annual Women in Computing Day at Virginia Tech, eight local middle school girls
(ages 12-14) experimented with our application and Look functionality. They were divided into three groups of
two "learners" plus two student "teachers." One "teacher" monitored two matcher-director groups at the same
time.  "Learners" switched between matcher and director roles in different rounds.    The teacher's system was
equipped with both Look and a paper list of Korean characters and corresponding English-language names. The
teacher was instructed to try to figure out whether the groups were making progress and to help them if they got
stuck.  The experiment was conducted in a large meeting room with tables set in a U-shape.    Students were not
instructed on where to sit or whether they were free to move around.      Nonetheless,  learners  sat facing one
another or around a corner of the table while teachers sometimes stood next to one of them, sometimes say next
to one of them, and moved from person to person.
  Notes were taken by three observers to document the interaction.    These focused on whether and how Look
was used. Participants were asked to engage in a "think-aloud" process in which they articulated what they were
doing and when to enable us to locate usability problems.  Afterwards, students were asked to indicate both the
positive (good) and negative (bad) aspects of what they had done.
  Given its similarity to the Tangram and Match-my-graph games, it was not surprising that Matchers and
Directors appeared to be engaged and consistently expressed enthusiasm.         The teacher's role was  the  new
component.   These students did seem engaged, but not always in the ways we had envisioned. One teacher
functioned much as we imagined, looking over the matcher's shoulder and beaming to a director to check
desired the target order. This teacher beamed a lot in the middle of the game; however, the other beamed only at
the beginning and end of each round. Thus, she was not monitoring progress the moment, but only global
progress. Worse, neither teacher was able to intervene effectively during the interaction. Instead, they spoke
with learners only after they had reported the end of their play. At that point, the teacher would check again with
beaming and give feedback to students, such as concerning the incorrect placement of characters.
  Subsequently, six triads of male undergraduate and graduate students at Virginia Tech were recruited through
email requests to undergraduate and graduate researchers in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) to perform an
almost identical task. The average age of these participants was 24.7 years (Standard Deviation (SD): 3.7).   All
students were from the School of Engineering, primarily computer science and industrial systems engineering.
Half of these triads had Look functionality for the teacher, and half did not. Each group participated in two
rounds of KCM, rotating all participants between roles. Participants were videotaped and log files of the
interaction were kept. Additionally, two kinds of simple learning outcome measures were obtained: participants
were asked to pick out which ten characters they had worked with from a list of the complete 20-character
Korean alphabet, and to match characters with English names.
  Although there were too few groups for statistical tests to be meaningful, the number of errors in recognizing
the characters was consistently less for the groups that had Look compared to those that did not. In round 1, the
mean number of errors in recognition with Look was 7.33 (SD: .99) while without Look, it was 10.67 (SD: 2.18).
In the second round, the scores were 2.67 (SD: 1.33) and 8.33 (SD: 4.84).     Note that the standard deviations are
also smaller for the groups with Look than for those without. Additionally, students in the Look condition were
more accurate in naming the characters after round 1, though not for round 2.

                                                        
  Videotape     and log files revealed that teachers with  Look, updated   and consulted    their handhelds       quite
frequently.  One teacher looked at the others' screens ten times during one round.       He moved back-and-forth
between looking at the matcher's and director's screens.  Other teachers in the Look condition beamed to get the
director's order and then sat next to the matcher and watched him work.
  Although there was no reason to believe that the participants had any familiarity with pedagogical theory, and
no instructions were given to the participants about the kind of pedagogy desired, participants in both conditions
commented on the teacher's role.   One, in the Look condition, said "The teacher must not help the students until
the last minute.  Extensive help from the teacher will reduce the learning." Another commented "We can keep
going even   if the teacher  does not say anything."  On  the other  hand, students     in the no-Look       condition,
commented that the teacher was not particular useful.  One said: "As far as the teacher's action, it was minimal,
actually non-existent when I was trying to match for pictures."     Another echoed something sometimes heard
from students in project-based classes that "the teacher did not have to help in solving the puzzle, we just did it
ourselves."

DISCUSSION
  Thus, we have some support for the idea that Look functionality can be useful in conjunction with at least
this task. The undergraduate and graduate student teachers appear to have used it in a way consistent with our
pedagogical hopes and goals: lightly and to good effect.   The middle school girls had more trouble. This may
have been because their own notions of teaching were less mature, because they saw the student's role passive
than  did  VT   students, and/or  because   it was  more  difficult for  them  to imagine      teaching      in such a
decontextualized situation.
  One limitation of this work was that the learning task was confined to one factual task rather than a richer
array of tasks including more complex inquiry-based learning. Another limitation is that the "teacher" was not
motivated by the rich set of priorities and considerations that motivate a real teacher to intervene or not.
  Strengths of the task include that it is in fact interesting for the participants, that there at least the two layers
of learning (to recognize and name the characters), that it emphasizes the teacher's role, and that the recognition
component is sufficiently complex to have produce a wide range of errors after two rounds.
  Although these demonstrations are limited, we feel that there is enough evidence to go through the effort to
incorporate Look functionality in a more contextualized teaching context.   We do not expect Look to be used
constantly, perhaps only twice or three times in a class section; however, we expect that it will disambiguate
situations such as that reported in the initial paragraph of this paper that otherwise would not be clear.
  An additional direction has to do with the of future IR beaming.    We worked with IR in the NetCalc project
and therefore in this one because it solves a raft of classroom management problems.      When the teacher or the
teacher's machine functions as a central server, any problems tend to involve the whole class and be disruptive.
Point-to-point beaming allows localized control but participants with no need for the system to know who is
working together. We have found it to be extremely useful and easy for small group interaction.     However, it is
unclear that IR will continue to prevail on inexpensive handheld machines, compared to radio-frequency (RF)
communication.      Thus, our research has to extend to include RF. With its nearly synchronous properties,
teachers should have an easier time seeing activity in progress with RF. There will be no need for static
snapshots.  However, RF-based Looking may still be time consuming and problematic because of the need for
machine to know which other machine or machines to be Looking at. RF alone may not suffice to make the
teacher's assessment of the learning situation as automatic as with a desktop display.

CONCLUSION
  One of the fundamental design goals of this project was to support the role of the teacher in learning
situations as a "guide on the side" in relationship to handheld wireless computing. We investigated using Look
functionality for weak guidance in classroom activities, in which the teacher could come to understand the
intellectual state of small groups at work. The result of user experience with our prototype and a few triads with
a non-Look control, gives preliminary indication that Look can be used to enhance classroom communication
and understanding; however, the case is not closed, creating interesting design challenges in the social or
technological realm or both.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dan Dunlap who helped set up and conduct this experiment successfully.

                                                        
REFERENCES
Blaye, A., Light, P., Joiner, R., and Sheldon, S. (1991) Collaboration as a facilitator of planning and problem
       solving on a computer-based task. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 9, 471-483.
Clark, H.H. (1996a)  Arranging    to  do things  with other.   Plenary Speech,   ACM    Conference    on Computer
       Supported Collaborative Work, April 19, 1996; Vancouver, BC.
Clark, H.H. (1996b) Using Language. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Davis, S.M. (2002) Research to Industry: Four Years of Observations in Classrooms Using a Network of
       Handheld   Devices.  Proceedings      of the  IEEE   International Workshop     on  Wireless   and   Mobile
       Technologies in Education (WMTE'02), Vaxjo, Sweden., 31-38.
Ferraris, C., Brunier, P., and Martel, C. (2002) Constructing Collaborative Pedagogical Situations in Classrooms:
       A Scenario and Role Based Approach. Proceedings of CSCL 2002, Boulder, Colorado., 290-299.
Kaput, J., and Hegedus, S. (2003) Exciting new opportunities to make mathematics an           expressive classroom
       activity using newly emerging connectivity     technology. In N. A. Pateman, B. J. Dougherty & J. Zilliox
       (Eds.),  Proceedings of    the 27th   Conference   of   the International Group    for  the  Psychology  of
       Mathematics  Education   held  jointly   with the 25th   Conference  of   the PME-NA     (Vol. 1, pp. 293).
       Honolulu, Hawaii: College of Education, University of Hawaii.
Kaput, J.,Roschelle, J., Vahey, P., Tatar, D. and Hegedus, S. (2003) Five key considerations for networking in a
       hanndheld-based  mathematics      classroom.   In N.  A. Pateman,  B. J.  Dougherty    &  J. Zilliox (Eds.),
       Proceedings of the 27th Conference of the International Group for         the  Psychology   of Mathematics
       Education held jointly with the 25th   Conference of the PME-NA (Vol. 4, pp. 71-78). Honolulu, Hawaii:
       College of Education, University of Hawaii.
Luchini, K., Quintana, C., Krajcik, J., Farah, C., Nandihalli, N., Reese, K., Wieczorek, A., and Soloway, E.
       (2002) Scaffolding in the Small: Designing Educational Supports for Concept Mapping on Handheld
       Computers.  CHI 2002, 792-793.
Moher, T., Ding, X., Wiley, J., Conmy, D., Hussain, S., Singh, P., and Srinivasan, V. (2003) Combining
       Handhelds with a Whole-Class Display to Support the Learning of Scientific Control. Proceedings of CHI
       '93 (Amsterdam, The Netherlands, April 1993), ACM Press, 882-883.
NRC (2000) How People Learn: Bridging Research and Practice. Washington, D.C., National Academy Press.
Rieger, R. and Gay, G. (1997) Using Mobile Computing to Enhance Field Study. Proceedings of CSCL 1997,
       Toronto, Ontario, 215-223.
Roschell, J. (1996) Learning by collaboration: Convergent conceptual change. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL:
       Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 209-248.
Soloway, E., Grant, W., Tinker, R., Roschelle, J., Mills, M., Resnick, M., Berg, R., and Eisenberg, M. (1999)
       Science in the Palms of their Hands.  Communication of the ACM, 42, 8.
Tatar, D., Roschelle, J., Vahey, P., and Penuel, W. R. (2003) Handhelds Go to School: Lessons Learned. IEEE
       Computer, 36, 9, 30-37.
Vahey, P., Tatar, D., and Roschelle, J. (2004) Leveraging Handhelds to Increase Student Learning:        Engaging
       Middle  School Students    with   the Mathematics    of Change.  Proceedings    of the  Sixth  International
       Conference of the Learning Sciences. Santa Monica, CA. June 22-26, 2004.
Wilensky, U. & Stroup, W. (2000) Networked Gridlock: Students Enacting Complex Dynamic Phenomena with
       the HubNet Architecture.   Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference of the Learning Sciences,
       Ann Arbor, MI. June 14-17, 2000.

                                                         
