Collaborative Learning through Augmented Reality
                                             Role Playing

                    Eric Klopfer                                                 Kurt Squire
                     Judy Perry                                               Ming-Fong Jan
          Teacher Education Program                                        School of Education
     Massachusetts Institute of Technology                         University of Wisconsin, Madison
      klopfer@mit.edu, jperry@mit.edu                                 kdsquire@education.wisc.edu,
                                                                        mingfongjan@wisc.edu

       Abstract.   This research  investigates  the  potential of  Augmented     Reality  (AR)  technologies,
       specifically  handheld    computers,  to  create  an    emotionally    compelling,  rich  context  for
       collaborative learning. Building on work in collaborative learning, we sought to design games
       requiring positive interdependence, promotive interaction, individual accountability, interpersonal
       and small group skills, and group processing.    While the collaboration within groups was strong
       and successful in the first generation AR games, the collaboration between groups was limited or
       non-existent. Several new game play elements added to a new engine created a more dynamic
       game play experience. These features included time dependence, cascading events and distinct
       player roles.  In subsequent iterations of AR games, we have found these new features to be
       effective at fostering collaboration, which in turn scaffolds a more authentic investigation process

       Keywords: Handhelds, games, simulations, role play, PDA

INTRODUCTION
     Handheld computers make possible new kinds of field investigations where learners collect data, access
authentic tools and resources, and participate in collaborative learning practices while in the field (Roschelle &
Pea, 2002; Soloway et al., 2001). Whereas traditional desktop VR applications or 3D gaming technologies such
as MUVEs (e.g. Dede et al. 2004) burden the developer and computer with representing 3D, augmented realities
exploit the "3D" characteristics of the real world, and instead provide users with layers of data that augment
their experience of reality. As a result, simulations are untethered from the desktop and learners can physically
and  actively  participate  in   technology-enhanced    investigations,  location-based    games,   or  participatory
simulations. Because players are free to move throughout the world, novel opportunities exist for learners to
interact with  the  physical   environment,  literally reading    the landscape   as  they conduct     environmental
investigations or historical studies. This also frees up students to communicate and collaborate in natural ways.
Students can talk and communicate with body language as they do everyday, rather than investing effort in
developing communication skills relevant only within a purely virtual world.     In sum, by integrating more of the
real world, handhelds   can   create experiences that  differ  in significant ways from    more  traditional desktop
computer based environments.
     Leveraging design techniques from role playing games (c.f. Gee, 2003), we believe that opportunities exist
for  immersive  gaming     environments   to recruit   players into   assuming   new  identities  as   environmental
investigators, scientists, and environmental activists, thereby encouraging them to adopt epistemic frames that
might be ideal preparation for future learning (c.f. Schwartz & Bransford, 1999; Shaffer, 2004). This research is
investigating the   potential of Augmented     Reality  (AR)   technologies   to create   this kind  of emotionally
compelling, rich context.   AR devices superimpose a virtual overlay of data and experiences onto a real world
context. Early work on AR (Klopfer et al. 2002, Klopfer & Squire 2003, Falk, et al. 2001; Waltz 2002) indicates
that AR simulations can be designed not only to support learning disciplinary content knowledge, but also to
provide  opportunities  for   students to develop   critical 21st  century IT  skills including   collaboration and
information sharing, managing uncertainty, and analyzing complex systems (c.f. Beck & Wade, 2004). While
initial trials of this technology are broadly discussed elsewhere (c.f. authors, in press), this study focuses on the
design for social interactivity (or sociability), and how this is designed into the software and emerges during
game play. When designed correctly, they can present authentic problems, give students access to investigative
tools, and structure experiences to foster collaboration. Using a design narrative technique (c.f. Hoadley, 2002),
this study seeks to provide an account of a research project over several design iterations that might illuminate
the tensions behind designing for collaboration. Building on work in collaborative learning (e.g. Johnson, et al.

                                                        
1994), we sought to design challenges (or games) requiring positive interdependence, promotive interaction,
individual accountability, interpersonal and small group skills, and group processing (See Table 1)
Positive              Group members perceive that they are linked with each other so that one cannot succeed
interdependence       unless everyone succeeds.
Promotive             Students promote each other's success by helping, assisting, supporting, encouraging,
interaction           and praising each other's efforts to learn.
Individual            Each individual student's performance is assessed and the results are given back to the
accountability        group and the individual.
Interpersonal and     Interpersonal and small-group skills required to function as part of a team (teamwork)
small group skills
Group processing      Group  members   discuss  how   well  they    are achieving   their goals  and maintaining
                      effective working relationships

    Figure 1. A screen shot of a handheld AR game (left) and 2 players conducting an AR investigation (right).

GENERATION 1 ­ ENVIRONMENTAL DETECTIVES
   Our first AR simulation, Environmental Detectives (ED) (Klopfer et al. 2002), engaged high school and
university students in a real world environmental consulting scenario constructed to immerse players in the
practices of environmental engineers, giving them a "virtual practicum" experience, similar to working on an
environmental  research team. Students role play   as  environmental    scientists investigating a rash of health
concerns on site linked to the release of toxins in the water supply, a scenario loosely based on actual historic
situations. The main focus of the game was on planning an effective investigation that balanced quantitative and
qualitative data.
   Working in teams of two or three, players attempt to identify the contaminant, chart its path through the
environment, and devise possible plans for remediation if necessary. As students physically move about campus,
their handheld devices respond to their location and show their current location on a bird's eye view map,
allowing them to collect simulated field data from the water and soil, interview virtual characters, and perform
desktop research using mini-webs of data. At the end of the exercise, teams compile their data using peer-to-peer
communication and synthesize their findings into case reports.
   The problem space of ED is quite vast. By design, no one player can obtain all of the requisite information
in the allotted time, and teams had to work with each other to collect data and come up with solutions. Each
team had one Pocket PC, one walkie-talkie, a printed map and a notepad. Teams typically assign one player to
the Pocket PC/map, and another player as notetaker and/or communicator.      This promoted strong collaboration
within teams ­ forcing players to work together effectively for navigation and planning. In most cases players
were not specifically instructed to either collaborate or compete with the other teams in the game, but to use
their judgment in order to devise the best solution and provide the strongest evidence. By creating this large
physical space, which can easily be geographically subdivided, we were most strongly emphasizing positive
interdependence. It should be noted that in ED, there is no "role" differentiation among players and, since all
players are using the same software, they can potentially access the same information at the same time. Table 2
(below) depicts the components of Environmental Detectives designed to promote collaboration.
Promotive            Moving in physical space, students working collaboratively can cover more ground and
interaction          share information by looking at each other's screens. One group's information is often
                     evaluated on the spot by other groups.
Individual           Each pair of students is responsible for presenting their case to the class at the end of the
accountability       experience. This is often supplemented by written arguments.
Interpersonal and    Groups of students communicated via walkie-talkie to share information or pool data.
small group skills

                                                      
Group processing     A classroom/lab space provides a shared location where students could plan next steps,
                     assemble evidence and ultimately present their case to the class.

    Nearly a dozen classes have run through ED. Here we examine collaboration within and across teams, one
an environmental science class from a suburban high school, and the other a chemistry class from a private all-
girls high school, both in the Boston metropolitan area. Through these runs we have found that collaboration
within the teams was quite strong. Both groups of students collected interviews and used sampling , though how
much weight they gave to these qualitative (interviews) and quantitative (sampling) activities varied greatly.
    Suburban High School. Looking at one team of three students towards the end of their investigation, they
start to evaluate what they know, and they grow concerned that they do not have enough information to make a
compelling case about the toxin. We pick up the discussion as they decide what to do next:
        Louis:           My socks are so wet.
        Camera:          We should head back soon.
        Gina:            Yeah, it is 12:50.
        Louis:           How far away is the thing [place they should return to]?
        Gina:            Where do we have to go again?
        Stacey:          Alan Morgan center?    That is...
        Louis:           [Looking around]. Not around here.
        Stacey:          Right here [points at paper map].
        Stacey:          How are we supposed to make recommendations?
        Gina:            I don't know.
        Louis:           Just read off of the information that we got.
        Gina:            I thought we could dilly-dally but we actually did work.
        Louis:           For once.
One of the defining characteristics of the experience was a constant shifting of goals. Students were expected to
manage their problem solving, reframe the problem as new information became available, and in short "work"
toward finding   a solution.  Much  of this  work,  however,    emanated   from an     "acquisition" metaphor   of
knowledge. Perhaps influenced by the field trip nature of the experience, some students thought the goal was to
acquire as much information as possible and then develop the right answer. Here, late in the experience, they
begin to understand that developing an answer requires negotiating and synthesizing information. Although this
group shared a lot of information and fluidly navigated multiple information spaces, much of their collaboration
centered around game mechanics, and less around collaborating to work through scientific dilemmas.
    Evidence of collaboration between teams of students is sparser. During this run, several groups tended to
frame the activity as akin to a scavenger hunt, with little consideration as to the significance of the information
contained within each of these interviews.
    Private Girls' School. Another class with previous experience in collaborative problem solving divided the
problem space and worked together to efficiently solve the problem. The facilitator began by asking students
what they knew, what they needed to know, and asked them to make a plan. The groups went out and collected
data, and, mid-game, decided to pool resources and see what they had learned so far.
    Two girls stand at the board and add to the list of facts already started earlier in class. A map is passed
around the room, and students add where they found their toxins. To those familiar with knowledge building
communities (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991) or jigsawing (Brown & Campione, 1996), the scene was quite
familiar. Each student was adding what she knew toward building a more holistic view of the problem. What
was particularly   noteworthy about  this  session is the  way   that  the facilitator quickly receded   into  the
background. While she drove much of the initial conversation, students quickly took ownership of the problem
and coordinating the discussion. For evidence typical of this, one student, Miranda interrupted the  conversation:
        Miranda:         Before we go back out, can we go through the names of all the interviews and make
                         sure that everyone's hit one at least?
We highlight this case not only to show how the task, designed to be unsolvable by any one person, could elicit
coordinated problem solving actions, but also to show how the game activity is not solely a property of the
software or design, but an interaction between the software design and the existing classroom culture.

GENERATION 2 ­ CHARLES RIVER CITY AND MAD CITY MURDER
    While the collaboration within groups was strong and successful in the first generation AR games, the
collaboration between groups was limited or non-existent, except in the last case, which showed that promoting
collaboration at a larger scale requires providing additional scaffolding for collaborative learning. In order to
promote greater collaboration between the teams, the core engine for our AR games was redesigned. From this
redesigned engine two new games were created ­ Charles River City (CRC), which combines environmental
science and epidemiology to create a large scale investigation, and   Mad City Murder (MCM) which uses the

                                                      
ED premise to create a mystery investigation. These games tap new features that were introduced into this
engine   including time dependence, cascading events and distinct player roles. The time dependence, which
made the game change over time, and cascading events, which allow events to trigger other events, were added
to provide a richer experience. Distinct roles were added to promote greater collaborative learning between
teams.
     Distinct  roles added   several  key  elements.   First, players    receive different   information   from  virtual
characters depending on what role they are playing. For example, a virtual character who is feeling sick might
give a player in the role of "nurse" different information than she would give to the "detective". Second, roles
have different data collection capabilities allowing them to collect unique types of samples or access unique
kinds of data. For example, an environmental scientist might have access to water sampling equipment, whereas
a medical doctor might be able to access medical records or get vital signs from virtual characters. Finally, since
roles can  access  different information,   players  can use  infrared   beaming  to  exchange    information   between
players. For example in CRC, a character reveals information to the "detective" about a student who has fallen
ill. The "detective" must then beam that information to the "nurse", so that the "nurse" can interview the player
and examine the specific symptoms and what might be causing them. Reconsidering the criteria for promoting
collaborative learning, we see how these new game play elements have enhanced the potential for larger scale
collaborative learning.
Positive              Each   team's  information  is explicitly  described   to  them as  only  a   small piece of  the
interdependence       puzzle, and they need information from other roles to solve the problem. This sharing is
                      facilitated by the infrared beaming of information.
Promotive             Students encourage players in the other roles to go out and get information that they know
interaction           they need but cannot get themselves.
Individual            Each role has access to unique information, necessary to solve the problem. Players know
accountability        which role has access to the information that they need.
Interpersonal and     Sharing   of  information   across teams     via the  infrared  beaming   becomes    a  point of
small group skills    instruction on how to share information and collaborate across teams.
Group processing      Groups    could "divide    and conquer"    ­  with  roles  dispersing  to find  information  and
                      regrouping to exchange information at planned times or ad hoc, or move around in multi-
                      role groups. Both strategies require getting together and planning how to move forward.

     In subsequent   iterations of  AR    games, we  have   found   these  new   features to be  effective at fostering
collaboration, which in turn scaffolds a more authentic investigation process. The fact that sharing information
could   reveal new   things  encouraged    frequent  digital  exchanges,    which  were    accompanied     by pertinent
discussions of game progress. Here is a typical exchange of middle school students from an urban school in the
Boston metropolitan area playing CRC.      In this particular version, there are three roles ­ a doctor who can take
people's vital signs and symptoms, an environmental scientist who can take samples from the water and air, and
a department of public health expert who has access to hospital records and epidemiological data.
         Manny:              I got a document that says that says West Nile Virus has the most serious effects on
                             people over 50.
         Jane:               So ... the   doctor might   be  the one   that wants  to talk   to Salvadore   [previously
                             identified older patient] since he can get his health information.
     The doctor goes to the location where Salvadore is and takes physical exam. A player in another role
(Department of Public Health official ­ DPH) also goes along.
         Sal [Doctor]:       I was right! He has all of the symptoms of WNV [West Nile Virus].
         Tricia [DPH]:       [Radios to whole group via walkie talkie] I found Salvadore!
         Sal:                [Via walkie talkie] He has all the symptoms that he carries for WNV.
This  collaboration   between    groups    continues  on    into   the  classroom    where   they    are  making   their
recommendations on what to do about the problem. Each one of them contributes information that they got on
the topic specific to their role (Environmental Scientist ­ Env).
         Dave [DPH]:         I found that West Nile Virus can make you really sick.
         Tricia [Env]:       Mosquitoes are all over the world so it is dangerous.
         Manny [Env]:        Not right now. Since it is fall there aren't many mosquitoes out. Only in spring and
                             summer.
         Jose [DPH]:         Julia [a character] said that an elderly man complained of swarms of mosquitoes.
         Kim [Doctor]:       We found the old man [Salvadore] that complained of symptoms that could be WNV.
         Dave [DPH]:         There might be enough mosquitoes where it could still be a problem.
         Manny [Env]:        So get rid of the ones that are there.
         Dave [DPH]:         Get rid of all of the water that is standing around like in old tires.

                                                         
As seen in the above dialog, the different roles have different perspectives and different pieces of the puzzle.
This encourages them to collaborate, which progresses into other forms of collaboration and discussion as they
attempt to solve the problem at hand.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
One of the key design considerations for the different roles within the AR games is how much overlap there
should be between the roles. Too much overlap between the roles will remove the positive interdependence and
individual accountability that encourage collaboration.     However, too little overlap does not give the students
enough common ground to discuss the problem space.           We have found that when students access the same
information, it serves as a promotive interaction ­ reinforcing students that they have done well.    It also gives
them a   point around   which they    can begin  discussion.  They   start piecing  the puzzle together around   the
common pieces and then work towards their own unique contributions.            As in the CRC example, all of the
students learned that West Nile Virus was a serious mosquito borne disease, but only certain roles were privy to
the seasonality, the current  levels, or  the symptoms.   In  our next  phases we   will study how  increasing and
decreasing overlap can affect learning outcomes, and how role interdependence relates to both subject matter
and student experience.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the iCampus program for funding the initial development of this project, the Academic
Co-Lab for research assistance, and the countless UROPs who worked on software development.

REFERENCES
Beck, J. & M. Wade (2004) Got Game: How the Gamer Generation Is Reshaping Business Forever. Harvard
      Business School Press, Cambridge, MA.
Brown,   A.L.,   & Campione,    J.C.   (1996).  Psychological   theory  and   the   design  of innovative learning
      environments: On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in
      learning: New environments for education (pp. 289-325). Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
Dede, C., Nelson, B., Ketelhut, D.J., Clarke, J. &   Bowman, C. (2004). Design-based Research Strategies for
      Studying Situated Learning in a Multi-user Virtual Environment. Paper presented at the International
      Conference on the Learning Sciences, Los Angeles, CA, June.
Falk, J., Ljungstrand, P., Bjork, S., & Hannson R. (2001). Pirates: Proximity-triggered interaction in a multi-
      player game." Extended abstracts of computer-human interaction (CHI), ACM Press: pp. 119-120.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy.          Palgrave Macmillan.
Hoadley, C. P. (2002). Creating context: Design-based research in creating and understanding CSCL. In G.
      Stahl (Ed.),   Computer  Support    for  Collaborative  Learning  2002   (pp.  453-462).  Lawrence  Erlbaum
      Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
Johnson, D.; Johnson, R.; and E. Johnson Holubec. 1994. The New Circles of Learning: Cooperation in the
      Classroom and School. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
Klopfer, E. & Squire, K. (2003). Augmented reality on PDAs. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
      American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL, April.
Klopfer, E., K. Squire and H. Jenkins. 2002. Environmental Detectives          PDAs as a Window into a Virtual
      Simulated World. Paper presented at International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in
      Education.
Roschelle, J., &   Pea, R. (2002). A   walk   on the WILD     side: How    wireless handhelds  may  change CSCL.
      International Journal of Cognition and Technology, 1, 145-168.
Scardamalia, M. and Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher Levels of Agency for Children in Knowledge Building: A
      Challenge for the Design of New Knowledge Media.         The Journal of the Learning Sciences. 137-68.H
Soloway, E., Norris, C., Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, B., Krajcik, J. & Marx, R. (2001, June). Log on education:
      Handheld devices are ready-at-hand. Communications of the ACM, 44, pp. 15-20.
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999).    Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications.
      In A. Iran-Nejad & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review of Research in Education , 24, 61-101.            Washington
      DC: American Educational Research Association.
Shaffer, DW    (2004).  Epistemic  frames   and  islands of  expertise: Learning    from infusion experiences  . In
      Proceedings of the 2004 International Conference on the Learning Sciences (ICLS), Los Angeles.
Walz, S. (2002). On the Move between Proximate Distance and Distant Proximity.          Master's thesis published by
      the  University   Tuebingen,    Germany,   Dept.   of  Cultural Anthropology,     and commissioned   by    the
      University for Art Media and Design Zurich. University Tuebingen, Germany.

                                                         
