 Mystery at the Museum ­ A Collaborative Game for
                                 Museum Education

                  Eric Klopfer                                               Kurt Squire
                    Judy Perry                                              Ming-Fong Jan
         Teacher Education Program                                     Constance Steinkuehler
    Massachusetts Institute of Technology                               School of Education
                 klopfer@mit.edu                                University of Wisconsin, Madison
                 jperry@mit.edu                                    kdsquire@education.wisc.edu
                                                                       mingfongjan@wisc.edu
                                                                       steinkuehler@wisc.edu

       Abstract. Through an iterative design process involving museum educators, learning scientists
       and technologists, and drawing upon our previous experiences in handheld game design and a
       growing body of knowledge on learning through gaming, we designed an interactive mystery
       game called  Mystery  at the Museum      (the High Tech     Whodunnit), which  was      designed  for
       synchronous play of groups of parents and children over a two to three hour period. The primary
       design goals were to engage visitors more deeply in the museum, engage visitors more broadly
       across museum exhibits, and encourage collaboration between visitors. The feedback from the
       participants suggested that the combination of depth and breadth was engaging and effective in
       encouraging them to think about the museum's exhibits. The roles that were an integral part of the
       game turned out to be extremely effective in engaging pairs of participants with one another.
       Feedback from parents was quite positive in terms of how they felt it engaged them and their
       children. These results suggest that further explorations of technology-based museum experiences
       of this type are wholly appropriate.

       Keywords: Handhelds, games, simulations, role play, PDA, museum, wireless

BACKGROUND ­ GUIDED TOURS AND HANDHELDS IN MUSEUMS
It is well known that museums have sought ways to engage visitors both more deeply and broadly in museum
resources. Technology has enabled museums to explore new ways to provide visitors with richer experiences
without necessarily producing additional physical exhibits. Many museums have employed audio tours, utilizing
customized mobile devices with headphones for this purpose. These audio tours, which typically require visitors
to manually enter codes displayed near specific locations and/or exhibits, offer visitors on-demand , information,
commentary and even music. While these hardware devices have evolved from linear cassettes to non-linear
digital CDs and MP3 players, making the user-experience more intuitive and more flexible, the concept has
remained fundamentally the same ­ provide visitors with access to additional auditory content relevant to single
items, or less commonly, exploring connections between multiple items.
    More  recently, some museums    have    started  offering handheld devices which  allow     visitors to specify
exhibits for which they would like to subsequently access additional media. Perhaps the best known example of
this is the Experience Music Project (http://www.emplive.com/visit/about_emp/tech.asp) in Seattle, which not
only provides supplementary audio content to exhibits, but also allows users to electronically "tag" items which
they can then explore in more detail using a separate electronic workstation at a later time.
    Other museums have also sought to offer electronic guides to visitors that not only provide supplementary
information on the spot, but also allow them to retrieve related information later. The Exploratorium in San
Francisco has conducted a study (Hsi 2003) of visitors' use of this strategy within their science center. In this
study, location-aware Pocket  computers     provided visitors with web-based  information     about aspects  of the
museum including history, annotations and suggested explorations.      Content, including audio, video and text,
was delivered to  the devices wirelessly.   Two  themes  emerged    in this study. First, visitors  said  that they
technology isolated them. In order to hear audio, they wore headsets which tended to separate them from their
surroundings. Additionally, visitors tended to focus on the device, taking away their focus from the rest of the
museum. Second, visitors had trouble connecting the virtual content on their handhelds with the real content in

                                                       
the museum. Despite these two shortcomings, however, the visitors did say the technology encouraged them to
view exhibits in new ways and try things that they hadn't before.
   As museums explore these new technologies it is important to consider the affordances of the specific
technologies and how they can meet the goals of the museum's physical space while providing an additional
layer of engagement. In exploring this notion, other museums have tried using roaming handhelds in different
ways.     In      a      departure       from       the     guided       tour     metaphor,      one        design
(http://woz.commtechlab.msu.edu/courses/theses/scavengerhunt/) was created at the Chicago Historical Society
in the form of a scavenger hunt. The goal here was to create something more game-like that would attract the
interest of younger visitors. The scavenger hunt would pose one of 10 questions such as, "Find this cup [picture
shown] and see the logo and mascot carefully. Which famous brand's cup was it?          [multiple-choice answers
provided]". Players would earn points for correctly answering each of the questions. They found that students
aged 9-13 liked the technology and actively sought the answers rather than simply guessing. However, from a
museum education and design perspective, this scavenger hunt strategy may be viewed as counterproductive. It
encourages students to see the museum as a bunch of disconnected, decontextualized artifacts. Many museums
actively discourage the scavenger hunt motif because it does not encourage students to think deeply about what
they are looking at or promote thoughtful inquiry. Yet, the concept of integrating a game into the museum space
to engage students in this age range is intriguing, as many of them use and enjoy handheld games.
   Museums have not employed these new technologies to encourage interaction with other museumgoers. For
the most part, as noted in the Exploratorium study (Hsi 2003), the technologies do exactly the opposite, fostering
a more private and isolated experience. Yet the field of computer supported collaborative learning certainly
provides evidence   that collaborative learning  is effective in  encouraging   people  to think critically about
important ideas, and perhaps this notion should be more seriously considered in the informal learning space of
museums.

MYSTERY AT THE MUSEUM
Building on of our experiences using location-aware handhelds for learning experiences at schools and nature
centers (Klopfer and Squire 2003), a new game was designed for the Boston Museum of Science. The primary
design goals were to:
   x     Engage visitors more deeply in museum exhibits ­ get visitors to explore and think about specific
         exhibits that they had not seen before
   x     Engage visitors more broadly across museum exhibits ­ get visitors to see connections across the
         exhibits of the museum, and explore parts of the museum that they had not visited in the past
   x     Encourage collaboration between visitors ­ get visitors to discuss ideas to promote engagement

   In choosing a target audience for the game, we settled on the core museum going contingent of families ­
specifically late elementary through middle school aged students and their parents. An additional goal was then
added to the project of increasing meaningful collaboration and interaction between parents and children around
science  and inquiry.  These   goals are consistent   with  the recently   introduced AAAS    supported  Science
Everywhere initiative (http://www.tryscience.org/parents/parent.html).
   Through an iterative design process involving museum educators, learning scientists and technologists, and
drawing upon our previous experiences in handheld game design (e.g. Klopfer and Squire 2003) and a growing
body of knowledge on learning through gaming (Gee 2003), we designed an interactive mystery game called
Mystery at the Museum (the High Tech Whodunnit), which was designed for synchronous play of groups of
parents and children over a two to three hour period.
   The fictitious premise of Mystery at the Museum (M@M) was that a band of thieves (The Pink Flamingo
Thieves) had left their calling card (a pink flamingo) in an exhibit case indicating that they had stolen a priceless
object from the museum and replaced it with a replica. The players (in M@M) have been brought in as a team of
experts to try to solve the crime, apprehend the criminals, and identify and retrieve the stolen artifact. Each
player took on one of three possible roles ­ a technologist, a biologist and a detective ­ each with special
capabilities. The interdependencies among the roles encouraged different roles to collaborate throughout the
game.   Logistically, players were organized as six players (three pairs) per team with each pair (parent and
child) using one one Pocket PC and a walkie-talkie. Players have many different ways in which they can collect
clues - including interviewing virtual characters (unique to each room within the museum), collecting virtual
clues found in exhibit halls, analyzing samples using virtual instruments, and understanding information from
exhibits throughout the museum.
   The Pocket PC used Wi-Fi positioning to determine what room in the museum it was in. It could then
provide the players with information about dynamic virtual characters and objects in the room with which they
could interact. These  virtual objects and  characters   in turn  referred to and complemented    real, physical

                                                        
components of museum exhibits which had been incorporated into the story. The fundamental interactions that
were inherent to the game were as follows:
    x   In each room was a set of virtual characters, which could be "interviewed" by clicking on them. The
        characters would provide a monologue in the form of text, often accompanied by pictures. The
        characters could move rooms over time, and players in different roles might receive different
        information from the characters (i.e. a character might tell something quite different to a detective
        researching a case, than they would to a biologist). Many of the virtual characters referred to other
        exhibits or rooms.
    x   In many rooms there were virtual objects, which could be picked up and examined. Each had        both a
        textual description and one or more images associated with it. Players could also "show" virtual
        objects to characters who would then  react accordingly, often providing additional information.  Some
        of the objects related to nearby exhibits.
    x   In several locations virtual equipment (e.g. a scanning electron microscope) could be used to obtain
        further information about the virtual objects. Where possible the virtual equipment was placed near
        real equipment of similar types (like the SEM). Equipment "use" was restricted to certain player roles
        as appropriate.
    x   Several items in the museum were tagged with infrared tags. These tags provided the players with
        virtual samples taken from those particular items (e.g. fingerprints from a glass case).
    x   Players could exchange objects and interviews with each other through localized infrared beaming. In
        many cases one role was the only one capable of retrieving a sample (e.g. the detective who could get
        a splinter from an unconscious guard), while another role was the one who could use equipment to
        analyze it (e.g. the technologist capable of using the virtual SEM).

The game was completed when players had accumulated enough evidence to obtain a virtual warrant for the
arrest of the culprits. One of the organizers played the role of judge who considered the information presented
orally by the players and, if sufficient evidence was presented, beamed the players an arrest warrant

Figure 1. A screen shot showing virtual items and characters in the room (left) and a group of players collecting
                                      clues in the museum (right).

IMPLEMENTATION AND DATA
M@M was played at the Boston Museum of Science on two successive weekend afternoons with a group of
approximately 20 parents and children each day. Parents were always paired with their own child.           While
several of the parents and children knew each other, the majority did not know any of the other participants
before the game. The groups were subdivided into teams of six (as mentioned above). In cases with uneven
numbers, a single redundant role was added to a team. After players were introduced to the "mystery" and given
a brief tutorial of game mechanics, they were given one hour to play the first phase of the game. After this first
hour of game play, players regrouped in the meeting room, checked in with the organizers for 5-10 minutes and
then went back into the exhibit halls to play the second half of the game for an additional 30 minutes. At the end
of the game the players met again to discuss the process, complete surveys.  A sample of participants were then
interviewed by the research team. In order to determine how well the game met our design goals several data

                                                       
sources were   triangulated to determine    emergent  themes.   These  sources  included   video tapes  that tracked
groups as they went through the entire process, pre and post game surveys of both parents and children on
interests in the museum, technology and collaboration, and video tapes of the post game group debrief and
individual interviews.

RESULTS

Deep and Broad Engagement
Players in the game were required to visit a wide variety of places in the museum, and to examine exhibits
closely to find and understand some of the "clues". Several codes, for example, were woven into the storyline
(the thieves used codes to communicate with each other). Interpreting these codes required players to find and
connect information from several exhibits on mathematics, communication, and models. The feedback from the
participants suggested that this combination of depth (examining some exhibits in detail) and breadth (thinking
more   broadly about  multiple   exhibits)  was engaging   and effective  in encouraging   them  to think about  the
museum's exhibits.   This can be seen in the interactions of one of the groups searching for information to help
them decode one of the clues which the thieves left behind:
         Mom 1: We're looking for codes to help us decode this. If anyone finds stuff let us know [looking
             around]
         Girl 2: Over here! Over here!
         Mom 1: [Boy2] look in the 14th century [points to chronological history of mathematics]
         Boy 2: Look Look. Water and dice like on the code.
         Dad 2: [reads information about the code to himself and then applies that to the code "written" on the
             back of a virtual receipt] In an ... hour.. [points to a part of the exhibit and speaks to the group]...
             it is telling him when to meet by the water. An hour after close.

This interaction shows how the teams worked together to discover and apply information from real exhibits in
order to interpret the virtual information which in turn fed back into their game play strategies. During the group
debrief discussion following the game, these feelings of connection with the museum were further conveyed.
"...We did see parts of the museum we weren't aware of," said one of the parents addressing the variety of new
exhibits they saw. A child commented that he, "hadn't ever seen the monkeys," which are one of the few live
exhibits in the museum, and are tucked away in an area that is easy to miss. A parent noted on behalf of herself
and her child, "We come a lot, and I still saw stuff in exhibits that I had never seen before."      Another parent
echoed, "I learned things that I had never seen before, like reading about the mummy or the banana tree. It made
me read things that I wouldn't have otherwise."

Collaboration Across Roles
The roles in the game turned out to be extremely effective in engaging the pairs of participants with one another.
Each individual role was forced to collect and share information to successfully solve the case. Here one group
has met up after collecting information separately.
         Boy 3: Have you been to the mummy?
         Mom 2: Yes we went there.
         Boy 3: They have to go there since they're the biologist. It is upstairs...
         Boy 1: Let's give you [the Technologist] the splinters so you can look at them with the microscope.
         Mom 1: We got the hobo code but we can't fully decode it. What do you think this means?          [beams to
             other groups so that they can all look at the picture]

Often  the groups  concluded   that  it was  beneficial to move  around   the   museum   in groups  which  included
multiple roles so that they could collaborate to solve the problems. As one parent said, "In the second part we all
went together to every room or even though we might not have needed everyone in each room we did better as a
group."  One of the senior museum educators further commented, "...sometimes people have trouble with the
logical reasoning... [but in this group] they saw that one person could get what the others couldn't and they got
the power of roles. Then they started using the beaming and they got that roles idea and off they went."        The
interdependence   of roles  served  as  the starting place for collaboration  which   then  promoted  more   general
collaborative problem solving. It is interesting to note that in the post-game surveys many participants wrote that
they felt that their role was the most important in the game for one reason or another. This was consistent across
all of the roles, showing   that the roles  had  fostered  players' sense of  a unique  contribution in addition to
promoting collaboration.

                                                         
Parent Child Interactions
Feedback from parents was quite positive in terms of how they felt it engaged them and their children.     Parents
commented on the appeal of different levels of complexity within the game, with tasks that encouraged them as
adults to take an equally active, but different, job from their children. For example, in many cases the children
were   the ones  who   collected evidence  with the   Pocket  PC,   while   the parents frequently organized  the
investigation and helped them physically navigate the large museum space.        One parent of a 14 year old boy
noted, "this is  the longest substantive interaction I've had with   my   son in years  without fighting."  While
children similarly noted, "my mom actually had a reason to be here [to help me figure out part of the game]".

CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT DIRECTIONS
This implementation of Mystery at the Museum shows great promise for interactive games in a museum setting.
Museum educators, parents and children were all pleased with the way that it engaged them with individual
exhibits, the larger museum space and with each other.     There were other positive outcomes which were not
originally designed into the experience.  One mother (a physician) noted that while her colleagues had all used
PDAs (like the Pocket PC) in their practice, she had been too afraid in the past, and now was willing to give it a
try.  A 10-year old girl similarly noted that she was not "the techie in the family" and often felt left out by
technology, but that during this experience, she "really got it." These results suggest that further explorations of
technology-based museum experiences of this type are wholly appropriate.        There are many design issues to be
considered in the future including how the roles should be designed, how this model could be adapted to less
synchronous implementations, and how portable the model is across institutions. Of particular interest is how
this game can be adapted to museum environments in which synchronous runs of the game are not feasible or
desired. There are several options for making these kinds of adaptations. One solution would be to allow players
to start the game at any time, but limit their interactions to other players who started within an adjacent window
of time. Alternatively, the narrative may be adapted such that it is dynamic and responsive to the actions of the
current players. As we did in the original game, we can look to other gaming genres, which have conquered
similar problems. The quests of many massively multi-player online roleplaying games, which are constantly
unfolding, have much to offer in this regard. These ideas will be considered in future investigations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We'd like to thank the Boston Museum of Science, and Sheila Jasalavich for their support in implementing this
project.

REFERENCES
Gee, J. P. (2003). What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy.        Palgrave Macmillan.
Hsi, S 2003 A study of user experiences mediated by nomadic web content in a museum. Journal of Computer
       Assisted Learning 19, 308-319
Klopfer, E. & Squire, K. (2003). Augmented reality on PDAs. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
       American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL, April.

                                                       
