Effective Discussions, Social Talks and Learning: A
          Paradox on Learning in Discussion Forums

              Fei-Ching Chen, Yu-Wei Lee, Hui Chen Chu, Hung Ren Wang1, Huo-Ming Jiang2

                        Institute of Learning & Instruction, National Central University
                     1Department of Information & Communications, Shih Hsin University
                        2Institute of Atmospheric Physics, National Central University
                                               fcc@cc.ncu.edu.tw

       Abstract. It is generally accepted that social talks have nothing to do with on-task discussion, or
       even that they are to be discouraged in the interests of effective learning.         However, from a
       community-building   perspective,    social interaction is key   to   the sustainability of   a learning
       community. An apparent paradox seems to exist in that, while social interaction is critical for
       community cohesion, social postings do not contribute to effective discussion. The authors argue
       that previous research using postings as the unit of analysis has failed to discover the context in
       which effective learning took place. Using threads as the unit of analysis, this study is able to
       explore  empirically the  relationship  between   effective  discussion    and social   talks  in CSCL
       environment. Based on an analysis of 321 longer threads (consisting of 10490 postings) in which
       the structure of the threads, the components of the threads, and the order of different categories of
       postings  in  some of   these threads  were   defined,  this    study reveals  that  genuine    effective
       discussions and social talks cannot be viewed in isolation nor does there exist a wall between
       them.  The roles of social talks in CSCL are rediscovered and discussed.

       Keywords: social talks, "off-task" interaction, effective discussions, thread

INTRODUCTION
CSCL is normally aimed at providing new opportunities for designing and implementing advanced learning,
such as deep learning, sustained and critical discourse, and effective discussions (e.g., Guzdial & Turns, 2000).
Current insights into the CSCL-environment also suggest that social interaction is important for a community
that supports learning (e.g., Kreijns, Kirschner, & Jochems, 2002). It seems that both effective discussions and
social interaction are the focus of learning in a virtual community. However, despite their respective importance
in learning, there is little research on the relationship between effective discussion and social interaction.
  A body of research does articulate the negative effects of social talks on effective discussion. Researchers
have claimed that social talks fall into another category of activity, one which prevents students from learning
effectively.  For  example, Hara  and   colleagues   (Hara, Bonk,   &   Angeli,   2002) examining      the relationship
between cognitive processes and social cues in a study conducted on a graduate level course, reported that social
cues appeared separately from content discussions and that the number of social cues decreased as the semester
progressed. During later weeks, students engaged in intense online discussion and were highly focused on the
task. They described social cues as taking a back seat to student judgment, inference, and clarification. Walther
(1996) also argues that the more effective CMC is, the less socio-emotional communication is present. Similarly,
some research done by exploring the percentage of on-topic and off-topic discussion concluded that the ratio of
the two determined the effectiveness of learning. Lipponen and colleagues (Lipponen, Rahikainen, Lallimo, &
Hakkarainen,   2001)  conducted   an  online  science   discussion  with     elementary students   and     reported the
proportion of on-topic notes to be 63% with off-topic notes totaling 37%. They were disappointed in this ratio,
having expected the discourse to be more oriented to the subject matter and practices of inquiry than it turned
out to be. They sought a higher on-to-off topic ratio assuming that the more the discussions were oriented
towards learning topics, the more students would learn. Furthermore, Badri, Grasso, & Leng (2003) developed a
"filter" to distinguish relevant contributions from irrelevant contributions and to help instructors to identify
students who constantly disrupted conversations with off-topic contributions. These studies all seem to regard
effective discussion and social talks as existing in conflict with each other, the one, constructive, and the other,
distracting.
  There    is also a body   of research revealing   the positive  effects  of social  talks on  effective    discussion.
Steinkuehler and colleagues (Steinkuehler, Derry, Levin, & Kim, 2000) were the few researchers to make an
effort to code  the  "seemingly  effortless social  interaction"  into categories.  Based   on  their  data, "off-task"

                                                         
discourse was   placed into  four  coding   categories: housekeeping   statements,  social talk, tangent topics, and
"null" statements. They found that the majority of off­topic content appeared to consist of social talk. Both
housekeeping statements and social interaction were considered necessary to keep the general conversation on
task, to maintain an amiable conversation, and to serve as a base to insure that participants understand one
another. Furthermore, Hobaugh (1997) emphasizes that problems with social dynamics among group members
are often a major cause of ineffective group action. Gunawardena (1995) claims that these kinds of "failures
tend to occur at the social level far more than they do at the technical level". Their findings revealed the value of
social interaction to effective discussion.
  From a community perspective, the position of social talks in discussion forums was illuminated further by
Wegerif   (1998)  who     pointed  out that:  "Many     evaluations of asynchronous     learning  networks   (ALNs)
understandably focus upon the educational dimension, either learning outcomes or the educational quality of
interactions, overlooking   the social  dimension  which    underlies  this." He  noted   that "forming  a   sense of
community, where people feel they will be treated sympathetically by their fellows, seems to be a necessary first
step for collaborative learning. Without a feeling of community people are on their own, likely to be anxious,
defensive and unwilling to take the risks involved in learning".       Rourke (2000) found that certain conditions
must exist before students will offer tentative ideas to, or critique the ideas of peers, and before they are willing
to interpret criticism as valuable rather than as a personal insult. These findings suggest that group cohesion is
required for effective discussion.
  Moreover, research also attempted to explore the context of "off-task" on the effectiveness of "on-task".
Erickson & Kellogg (2003) investigated the content of conversations and concluded that "In theory, more topic-
oriented discussion is `supposed' to take place in specific topics; in practice, work talk often grows out of social
discussions." Kreijns, Kirschner and Jochems (2002) concluded that, although social interaction in the social-
psychological/ social dimension has little to do with task execution, we expect that various non-task contextual
settings will foster this dimension of social interaction more than a task context would.
  The investigation of this study aims to provide a better understanding of how learning takes place in online
discussion forums through exploration of the relationship between effective discussion and social interaction. By
examining the activities of learners in discussion forums, we attempt to trace the trajectories of online group
learning.

THE RESEARCH QUESTIONS
The research on the relationship between social interaction and effective discussions is, however, anecdotal and
speculative, rather than empirically grounded. The authors in this study approach the underlying structures
between these factors with two methodological considerations. First, most of the research done on computer-
mediated discourse analysis considers postings as the unit of analysis (Drie, Van Boxtel, Erkens & Kanselaar,
2004). Using this criteria, all of the postings are sorted into different categories according to their attributes.
Postings are therefore isolated from each other and the context of the dialogue in which they appeared is missing
entirely. However, in a threaded discussion, postings exist within a contextual atmosphere and a posting cannot
be fully understood merely by the content of the single posting itself. Better insight into effective discussions
can be gained from a macro-view of the threaded context.
  Secondly, definitions of effective discussion", as applied to performance in discussion forums, vary a
good  deal.  The  termeffective    discussions     is   widely and  variously  used to  characterize positive  group
learning. For example, Guzdial & Turns (2000) applied the term "effective discussions" to discussions sustained
and focused upon topics related to class learning goals. Hsi & Hoadley (1997) used "productive discussion" to
refer to situations in which all students "participate actively, generate comments containing a repertoire of
scientific ideas, and in a group, students elaborate their own ideas, and propose new ideas." It appears that what
they call "effective discussion"   referred  to "cognitive"  , "on-topic"   , "on-task" ,  and   "sustained" learning
processes and clearly excluded the "off-topic" , "off-task" , "social interaction", and "social talks" activities.
Must effective discussions be sustained and be on-topic? Who determines whether the discussion is "effective"?
Whose perspective is being used?
  Our question, then, is how to identify "effective discussion" from the perspective of the learners themselves,
which data may then be used to explore empirically the relationship between effective discussion and social
interaction. In this paper, we argue that isolated postings in discussion forums cannot serve as the unit of
analysis for defining a picture of effective group learning. We introduce our tool, "Pick-n-Choose", with which
learners identify the important posts in the threaded discussions of their joint tasks. Using the thread as a unit of
analysis  instead of discrete posts,   we   demonstrate  how   an effective thread  containing   identified important
postings  is  structured, composed,    and   developed   by  interwoven  postings   in  the three  categories:   task,
coordination, and social talks. Our discussion focuses on two facets: rediscovering the "social talks" aspect of

                                                          
discussion forums,   and identifying the effective discussion   that    takes place in "social talks". Through    this
examination, we are able to deepen our understanding of "how learning happens in discussion forums".

METHODS

The community & the tasks
The online community was formed for a web-based science contest in an inquiry-based learning environment
called Learning Atmospheric sciences via the Internet (Lain), which was created primarily to allow high school
students to participate as a virtual summer camp. Those volunteer individuals who chose the same topic from a
list of five topics were sorted into a set of groups of 5-7 individuals each. Members of a single group did not
normally know each other, nor did they engage in face-to-face communication throughout the activity. This
web-based science contest lasted six weeks with one stage scheduled for each week. The six stages were:
Individual claim formulation, Team hypothesis creation, Detailed planning, Data location, Data transformation,
and Hypothesis justification. Participants in this activity qualified for a certificate if they went through the
process and completed all required tasks. However, as there were multiple summer programs from which to
choose and some participated in more than one, some students were absent for a few days, more or less, during
the six week course.

The "Pick-n-Choose" tool in the discussion forum
Much research effort has been put into designing scripts or scaffolds to support effective discussion. Scripted
encounters may work because they allow learners to push for deeper understanding and eliminate extraneous
fruitless activity but this also raises the issue of over-scripting. For example, the self-coding activity (note-type
or classification) may result in bored and faked entries. The "electronic anchor" , a document or topic which
students may be interested in discussing (in CaMile discussion forum), is designed to elicit sustained discussion.
However, we are still not in a position to judge whether it is "who", "what topic" or "when the statement is
posted" that attracts people to join the discussion forums.
   "Effective discussion" in previous research has been studied but only loosely defined (e.g., sustained, on-
topic, on task...). In this study, we introduce the concept of "Important Posting" (IP), that which is identified by
the learners as important and useful for later discussion, and "Important Thread" (IT), that which provides the
environment within which the "IP" appears in order to empirically capture the context of important learning
moments as "effective discussion."
   Each group had its own discussion forum and permission to post in group discussion forums was restricted
to the legitimate group members.  They were read-only to non-members. The discussion forum was composed of
threads, each a mini-discussion, triggered by the group's members.        There were four prompts in each week's
worksheet.  Worksheets were designed around the scientific process skills at each stage of the week in order to
anchor the discussions. As many community members were absent for short periods, and there were a vast
number of threads and postings,   the authors designed a "Pick-n-Choose" process for the following purposes.
The focusing features.
The focusing features helped group members to focus upon specific important elements among the dozens of
threads. As the group was formed virtually, members of the group had to take an active role in building a shared
mental model for the collaborative project. Any group member had the right to choose the posting that s/he
thought important, and put it in a "Pick-n-Choose" collection. Later on, when working on the worksheets,
completing their group tasks, and generating their final products, they had that shared mental model upon which
to focus.
The Meta-cognitive features.
Differing from some of the self-coding interfaces in which learners were asked to classify every single post of
their own dialogue (Dillenbourg, 2003), the "Pick-n-Choose" process was carried out only after the statement
had been posted and whenever necessary. Therefore, not every single post had to be coded. This variation
would not reduce the meta-cognitive and the methodological advantages of that approach.
The portfolio features.
One  promising  outcome   of this process  emerged.   A     troublesome    paradox  exists when  the   quality of the
discussion process seems disconcertingly inconsistent with that of the final product -- when, for example, the
discussions are sustained and on-topic, but the final products are poorly presented, or the final product is
fascinating but there is little corresponding evidence in the discussion process.    This presented problems in the
evaluation process.  "Pick-n-Choose" was designed to overcome this difficulty by requiring group members to

                                                        
choose important discussion segments from among the postings thus causing the artifacts to be more closely
related to the final products.

The Sample
The four hundred and eighty seven (487) high school students who participated in this activity were sorted into
82 groups of 5-7 individuals each. The six-weeks of inquiry-based online discussions consisted of 42567 total
postings in 7037 threads. The number of postings and threads produced by the groups averaged 519 and 86
respectively. The average number   of postings in each thread was 6.8. Of these postings, 7943 (19% of the total)
were included in the "Pick-n-Choose", "Important Posting" (IP) collection. The number of Important Threads
(ITs) containing IPs, was 2220 (30% of the total). In order to explore the underlying structure of the more
sustained ITs, we first chose the top 25% of groups (by thread length -- the number of postings per thread) and
then from among these, chose the IT threads that were above the average (68%) (we will analyze the remaining
32% of ITs that were not "sustained" in another paper). As a result, 321 threads containing 10490 postings (of
which 2688 were IPs) were selected as the sample for further investigation.
  This is an environment designed for asynchronous discussion. However, due to the popularity of MSN
Messenger, some of the groups communicated with each other in a synchronous way, as in a chat room. In this
particular context,   both real-time   and delayed, spontaneous   discussion   and   considered    postings were
documented and recorded.

Data analysis
In order to explore empirically the relationship between effective discussion and social interaction, this study
developed a "Pick-n-Choose" tool for learners to identify the IPs and the ITs. The 321 ITs in our sample were
first analyzed in the following ways.
Identifying the positions of the IPs within their ITs
The purpose of this analysis was to reveal the position of the IPs in each IT. Since probably more than one
posting were designated as IP in an IT, we arbitrarily divided all the threads into 3 sections: the Beginning part,
the Middle part, and the Closing part. A frequency count was kept of postings which fell within each part.   Our
assumption was that if an IT was socially constructed, the IP would appear in the Closing part. On the other
hand, if an IP appeared at the Beginning or in the Middle part, then what took place after the IP? In other words,
from a knowledge-building perspective, an IP would be expected to emerge from the latter part of a thread. That
is what a "meaningful" sustained discussion meant. Treating the thread as the unit of analysis, the contextual
cues were utilized to explore the interrelationship among postings of IPs and non-IPs in ITs.
Coding the postings in the ITs
Except for the presence of IPs, what characteristics distinguished ITs from other threads? We were interested in
what fostered the IPs. Postings did not occur in isolation but emerged as part of an ongoing dialogue, and by
analyzing the attributes of the postings in an IT, we were able to reveal the distinctive qualities of an IT. For
maximum effectiveness, we coded a sampling roughly 1/10 of the total, or 28 threads with 962 postings. The
coding scheme was modified from Dillenbourg's (2003) work on the three concurrent processes involved in
collaboration: the domain, the organization or coordination, and the social talks. The purpose of codifying these
three categories was to explore the weighting of each category in the ITs.
Uncovering the interweaving of postings of three categories within ITs
The aforementioned 28 threads, with each posting codified, were then represented in a figure to show the
interweaving of these ITs. The relationship between the effective discussion and the social talks was vividly
revealed.
  Based on this basic information, further analysis of the dynamics within threads followed, defining the
profile of the threads qualitatively.  Based on the data  represented  in  Figure one, we blocked   a few typical
sections of the interweaving of postings distributed among these categories and illustrated them in a detailed
manner. The representation of the juxtaposition of these sections is used to uncover the placement and context of
effective discussion.

RESULTS
In this section, we will report the quantitative results of the context in which IP's appeared. By identifying the
IPs in ITs, we were actually looking at the role of social talks in these ITs, and clarifying the interplay between
effective discussion and social talks. We first give a profile of the important ITs, by paying attention to how
these IPs are surrounded by the non-IPs and are supported and enabled by them. Then, using selected sections

                                                         
from ITs to illustrate how the online discussions were overwhelmed by the phenomenon of "on-task" postings
going hand in hand with "off-task" postings, we reveal how learning actually occurs.

The surroundings of the IPs in their own ITs
From a total of 10490 postings, 2688 IPs were identified in 321 threads. 37% of them emerged in the Beginning
part, 34% in the Middle part, and 28% in the Closing part. The IP frequency count in the Closing part differed
significantly from that of the other two parts. It is surprising that IPs did not overwhelmingly emerge in the
Closing part of ITs, that, on the contrary, they were developed more frequently in the earlier parts.
  At     first glance,  the non-IPs in  Closing  parts  of the  ITs  were  full  of tangential  topics or  housekeeping
statements, but when the ITs are viewed as a whole, complete with the non-IPs, the contextual cues are seen to
support IP development in a meaningful position. Here are two examples illustrating the context of an IT with
no IPs in the Closing part and their connection to the rest of the non-IPs in the Closing part of the IT.

                            Table 1 the distribution of the position of IPs in two selected ITs
thread ID        # ofpostingsLife span(day)The BeginningpartThe Middle part          The Closing part      # of IP
Categories of the postings
D = DomainC = Coordination           D        C     S      D       C       S        D    C        S           
S = Social
 A5_43           68         8      143 IP)    0     0   5(2 IP)    2    7(1 IP)     0    7       33          6
 C6_10           22         5         1       2     4   2(2 IP)    1       4        0    2        6          2
Example one: the last 45 postings were non-IPs in an IT consisting of 68 postings. (See thread 1 in
Figure 1)
There were 3 IPs (6th, 12th, 13th) in the Beginning part and 3 IPs 3 IPs (20th, 21th, 23th)in the Middle part of
the IT. In the Beginning part, the group members focused on the variables to be chosen and how to represent the
relationships    between  the variables. Upon    trying  different ways  of  showing   the results,   one  team   member
accidentally     discovered a new   relationship between   two  variables.   In  the  Middle   part,  they discussed  the
difference between radical moisture vs relative moisture and revised their representation. In the Closing part,
they uploaded their artifacts and finished their tasks for the week. They felt relaxed and began to be curious
about who was not online during these busy days and what school each other attended. One member observed
the artifacts done by other teams and regretted not being as good as they were. Another team member comforted
her.....
Huan: I discovered that someone has not shown up so far. We have six people together but only five left
         messages. One is still unknown.
Yeh: Who? I know. Its shu-shu. She showed up at the first week, and then gone.
Huan: What's your plan for high school?
Yeh: Art program in Shin-Gu Girl's school.
Huan: Good luck! You will be very busy if you attend that program because the annual exhibit will keep you
         work around the clock.
Huan: By the way, did you get a chance to look at the artifacts of the other teams? Team A-16 did an excellent
         job.  I really envy  about it.  They   are very good   at  a   special software for   presenting    the artifacts.
         Ummmm....
Yeh: Don't be frustrated. They have their advantages. We have ours too. Even though ours are not as good as
         them, we tried our best!
  The     group     members   engaged   in serious   discussion    only on  domain-related     tasks,  after which   they
simultaneously engaged in social talks. It seems that, after a stint of heavy-duty office work, they needed a
"coffee break" for a while. If these postings had been examined and sorted in isolation and out of context, they
would be interpreted as digression and reflective of a non-concentrating team. However, analyzing the extended
thread consisting of 68 postings from a macro-view, the role of these social talks suddenly became apparent: the
participants were relaxing after their task-related discussions. The thread did not conclude with serious task
discussions, but, as in face-to-face interaction, people need to maintain shared regard and to structure possible
future activity (Jucks, Raechter, & Tatar, 2003)

                                                            
Example two: the last 13 postings were non-IPs in an IT consisting of 22 postings. (See thread 2 in
Figure 1)
There were 2 IPs (8th & 9th) in the Middle part of the IT. After an exchange of information on individual
experiences with fog, some discussion ensued about the reasons for previous absences, the division of labor, and
who would    volunteer   to do  which parts of  the   project.  Others were concerned   about the   unavailability of
networking capability some members were suffering due to technical problems.
Angela: I feel embarrassed that I will go out to have fun tomorrow. I will be back very late. So please do not
     wait for me. I will be online on Saturday for sure.....My computer isn't work very well. I don't know why.
Little grass: Anyone who is going to upload our artifacts please read the information on benchmark section 7
     "how to hand in assignments." I bet everyone should read it too because maybe you have to do this next
     time.
Latte: Can we negotiate who is responsible for upload our assignments? .... If everybody is busy, maybe I can
     do it this week. ....By the way, does anyone know when Yeh is going to be back?
Latte: I thought Rita mentioned before somewhere he is having a summer camp soon. I bet we can expect his
     back soon. That's what I thought.....Don't worry too much. Angela, if you feel that something wrong with
     your computer, you can scan it. Mine is too. If we don't do something, it will be sent out for repairing
     right away.
Little grass: hello, Latte and Angela, make decision on who is going to upload the assignments........ I don't
     know when Yeh will be back. But I believe it will be soon. Cheer up!
  During that week, this group lost more than 3 members who left or were planning to leave for another
summer camp. This situation bothered the remaining members a good deal. Although the remaining members
made progress, they spent a lot of time discussing and figuring out the fluctuation in membership. They then
announced    anticipated absence   days to  let their partners  know.  It was because   they  cared that they didn't
disappear silently. The forum is not a place reserved exclusively for the handing in of tasks; it's a place for them
to live and to be together.

The distribution and the interweaving of varied categories of postings within ITs
962 postings from 28 threads were sorted into three categories: domain, organization or coordination, and social
talks. 48% were in the domain category, with 22% in organization or coordination and 30% in the social talks.
Using these coding results, the interweaving of different categories of postings within the 28 ITs are represented
in Figure 1. In this figure, each line represents one IT, with black, shaded, and white representing the Domain,
Coordination, and Social talks categories   respectively. IPs are represented by bars of double height.
  It seems clear that ITs are found with various combinations of the three post categories. The ratio of postings
in the three categories was roughly 5:2:3.      Few threads were composed of only domain-related postings, and
task-related discussions    tended to be    mixed   together   with coordinated  discussions  and   were  frequently
surrounded   by social   talks. What  roles do  coordination    and social talks really play? We    will take a few
selections of ITs as an example.
Social talks as required greetings in the online world.
A thread may last from several hours to a few days. Each time group members logged in, they would say hello
to their group colleagues, and would later say goodnight as well. (See thread 3 in Figure 1)
Yeh: Sorry, I have not dare to speak up for quite a long time. Since Grass encourages me a lot, I am eventually
    delurking. I fee sorry about that.
Grass: Hello, A-nei, are you online? Latte is online too. Angela~~~ Long time no see~~~~
Grass: What a pity! A-nei just got off a moment ago while you login.
  While in the face-to-face environment we say "goodbye!" to mom when going to school, she would kiss us
and say "Be careful on the road!"; and when returning home, we say "Mom, I am back" and mom would say
"All right! There is a cake in the refrigerator." In contrast, in online discussion forums, one cannot tell who is
coming because there is no noise (i.e. as there would be when someone enters a room) when somebody comes
(logs in) or leaves (logs off). Therefore, whenever group members log in, they announce that fact, posting, for
example, "Sorry, I had a good sleep and just woke up." Or "Because of ..........., I finally am here." In short,
Just as people say "Hello!" and    "Bye!" in face-to-face daily life, when they meet and depart, group members in
discussion forums express their greetings by leaving a written record of having arrived and departed.

                                                          
Figure 1 The interweaving of various postings in 28 threads

                                    
Social talks as the context in which the division of labor is negotiated
In an  online   group  discussion forum,  the learning   activity does  not take   place  in   a serious  and concise
atmosphere. Instead, give-and-take collaboration quite often develops in an indirect way through social talks. In
the following posting, for example, Latte mentions daily life in the real world a good deal, but mixes it together
with an account of her expectations of group members and their mutual responsibility. (See thread 4 in Figure 1)

Latte: I really want to go to bed. Grass, I want to ask you one thing. Was the one you sent to me the second
       figure in case #8?  I told you that I was planning to think about it for a while. Actually I was trying to
       figure out how to conduct that figure. I almost knew it except not knowing how to change the Y-axis all at
       a time. I was trying to log in last night, but I failed.   I think it was probably because the University
       server's turned off. So I played the game instead, but I dare not to wakeup my mom. So I have to log off.
       Tomorrow I am going to conduct the second figure. But you must modify it. When you get home around
       10pm, you will receive that figure, and of course we have to discuss how to conduct the third figure very
       soon.....)
   Figure   one  reveals the  genuineness of  learning within   online  discourse. There    is no   clear demarcation
between task and "non-task" contexts. The repertoire of these threads broadens our vision of online discussion.
Threads easily and frequently switch in and out of on-task and non task contexts, focusing for a short while on
social issues and then returning to the task at hand. (Kreijns, Kirschner, & Jochems, 2002). But the alternation
between the black and white blocks in figure one and its significance to online learning is deserving of further
exploration.

DISCUSSIONS
We began this paper by arguing that the examination of effective discussion was an interesting subject of study
due to the ambiguous role that social talks play in effective discussion. In order to explore the substantive
dimensions   of  group learning in online  discourse,  we first   asked the question of   how    to identify  effective
discussion,  not  from the perspective of designers   or researchers    seeking an appearance     of interaction (i.e.,
sustained,  on-topic), but based  upon  concrete evidence   provided    by  the  learners themselves.     Rather than
identifying "effective discussion" by the learners individually, we proposed the concept of "Important Postings"
(IPs) as perceived  by   members  of the  group themselves.     A  "Pick-n-Choose"   was    implemented    to support
learners in identifying the IPs from among the hundreds of postings. The "important threads (ITs)" were also
identified.
   Referring to the view put forth by Lave and Wenger's work on communities of practice (Lave & Wenger,
1991; Wenger, 1998), we found that learning in online discussion forums is also inseparable from the identity
and life of the online community. Based on the findings of our study, we argue that a theory of learning that
ignores these connections cannot account for when, how, or what people learn. Therefore, the findings are
discussed based on the perspective of social theory of learning (Wenger, 1998).
   From this perspective, learning is a kind of social participation. It is a process involving active participants in
the practices of social communities and of constructing identities in relation to these communities. What we
should be looking at in online discussion forums is not only the kind of action (i.e., postings), but also a form of
belonging.  The   process  of learning is the experience   of   meaning;  the   product  of  learning  is  a sense of
meaningfulness and belonging.
   However, many discussion forum research methodologies ignore the factor of an educational cue arising
from a sense of belonging. Using ITs as the unit of analysis, we realized that identity is not all that abstract. It
manifests itself in what learners say, the perspectives they adopt, and the way in which they react to certain
statements. People's participation in a discussion reflects the way they look at the world, and therefore the
trajectory that has led them where they are (as well as their sense of where they are going) (Wenger, personal
communication, October 08, 2004).

Rediscovering the "social talks" in discussion forumsa picture of group identity
From the results of this study, we have gained a better understanding of the social nature of online discourse.
But are these social talks really "off-task" or "off-topic"? In online discussion forums, participants discuss "soft"
things more than task-related material because they care about each other. They announce their daily schedules
because they have developed mutual accountability. They share feelings of loss when finding themselves to be
the remaining members after the group has lost members because they have a sense of "our" group. What these
social talks reveal is a picture of group identity. By examining the content of postings across each thread, the
contextual environment of learning is uncovered. The cases discussed in this study indicate a kind of subtle

                                                         
atmosphere within which important discussions are generated. It is the social talks that make the group cohere.
As Gunawardena (1995) suggested, once a positive affective relationship and sense of community have been
established, enhanced task accomplishment may be achieved. This study empirically justifies the existence of
social talks in effective discussion and identifies them as an inseparable part of effective discussion.
  From   this  perspective,  the significance  of  postings  such as greetings,   shared  regard, introductions,  or
inquiries about the social life of fellow group members in the real world becomes clear: those interactions are
not irrelevant to learning. Instead, these postings are meaningful in that they are negotiating meaning. Getting to
know each other, finding communal interests, giving and receiving regards, and showing responsibility to the
group are all a form of participatory identity.   During the process of developing this sense of belonging, their
joint enterprise is continually being negotiated.  It is not the tasks but the sense of belonging that contributes to
learning. Therefore, in ignoring the part social talks play, we lose the opportunity to uncover the substantive
dimension, the identification and negotiability of learning in online discourses.
  Social  talks are    not irrelevant  to learning but  are  important to group   cohesiveness    prior  to effective
discussion. Improvising social talks among group members provides a deep common ground for important
postings as well as for important threads to be generated.

Rediscovering     effective   discussion     through    social  talksdiscussions           embedded       in social
talks are the complete picture of effective learning
In contrast to the claim that the success of systems in CSCL environment may rest on the satisfaction of non-
learning goals as latent variables (Jucks, Raechter, & Tatar, 2003), this study found that there are facets to
effective participation in an online community. As community knowledge involves not only facts (i.e., What
factors influence the rainfall of a typhoon in Fall in Taiwan?) and skills (i.e., How to represent the relationship
among four factors in a figure?), but also a knowledge of social relations and practices (Greeno, Eckert, Stucky,
Sachs, & Wenger, 1999).
  By    analyzing the  context of "IPs"    (Figure one)  , we discover that an  IP  occurs   in a thread  containing
numerous social talks and much procedural coordination in addition to " the on-topic" activities sought in the
traditional perspective. The extended sequences of threads show the various distributions of postings in different
categories during asynchronous interaction. In terms of the category of IPs, important postings are not limited to
the "Domain" category only. In terms of the combination and development of ITs, important threads may be
initiated by a posting in any of the categories, Domain, Social talks, or Coordination.
  This study reveals that social talks are so omnipresent in the process of negotiating meaning that we hardly
pay attention to their existence in the discussion forums. In particular, the postings sorted as Social Talks occur
in the ITs at any point, and are of varying length. On the one hand, it is obvious that most social talks do not
serve as distractions, continuing to the end of a thread to the exclusion of other material.     On the other hand,
even though social talks do tend to aggregate at the Closing part of the thread, they are found to be serving as
after-meal talk in contrast to the earlier hard work.
  The positions of IPs in threads were also found to contradict common assumptions about the process of
knowledge co-construction. The fact that important postings are distributed roughly equally through most of the
threads alters the impression    that  the  accomplishments   of  decision-making     or meaning   negotiation  will
commonly     terminate a   discussion. Learning   takes place  when  cognitive    and social interactions   naturally
intertwine, as they do in activities (Scribner, 1984). Effective discussion and social talks are thus interrelated.
Accordingly, from a community perspective, meaning is negotiated continually, and learning takes place not
only through doing (domain-related), but also through becoming, belonging, and experiencing (Wenger, 1998).

CONCLUSIONS
The major implication of this study is the value of coordinating on-topic and off-topic perspectives on learning
in discussion forum. We empirically justify that "social talks" is neither a necessarily non-productive, nor an
analytically separable  type  of communicative     action. With  the scope  of  analysis  in the  context   of entire
discussions (threads), we are able to reveals the social nature of online discourse in an inquiry-based learning
environment.
  Most recent research in collaborative learning focuses on characterizing the patterns of effective or productive
collaboration. Traditionally, those patterns that are sustained and focusing on on-topic issues are considered as
effective learning. However, this study showed on- and off-task talks not only co-occur, but also interweave in
supporting an effective discussion. Without social talks going hand in hand with on-topic discussion, group
identity may not form substantially. In order to one step further propose more off-task talks lead to more on-task
talks or engagement in the task, further research with ethnographic methodology is warranted.

                                                          
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported, in part, by National Science Counsel Grants NSC92-2520-S-008-005.

REFERENCES
Badri, A., Grasso, F., & Leng, P. H. (2003). Evaluation of Discussions in Online Classrooms. KES 2003: 193-
     200.
Dillenbourg, P. (2003). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
     design. In Paul A. Kirschner (ed). Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL?,61-82. Heerlen: Open
     Universiteit Nederland.
Drie, J.P. van, Boxtel, C.A.M. van, Erkens, G., & Kanselaar, G. (2003). Supporting historical reasoning in
     CSCL..Proceedings of the international Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning ,
     Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 93-102.
Erickson, T. & Kellogg, W. A. (2003). Social translucence: Using minimalist visualizations of social activity to
     support   collective interaction. In K. Höök,  D.   Benyon  and A.    Munro   (eds), Designing  Information
     Spaces: The Social Navigation Approach (pp.17-42). London: Springer.
Greeno, J.G., Eckert, P., Stucky, S.U., Sachs, P., & Wenger, E.   (1999).   Learning in and for participation in
     work and society [Electronic version].    Retrieved May 22, 2002, from the United States Department of
     Education Web site http://www.ed.gov/pubs/HowAdultsLearn/Greeno.html.
Gunawardena,   C.  N.  (1995).  Social Presence  Theory   and  Implications   for Interaction  and  Collaborative
     Learning in Computer Conferences. International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 1,2/3,
     147-166.
Guzdial, M., & Turns, J. (2000). Effective discussion through a computer-mediated anchored forum. Journal of
     the Learning Sciences, 9,4, 437-470.
Hara, N., Bonk, C. J., & Angeli, C. (2002). Content analysis of online discussion in an applied educational
     psychology course. Instructional Science, 28, 115-152.
Hobaugh, C. F. (1997). Interactive strategies for collaborative learning. Competition-Connection-Collaboration,
     Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Distance Teaching and Learning. Madison, WI: University of
     Wisconsin-Madison. ,121-125
Hsi, S. and Hoadley, C. M. (1997). Productive discussion in science: gender equity through electronic discourse.
     Journal of Science Education and Technology, 6,1,23-26.
Jucks, R., Raechter, M.R., & Tatar, D.G. (2003). Learning and collaboration in online discourses. International
     Journal of Educational Policy, Research, & Practice, 4, 1, 117-146.
Kreijns, K.,  Kirschner, P.A., &  Jochems,   W.  (2002). The   sociability of computer-supported    collaborative
     learning environments. Educational Technology & Society, 5, 1, 8-22.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge University
     Press.
Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M., Lallimo, J., & Hakkarainen, K. (2001). Analyzing patterns of participation and
     discourse    in  elementary students'  online  science discussion.    Proceedings    of the  First European
     Conference on CSCL. Maastricht, the Netherlands: Maastricht McLuhan Institute, 421-428.
Rourke, L. (2000). Operationalizing Social Interaction in Computer Conferencing. Proceedings of the 16th
     Annual conference of the Canadian Association for Distance Education, Quebec City, Retrieved October
     22, 2004, from http://www.ulaval.ca/aced2000cade/english/proceedings.html
Scribner, S. (1984). Studying working intelligence. In J. Lave & B. Rogoff. (Eds.), Everyday Cognition: its
     development in social context. Cambridge, Mass: Havard University Press.
Steinkuehler,  C. A., Derry, S.  J., Levin, J. R., &  Kim,  J. B. (2000).   Argumentative     reasoning  in online
     discussion. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association
     (AERA), New Orleans, LA.
Walther,  J.B. (1996).Computer-Mediated      Communication:    Impersonal,    Interpersonal   and  Hyperpersonal
     Interaction. Communication Research, 23, 1, 1-43.
Wegerif, R. (1998). The Social Dimension of Asynchronous Learning Networks. Journal of Asynchronous
     Learning Networks, 2,1, 34-49.
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
     University Press.

                                                        
