 Internal and External Collaboration Scripts in Web-
                    based Science Learning at Schools

            Ingo Kollar                              Frank Fischer                         James D. Slotta
      Virtual Ph.D. Program                      Knowledge Media                          Graduate School of
 "Knowledge Acquisition and                 Research Center, Tübingen                          Education
    Knowledge Exchange with                            (Germany)                     University of California at
     New Media", Tübingen                     f.fischer@iwm-kmrc.de                       Berkeley (U.S.A.)
              (Germany)                                                               slotta@tels.socrates.edu
      i.kollar@iwm-kmrc.de

Abstract.  Collaboration    scripts  can help  learners  to   engage    in argumentation     and knowledge    acquisition.
However, they might have differential effects for learners holding differently structured knowledge (internal
scripts) on   argumentation.   We    investigated    how  external   scripts  interact  with  learners'  internal   scripts
concerning collaborative argumentation. 98 students from two secondary schools participated. Two versions of
an external collaboration script (high vs. low structured) supporting argumentation were embedded within a
web-based collaborative inquiry curriculum. Students' internal scripts were classified as either high or low
structured, establishing a 2x2-factorial design. Results suggest that the high structured external script supported
all learners, regardless of    their internal scripts, concerning    the   acquisition  of   domain-general   knowledge.
Learners'  internal scripts influenced   the  acquisition   of domain-specific      knowledge.   Results from     two   case
studies reveal differences in argumentation processes attributable to the learners' internal scripts. Results are
discussed  in terms  of  their theoretical  relevance    and  practical  implications  for   learning with   collaboration
scripts.

       Keywords: Collaboration scripts, internal scripts, inquiry learning, science education, learning
       environments.

INTRODUCTION
Several  studies have   demonstrated     that students   frequently  have    problems   discussing    scientific  evidence,
particularly in relating evidence to theoretical explanations (e.g., Sandoval, 2003; Bell, 2004). Additionally,
students often have difficulty engaging in fruitful argumentation. For example, arguments raised by one student
often  remain  unaddressed     by the  student's  learning    partner(s),  and   obvious  disagreements    are    often left
unresolved. If not explicitly scaffolded, learners may fail to show substantive argumentation, leading to little
acquisition of domain-general knowledge about argumentation. Low-level argumentation might be reflected in
poor elaboration of learning contents and result in a limited acquisition of domain-specific knowledge.
       Several instructional approaches have been used by researchers to address these challenges in learning
through  argumentation.  For   example,     Suthers, Toth,  and Weiner     (1997)    developed   and  tested Belvedere,   a
graphical argumentation tool where learners enter hypotheses and evidence into text boxes and specify the
relationships between boxes using graphical arrows. This results in a network of nodes and links representing
the various pieces of evidence that support or contradict a particular hypothesis. A similar approach has been
taken by Bell (1997) in developing the "Sensemaker"-tool to help scaffold students' use of evidence within
arguments   within  Web-based     inquiry   projects.  Another   promising     approach    to  structuring   collaborative
argumentation   processes   in computer-supported      collaborative    learning is  that of  collaboration  scripts  (e.g.,
Weinberger,   Fischer,  &   Mandl,    2004).  Collaboration    scripts  provide     learners  with procedural     guidance
concerning specific discoursive processes they are to engage in during a particular collaborative learning task,
thereby  scaffolding the  acquisition    of procedural   knowledge.     Weinberger,    et al. (2004)   demonstrated     that
collaboration scripts can be designed and implemented within a web-based learning environment in order to
evoke  specific  argumentative    discourse   processes, resulting   in an  acquisition   of domain-general    knowledge
about argumentation.
       We argue that collaboration scripts are a particularly promising approach when they are implemented
within   computer-based  collaborative    inquiry    learning  environments.     In  existing approaches     like BGuiLE
(Reiser, Tabak, Sandoval, Smith, Steinmuller & Leone, 2001), CoLAB (Savelsbergh, van Joolingen, Sins, de
Jong  &   Lazonder,  2004),  or   WISE   (Slotta  &   Linn,   2000), learners    are provided    with significant  support
concerning content-related learning, but rarely with specific instructional guidance concerning collaboration and
argumentation. Instead, these environments typically provide rather open problem spaces, within which learners

                                                           
are relatively free to choose (a) what activities to engage in with respect to the problem at hand, and (b) how
they want to perform those activities. While students are often required to work collaboratively with one or more
peers in such activities, the lack of explicit scaffolds for collaboration could result in unequal participation of
learning partners and ineffective argumentation. We claim that externally provided collaboration scripts can be
designed to significantly improve both processes and outcomes of collaborative argumentation.
       Still, learners   may    enter instruction   with widely    varying   ideas    about  collaboration   and   different
capabilities in argumentation. Such differences may call for different collaboration scripts in order to achieve the
benefits of scaffolding described above. In the present study, we focus on the impact of learners' differently
structured internal   scripts   (Schank  &  Abelson,   1977)    concerning   argumentation,      meaning their    individual
procedural knowledge that guides them in argumentation tasks. We examine how these internal scripts interact
with  differently  structured   external  collaboration  scripts   that  are designed   to   help structure  collaborative
argumentation.     This  interaction  is investigated  with     respect  to both   (a) processes   and   (b) outcomes     of
collaborative argumentation.

KNOWLEDGE CONSTRUCTION IN COLLABORATIVE ARGUMENTATION
Collaborative argumentation is a core activity practiced by learners who are engaged in collaborative inquiry
learning environments. For example, by debating with peers about which piece of evidence supports a particular
theory or argument, learners can acquire argumentation skills as well as domain-specific knowledge about the
contents of their discussion (e.g., "arguing to learn" -- Andriessen, Baker, & Suthers, 2003). In formulating an
argument,    learners   must  explain    their reasoning    and   thereby   construct  new   knowledge     (e.g., the "self
explanation   effect" --  Chi,  Bassok,   Lewis,   Reimann,     & Glaser,   1989).  Concerning    the specific    process of
argumentation,     research  is  varied  (see  Stein &   Albro,   2001),    with at   least two  different  approaches    to
argumentative knowledge construction. On the one hand, some researchers seek to assess the quality of single
student arguments on the basis of the structural components they include. On the other hand, argumentation is
often analyzed with respect to the different sequences of arguments like argument, counterargument and reply
(Leitão, 2000; Resnick, Salmon, Zeitz, Wathen & Holowchak, 1993).
       As an example for the first perspective, the argument scheme developed by Toulmin (1958) can be used
to assess either written or oral arguments (e.g., Cobb, 2002; Bell & Linn, 2000) as well as to teach learners how
to create complete arguments (e.g., Carr, 2003; McNeill, Lizotte, Krajcik, & Marx, 2004). Driver, Newton, and
Osbourne (2000) point out that generating complete arguments leads to a deeper elaboration of the learning
material resulting    in an  acquisition  of   domain-specific    knowledge.     According    to the  Toulmin     model,  an
argument consists of up to six components. First, arguments are based on data representing evidence on which
the argument relies. Second, arguments usually include a claim by which the speaker expresses his or her
position. Third, arguments can contain a warrant that specifies why the data support the claim. Fourth, in order
to highlight the validity of a warrant, arguments can contain a backing, which can be a reference to a general
law, for example. Fifth, arguments can contain a qualifier that constrains the validity of the claim. Finally, an
argument can contain a rebuttal, by which conditions are specified under which the claim is not valid. Since
students in school may have difficulties in applying such a scheme to identify the components of an argument, it
is useful to reduce the complexity of Toulmin's model. Therefore, similar to previous research (McNeill et al.,
2004; Marttunen & Laurinen, 2001), we focus on three essential components of arguments: data, claims, and
reasons (which comprise both warrants and backings)
       With    respect   to  the sequence      of arguments,    Leitão   (2000)   proposed    a  model   of  collaborative
argumentation that takes different types of arguments into account. She distinguishes three types of arguments,
namely   (1)  arguments,    (2) counterarguments,    and    (3) replies.  An  argument   represents   an assertion  that  is
preceded or followed by a justification. By generating a counterargument, a speaker can (a) shift the topic, (b)
doubt the validity of the original argument, or (c) question the relation between the components of the argument
(e.g., doubt that the provided data is really supporting the claim). Replies on counterarguments can also take on
different forms. They can represent (a) a dismissal of the counterargument, (b) a local agreement with parts of
the counterargument, (c) an integrative reply that combines parts of the argument and the counterargument, and
(d) an abolishment of the original argument. Leitão (2000) claims that argumentation sequences of the structure
"argument ­ counterargument ­ (integrative) reply" are most fruitful for collaborative knowledge construction,
since they    lead both   learners to   deeply    elaborate content  information,     thereby acquiring  domain-specific
knowledge. Moreover, by engaging in meaningful sequences of argumentation, learners may internalize these
processes and apply this knowledge even when not explicitly asked to do so, thereby acquiring domain-general
knowledge about argumentation itself.

                                                             
SCRIPTS            FOR          KNOWLEDGE              CONSTRUCTION                    IN    COLLABORATIVE
ARGUMENTATION
External Scripts for Knowledge Construction in Collaborative Argumentation
Collaboration scripts are complex instructional means that (a) induce certain activities to be carried out by the
learners, (b) prescribe specific sequences concerning when to carry out each activity, and (c) provide learners
with collaboration roles specifying who of the learning partners is supposed to carry the related activities out
(see Kollar, Fischer,     & Hesse,  2003).   Such   scripts are here  referred to as   "external  scripts" because   they
typically are ­ at least at the beginning of a collaborative learning situation ­ not represented in the learners'
cognitive systems but rather in their external surround (Perkins, 1993), possibly being gradually internalized the
more learners are acting in accordance to the script's contents. With respect to their degree of structuredness,
external scripts can differ substantially. While some approaches provide rather rough constraints for specific
activities, sequences, and roles (e.g., Baker & Lund, 1997), other approaches can be considered as being rather
high structured    (e.g., Pfister &  Mühlpfordt,    2002),  including  very   detailed  instructions   concerning  which
activities should be shown and when this should be the case. When reviewing existing collaboration script
approaches   it appears   that  scripts can be  tailored to  very  different  process  and outcome     dimensions, often
accompanied     by non-intended     side-effects. For  example,    Weinberger,   et al.  (2004)   demonstrated    that an
epistemic script aiming at facilitating content-related activities within triads of learners led to an increase of
content-relevant talk but to lower content-specific learning gains and hampered transactivity, i.e. the mutual
relatedness of the learning partners' utterances.

Internal Scripts for Knowledge Construction in Collaborative Argumentation
It is reasonable to argue that collaborative argumentation processes are not only guided by externally induced
scripts. Learners also bring internal scripts for collaborative argumentation into argumentative situations, which
they have build up and continuously adjusted in earlier instances of argumentation. Similar to Schank and
Abelson's   (1977)  notion     of "personal  scripts", we    define  internal  scripts as  the set  of  process-relevant
knowledge that guides individuals in their acting in and understanding of particular situations, in our case in
collaborative argumentation situations. We assume that these internal scripts on collaborative argumentation
vary between individuals and that they are structured to different degrees, i.e. that different individuals have
different knowledge about how to act in argumentative situations. For example, some individuals might know
that reasons should be made explicit in arguments whereas others do not. Likewise, some individuals might have
the  aim to  persuade     their discourse   partner resulting   in producing   counterarguments     to all the partner's
arguments. Others might rather aim to find a consensus in an argumentative situation, resulting in an integration
of the different standpoints. It is then unclear, how differently structured internal scripts play together with
differently structured external scripts and how this interplay affects processes and outcomes of collaborative
argumentation.

GOALS OF THE STUDY
The objective of this study is to analyze the effects of differently structured internal and external scripts on both
processes and    outcomes    of   students' collaborative   argumentation    during learning   in a  web-based    inquiry
learning environment      (Web-based    Inquiry   Science   Environment;  Slotta  &    Linn, 2000).    On  behalf of   the
outcomes, we focus on the individuals' acquisition of domain-general knowledge on argumentation and of
domain-specific knowledge. With respect to processes, we analyze the effects of internal and external scripts on
particular argumentative moves. We set up two competing hypotheses:
      Interactive effects hypothesis: A highly structured externally provided collaboration script will facilitate
the acquisition of domain-general and domain-specific knowledge of learners holding low structured internal
scripts, whereas a low structured external script will lead learners holding high structured internal scripts to
acquire more domain-general and domain-specific knowledge. If true, this hypothesis could result from either
the high structured external script compensating for the deficits of the low structured internal scripts, or because
the highly structured external script unnecessarily puts constraints upon the learning processes of learners with
high structured internal scripts.
      Additive effects hypothesis: A high structured external collaboration script will support the acquisition of
domain-general and domain-specific knowledge of all learners, independently from the nature of their internal
scripts on collaborative argumentation, because even the contents of a high structured internal script will play
out only when additional instructional support is provided.
      In order to better understand the effects of the interplay of high and low structured internal and external
scripts, the analyses are enhanced by a qualitative analysis of the discourse of two exemplary dyads.

                                                            
METHOD
Participants. 98 students (grades 8 to 10) from five classes of two German Gymnasiums participated in the
study.
       Design. An experimental 2x2-factorial design was established with the internal scripts on collaborative
argumentation   (high   vs. low  structured) and  the external  collaboration   script (high vs. low structured)  as
independent variables. Dyads were homogeneous with respect to the learners' internal scripts and gender and
were randomly assigned to one of the two external script conditions. Learners were identified as holding a high
or a low structured internal script by assessing their performance in a test, in which they were asked to identify
"good" and "bad" argumentative moves (e.g., arguments lacking reasons or too short argumentative sequences)
in a fictitious discourse excerpt about a science topic. The median score of 3.33 (SD = 2.41) was used as the
criterion according to which learners were classified as holding either a low or a high structured internal script.
This resulted in 48 learners classified as holding a low structured and 50 learners as holding a high structured
internal script on collaborative argumentation.
       Procedure. The study was conducted in two sessions. In the first session, which took part about two
weeks before the actual collaboration phase, learners had to complete several questionnaires on demographic
variables, prior     domain-specific knowledge,    and  collaboration  as   well   as  computer   experience.  Most
importantly, learners were asked to answer the test assessing their internal scripts. For the collaboration phase
two weeks     later, homogenous   dyads  were    established with  respect  to the degree  of structuredness  of the
learners' internal scripts. They then collaborated on the WISE-project "The Deformed Frogs Mystery", which is
described  below.    Two  versions   of the  "Deformed  Frogs"    project  were  realized, one   containing the  low
structured and the other the high structured external collaboration script (see below). Dyads were randomly
assigned   to  one   of these   two  conditions. Time  for   collaboration  was    120  minutes. Immediately    after
collaboration,  learners    had to   complete  questionnaires   to   assess their  domain-general    knowledge   on
argumentation and domain-specific knowledge (see below).
       Setting and    learning  environment.  Dyads   worked   on  a German    version  of the WISE   project   "The
Deformed Frogs Mystery". They were introduced to the phenomenon that many frogs with massive physical
deformities had been found in the late 90's, for which several possible explanations exist. The project provided
learners with two competing hypotheses, a Parasite Hypothesis and an Environmental-Chemical Hypothesis to
be discussed against the background of various information (e.g., photographs, maps, reports), which learners
could explore within the project. The curriculum project was segmented into five content-specific units, e.g.
"What's the problem?", "Where are the deformed frogs?", or "What's in the water?". Learning partners of each
dyad worked together in front of one computer screen and could talk face-to-face. A teacher was not present.
       External collaboration script. The two versions of the external collaboration script were implemented in
the "Deformed Frogs" project. At the end of each content-specific curriculum unit, the learning partners were
supposed to discuss the two hypotheses on the basis of the information they had just viewed and to type their
arguments. The two experimental conditions differed in the way how this typing and discussion phase was
structured. In the low structured version of the external script, learning partners did not get further support than
being asked to discuss the two hypotheses on the basis of the information of the particular unit.

Figure 1: Screenshots of the high structured external collaboration script (left screen: introductory text; right
            screen: pre-structured text boxes to be filled in by the participants.

       In the high structured (see figure 1) version of the external script, however, learners received additional
guidance in how to discuss the two hypotheses, based on the models of Toulmin (1958) and Leitão (2000). More

                                                         
specifically, learners  were    prompted to  create complete    arguments     in Toulmin's   (1958)   sense  (data, claim,
reason)  and  argumentative     sequences   according to   Leitão's   (2000)   model   (argument   ­  counterargument    ­
integrative argument). This was achieved by providing learners with an instructional text about these guidelines
and  by  providing   them   with   prestructured  blank   text boxes    into  which to  fill in the   requested argument
components (e.g., data in text box 1, claim in text box 2 etc.). For each box, the script specified which learner
had to create an argument component and provided him or her with sentence starters (e.g., "It was found that..."
for data). In order to avoid biased information processing, the partners' roles concerning who had to advocate
which hypothesis were switched several times. Also, script instructions were continuously faded out to avoid the
problem of "over-scripting" (Dillenbourg, 2002). For example, at the end of the second unit, the high structured
external script did not contain any sentence starters, and the textboxes were reduced to one for each argument,
i.e. the interface  did  not force  the  learners anymore    to split   their arguments   into  data, claim, and    reason.
Anyway, learners still were reminded of those three components in the instructional text.
       Instruments and dependent variables. The domain-general knowledge about argumentation test asked
learners  to  mention   what    components  an   argument    consists  of as  well  as  how   a complete   argumentative
sequence looks like and to give examples for complete arguments and argumentative sequences. As a maximum,
12 points could be reached on this measure. Reliability of the measure was sufficient (Cronbach's  = .72). The
domain-specific knowledge test contained five open-ended questions. In the first four questions, learners were
asked to reproduce the mechanisms that might cause the frog deformities according to the parasite and the
environmental-chemical hypothesis. Learners received points for a reproduction of the mechanisms and for
pieces of evidence they were mentioning by which the validity of the particular hypothesis could be assessed.
The resulting subscale was termed knowledge about mechanisms. Overall, six points could be achieved on this
measure. In the fifth question of the domain-specific knowledge test, learners were asked to reason about what
could be done to definitely find out the reason for why the frogs are deformed. Here, learners could reach four
points as a maximum. The resulting scale was termed knowledge about scientific methods. We also computed an
overall test score for domain-specific knowledge, in which we added all items of the domain-specific knowledge
test, establishing an overall domain-specific knowledge measure. The same content-specific knowledge test was
also used to assess the learners' prior knowledge. For knowledge about mechanisms the used scale failed to
reach  sufficient  reliability. Therefore,  the  pretest measure    of  knowledge   about    scientific methods  was    not
included in our analyses. Reliabilities of the other measures ranged between .53 and .66 (Cronbach's ).
       For the analysis of processes of collaborative collaborative argumentation, discourses of the dyads were
transcribed and analyzed with a coding scheme aiming to identify arguments and argumentative sequences.
Utterances were coded as arguments when they were content-related and when they included at least a claim that
was made by the speaker. It was accounted for the fact that arguments can develop over time, i.e. arguments are
not limited to single turns. Arguments were rated concerning what structural component they included. An
argument was rated as containing data when it included an observation to make a claim. This observation could
both  have   its origin in the  contents of  the  learning   environment     and in the learners'  prior  knowledge.    An
argument was rated as including a reason when it was clear that the speaker aimed to say why (a piece of) data
supported the claim of the argument. Further, each argument was rated with respect to the function it had for the
context of argumentation. An argument was rated as argument, when it marked the beginning of a new topic that
had not been discussed before. A counterargument was rated when it represented a reply to an argument that
still dealt with the same topic and that went beyond a mere confirmation or negation of the argument. An
argument   was    rated as an   integrative reply when    it   contained  both   components    of the   argument and    the
counterargument that were uttered before. Thereby, it did not matter, which components of the integrative
argument was taken from what earlier argument. In the context of this paper, we focus on how discourse
develops when internal scripts are either high or low structured and the external script is low structured.
       Statistical analyses. Concerning both domain-general knowledge on argumentation and domain-specific
knowledge, we computed ANCOVA's with internal and external scripts as fixed factors and the scores in the
specific outcome    measures    as dependent    variables to   test the two   hypotheses. To    determine  the  effects of
internal and external scripts on domain-specific knowledge, the each specific domain-specific prior knowledge
measures were included as covariates (except for knowledge about mechanisms because of its low reliability).
Learners in the four conditions did not differ significantly concerning their domain-specific prior knowledge
(F(1,95) < 1.06; n.s.). As a covariate for domain-general knowledge on argumentation, the point score in the test
for assessing the internal scripts was used. For all analyses, the  -level was set to 5 %.

RESULTS
Acquisition of domain-general knowledge on argumentation
For domain-general knowledge about argumentation, learners with the combination of high structured internal
and high structured external scripts received the highest scores (M = 9.67, SD = 2.46), followed by the "low

                                                           
structured internal/high structured external script" condition (M = 8.00; SD = 2.67). Next was "high structured
internal/low structured external" (M = 7.46; SD = 2.12), followed by "low structured internal/low structured
external" (M = 6.76; SD = 2.17). The main effect for the external collaboration script (F(1,93) = 12.96; p < .01)
was significant indicating that the high structured external script led learners to acquire more domain-general
knowledge about argumentation than the low structured external script.

Acquisition of domain-specific knowledge
Table 1 presents the mean scores in the domain-specific knowledge tests for each experimental condition. On
the overall measure of domain-specific knowledge, learners holding high structured internal scripts reached
higher scores than learners holding low structured internal scripts, especially when they collaborated by aid of
the high structured external script. The group with the lowest scores in the overall measure of domain-specific
knowledge was the "low structured internal/low structured external" group. An ANCOVA revealed a significant
main effect for the internal script (F(1,93) = 10.33; p < .05), favoring high structured internal scripts.

Table 1: Mean scores (standard deviations in parantheses) in the domain-specific knowledge tests (pre- and
           posttests) in the four experimental conditions.

                               Low structured internal script                High structured internal script
                          Low structured         High structured         Low structured         High structured
                          external script        external script         external script         external script
                         Pretest   Posttest   Pretest       Posttest    Pretest    Posttest    Pretest      Posttest
                           M          M          M            M          M           M           M            M
                          (SD)      (SD)         (SD)       (SD)        (SD)        (SD)       (SD)          (SD)
 Domain-specificknowledge(overall)2.58(1.33)4.69(2.05)2.32(1.32)4.91(2.02)2.50(1.48)6.00(1.65) 2.50(1.32)    6.12(2.03)
 Knowledge about          0.42      1.77         0.64        2.14       0.58        2.31       0.63          2.83
   mechanisms            (0.58)     (1.34)    (0.73)        (1.46)      (0.70)     (1.62)      (0.88)        (1.49)
 Knowledge about          2.15      2.46         1.73        2.18       1.92        2.77       1.92          2.33
 research methods        (1.19)     (1.07)    (0.88)        (1.01)      (1.09)     (0.82)      (0.93)        (0.76)

     The same pattern could be observed for knowledge about mechanisms. Learners with high structured
internal scripts outperformed learners with low structured internal scripts. The most successful group was "high
structured internal/high structured external", followed by "high structured internal/low structured external, "low
structured internal/high structured external" and "low structured internal/low structured external". An ANOVA
yielded a significant effect for the internal script indicating that learners holding high structured internal scripts
received significantly higher scores than learners with low structured internal scripts (F(1,93) = 4.24; p < .05).
  For knowledge about scientific methods, a different and rather surprising pattern occurred. There, learners
holding high structured internal scripts who had collaborated on the basis of the low structured external script
reached the highest scores, followed by learners with low structured internal scripts who were provided with the
low structured external script. Learners with high structured internal scripts who collaborated on the basis of the
high structured external script reached lower scores, but even lower were the scores for learners with low
structured internal scripts who    worked   with the  high  structured  external script. An  ANCOVA        revealed  a
marginally significant main effect for the external script (F(1,93) = 3.18; p = .08) indicating that learners who
had worked with the low structured external script acquired more knowledge about scientific methods than
learners having been supported by the high structured external script. Post hoc t-tests revealed that learners
holding high structured internal scripts who had collaborated on the basis of the low structured external script
were significantly better than both groups of learners having collaborated with the high structured external script
(t(70) = 2.42; p < .05).

Processes of collaborative argumentation ­ examples from two dyads
In order to illustrate how internal scripts unfold in collaborative argumentation, we conducted a qualitative
process analysis. The    objective of this  analysis  is to identifiy single arguments   as well as argumentative
sequences and to assess their completeness in terms of the structural model proposed by Toulmin (1958) and the
dynamical model by Leitão (2000). I.e., we were interested in what components single arguments include (data,
claim, reason) and what types of arguments were parts of argumentative sequences (argument, counterargument,
integrative argument). Below, we present excerpts from the written transcripts of two dyads. Partners of dyad 1

                                                          
(Christina and Anne) were identified as holding low structured internal scripts, and the internal scripts of the
individuals in dyad 2 (Svenja and Lea) were classified as high structured.
      It was observed that collaborative argumentation processes of dyad 1 (Christina and Anne; low structured
internal scripts), were deficient both with respect to the structural components of single arguments and the
sequences  of  arguments.   Christina  and  Anna   rarely generated arguments that   contained     data, claims, and
reasons, and   almost never were   able  to complete  an   argumentative sequence   consisting     of an argument, a
counterargument, and an integrative argument. The transcript in table 2 illustrates that Christina in turn 3 states a
claim saying that the chemical substance is causing the frog deformities. After that, she fails to bring in data, and
the reason she gives is rather poor in that it does not go beyond "that is somehow more logical" (turn 5). Her
second claim in the second part of turn 5 ("No, earlier I would have said it's the parasites for sure") lacks a
reason as well as scientific data that support the claim that parasites are causing the frog deformities. Christina
and Anne also fail to create a longer argumentative sequence, although Anne is explicitly stating that she could
find reasons for both hypotheses. She suddenly stops talking while starting to develop a counterargument, and
Christina (turn 6) does not take up the chance to create a counterargument on one of the two arguments Anne
stated before.

Table 2: Excerpt of a discourse of a dyad in the "low structured internal/low structured external" condition.

  1.     Christina: "Well, I think..."
  2.     Anne: "Yes?"
  3.     Christina: "that, well, the chemical substances, that they uhm mainly are responsible for it, because they
          did not find out a lot about the parasites yet. And, well, that is somehow..."
  4.     Anne: (interrupts) "Did we really say that?"
  5.     Christina: (continues) "...more logical after I have read all that stuff. No, earlier I would have said it's
          the parasites for sure, but the... the biological stuff... that..." (stops talking)
  6.     Anne: "OK, so we are done then. Click it away."
  7.     Christina: "What?"
  8.     Anne: "That site."
  9.     Christina: "No!"
  10.    Anne: "Yes!"
  11.    Christina: "OK." (clicks on an another site)

  In the case of dyad 2 (Svenja and Lea; see table 3), collaborative argumentation was qualitatively better both
with respect to the structural components of single arguments and the argumentation sequences that could be
observed. Svenja and Lea often formulated arguments that contained data, claims, and reasons, and they also
showed attempts to generate longer argumentative sequences. In turns 2 and 3, Svenja and Lea collaboratively
construct an argument that contains a claim made by Lea (turn 2) and a reason by Svenja (turn 3). In turn 8, Lea
adds data to the argument, which Svenja in turn 9 even extends. With respect to argumentative sequences,
Svenja is concerned about possible counterarguments to their joint argument (turn 5, first part) but finds again
some counterevidence against this possible counterargument (turn 5, second part). However, the two girls do not
manage to create an integration of the two conflicting hypothesis in this excerpt.

Table 3: Excerpt of a discourse of a dyad in the "high structured internal/low structured external" condition.

  1.     Svenja: "So, what do you think is more likely? Chemical or parasite?"
  2.     Lea: "Well, what do we think? Well, I on my part think that chemical is more likely."
  3.     Svenja; "Yes, I agree. Because, although the parasite can also attack them (the frogs) but not that
          strongly. And it can also not block it."
  4.     Lea: "And also there is... I write it down, ok? (starts typing: "We think that the chemical hypothesis..."
  5.     Svenja: (interrupts) "Well, but they did block something that one time [inaudible]. But when their heads
          are shrinked..." [...]
  6.     Lea: (continues typing: "...is more logical") Is more logical, ok? Because...
  7.     Svenja: "Why do we think so?"
  8.     Lea: "Firstly it has been growing over the last years a lot, and the chemical stuff has become more,
          too."
  9.     Svenja: "Secondly, they also said somewhere that the parasite just can block a part, didn't they?"
  10.    Lea: "Yeah."
  11.    Svenja: "Yes, where did we read that?"
  12.    Lea: "It was somewhere up there (points to screen). That's where they said it. How should I write it?"

                                                          
DISCUSSION
In this study, we investigated how differently structured internal scripts on collaborative argumentation play
together with differently structured external scripts aiming at facilitating collaborative argumentation in a web-
based collaborative inquiry learning environment. With respect to both processes and outcomes of collaborative
argumentation, we set up two competing hypotheses, an interactive effects hypothesis and an additive effects
hypothesis. In general, the results rather support the additive effects hypothesis: At least for the acquisition of
domain-general knowledge about argumentation it was shown that the high structured external script supported
all learners independently from their internal scripts. It appears that high structured external scripts (O'Donnell,
1999) can be designed to help even learners with high structured internal scripts on collaborative argumentation
to acquire domain-general knowledge about argumentation. However, contrasting our expectations, the high
structured external script did not support the acquisition of domain-specific content knowledge beyond the level
that was reached by providing learners with the low structured external script. Concerning both the overall
domain-specific knowledge and knowledge about mechanisms, learners with high structured internal scripts on
collaborative argumentation acquired more knowledge about the contents of the learning environment than did
learners with  low  structured  internal scripts, regardless if they collaborated by aid of  the  high or the low
structured external script. Thus, argumentation competences can be regarded not only as a goal, but also as a
precondition for successful learning in web-based collaborative inquiry learning environments. It appears that
when    learners already  hold  higher-level  procedural   knowledge    about  argumentation, they  can   use this
knowledge for a deeper elaboration of domain-specific information, thereby acquiring more knowledge. Since
learners' internal scripts that guide them in collaborative argumentation can be assumed as having developed
over long periods of time by being exposed to argumentative situations over and over again (Schank & Abelson,
1977), it can be argued that learners can use these scripts effortlessly just like a very familiar tool when they
perceive themselves as participating in a collaborative argumentation situation. On the other hand, this stability
of learners' internal scripts can make it difficult to influence them by the provision of a high structured external
script.
However, the question why the high structured external collaboration script did not lead to the acquisition of
more domain-specific knowledge deserves further consideration, especially since it even tended to undermine
the acquisition of knowledge about scientific methods. It is possible that the design of the high structured
external script was too much oriented towards inducing specific argumentative moves and that learners were
already strongly challenged by following the script instructions so that they were not able to turn the support
they received into deep elaborations of the learning material ("over-scripting"; Dillenbourg, 2002). Wanting
learners to acquire both domain-general knowledge about argumentation and domain-specific knowledge might
be too much to achieve at a time. Maybe the effects of an internalization of the argumentative knowledge
inherent in the high structured script would only play out later in a new argumentative situation. This hypothesis
will be subject to further research.
  It is useful to take a closer look at the learners' talk during the collaborative learning phase. In the presented
excerpts, we were able to identify internal scripts on collaborative argumentation "on-line" and observed that
they do have effects on collaborative argumentation processes. High structured internal scripts are likely to lead
learners  to give  more   complete   arguments    (data, claim, reason; Toulmin,   1958) and   at least to create
counterarguments (Leitão, 2000). Learners with high structured internal scripts also seem to be more concerned
about backing their arguments up with data and to challenge their own arguments even when both partners
actually share a position. In low structured internal script groups it is evident that learners fail to formulate
arguments containing data, claims, and reasons, and that obvious conflicts do not become subject of discussion,
resulting in a rare construction of counterarguments. This should be validated in further studies and analyses. It
is an interesting question if the additivity effect that was found for the acquisition of domain-general knowledge
about argumentation will mirror with the results found on the process level.
        Finally, it should be noted that generalizations concerning the nature of the interplay of high vs. low
structured internal and external scripts should be drawn with caution, because of two reasons. First, subjects in
this study generally reached rather low scores in the internal scripts test. This is not mysterious taking the rather
bad results of German students from international comparison studies like PISA (Deutsches PISA-Konsortium,
2001) into account. Yet it might be that for learners with very high structured internal scripts (which apparently
were not part of this study's sample) the interactive effects hypothesis might be supported, meaning that such
learners would benefit much more from a low structured external script than was observed in this study because
they can make extensive use of the degrees of freedom they are provided with by the open structure of the
external script. Second,  it is unclear  to what   extent internal scripts on collaborative argumentation  can be
considered domain-general or have to be conceptualized as varying between contexts. Further research is needed
to address this issue.
        On a theoretical level, we believe that the study can contribute to the development of a framework for
describing the impact of internal and external scripts for collaborative learning. Thereby, a distributed cognition

                                                          
perspective (e.g., Perkins, 1993) might be a valuable frame of reference. From this perspective, it is an important
question how to orchestrate the different scripts in a way that they promote effective learning. Taking a systemic
approach, it is assumed that learners and their (social, artifactual, and also instructional) surround make up a
learning system, in which learning is or can be guided by different system components, namely the individual
learner, his or her learning partner, the computer-environment and the imposed external script. Since it is likely
to assume that individuals will internalize parts of the external script, the resulting framework would also have
to account for states of transition of script components from the external to the internal. These internalization
processes are then again important with respect to how instruction (i.e., external scripts) should be designed to
account for changes in the learners' internal scripts. According to Pea (2004), we urgently need methods to
continuously assess the learners' actual state of knowledge, which in turn must inform the degree of fading the
external script instructions out.
        From a practical perspective, the merit of this study is that it demonstrates that in problem oriented,
collaborative learning environments, external scripts should be used whenever internal scripts are not available
resp. if argumentation    skills of learners can be  considered as rather low.   With   respect to   the outcomes of
collaborative argumentative knowledge construction, the study even provided evidence that also learners with
better argumentation skills are not hampered by providing them with a high structured external script. Web-
based  collaborative  inquiry    environments can be  made  more   effective  by implementing      a high  structured
external script that scaffolds processes of collaborative argumentation. However, taking process analyses into
account, it was demonstrated that learners with low structured internal scripts might have problems in rather
open inquiry learning environments that contain only little information concerning how learners should argue
with theories and evidence. For learners with high structured internal scripts, in contrast, this open approach to
inquiry learning might be suitable.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research has partially been funded by Network of Excellence "Kaleidoscope" (6th Framework Program of
the EU) and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, Virtual Ph.D. Program).

REFERENCES
Andriessen, J., Baker, M. & Suthers, D. (Eds.) (2003). Arguing to Learn: Confronting Cognitions in Computer-
        Supported  Collaborative     Learning   Environments.   Kluwer   book    series  on  Computer      Supported
        Collaborative Learning, Pierre Dillenbourg (Series Editor). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Baker, M. & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a CSCL environment. Journal of Computer
        Assisted Learning, 13, 175-193.
Bell, P. (1997). Using argument representations to make tkinking visible for individuals and groups. In R. Hall,
        N. Miyake, & N. Enyedy (Eds.). Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Computer
        Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL 1997) (pp. 10-19). Toronto: Toronto University Press.
Bell, P. (2004). Promoting students' argument construction and collaborative debate in the science classroom. In
        M. C. Linn, E. A. Davis, & P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environments for science education. Mahwah, NJ:
        Erlbaum.
Bell, P., & Linn, M. C. (2000). Scientific arguments as learning artifacts: Designing for learning from the web
       with KIE. International Journal of Science Education, 22(8), 797-817.
Carr, C. S. (2003). Using computer supported argument visualization to teach leagal argumentation. In P. A.
       Kirschner, S. J. Buckingham Shum, & C. S. Carr (Eds.), Visualizing argumentation ­ Software tools for
       collaborative and educational sense-making (pp. 75-96). London: Springer.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students
       study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Cobb, P. (2002). Reasoning with tools and inscriptions. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11, 187-216.
Deutsches PISA-Konsortium (Eds.) (2001). PISA 2000. Basiskompetenzen von Schülerinnen und Schülern im
       internationalen Vergleich [PISA 2000. Basic competences of students in an international comparison].
       Opladen: Leske & Budrich.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002).    Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
       design.  In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL (pp. 61-91). Heerlen:
       Open Universiteit Nederland.
Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osbourne, J. (2000). Establishing the norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms.
       Science Education, 84(3), 287-312.
Kollar,  I., Fischer, F., & Hesse,   F. W.   (2003). Cooperation Scripts  for Computer-Supported         Collaborative
       Learning. In B. Wasson, R. Baggetun, U. Hoppe, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Proceedings of the International

                                                          
     Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning - CSCL 2003, COMMUNITY EVENTS -
     Communication and Interaction (pp. 59-61). Bergen, NO: InterMedia.
Leitão, S. (2000). The potential of argument in knowledge building. Human Development, 43, 332-360.
McNeill, K.L., Lizotte, D.J., Krajcik, J. & Marx, R.W. (2004, April). Supporting students' construction of
     scientific explanations using scaffolded curriculum materials and assessments. Paper presented at the
     Annual Conference of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego.
O'Donnell, A. M. (1999). Structuring dyadic interaction through scripted cooperation. In A. M. O'Donnell & A.
     King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 179-196). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pea, R. (2004). The social and technological dimensions of scaffolding and related theoretical concepts for
     learning, education, and human activity. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 423-451.
Perkins, D. N. (1993). Person-plus: a distributed view of thinking and learning. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
     cognitions:  psychological   and  educational   considerations  (pp.  88-110).  Cambridge:   Cambridge
     University Press.
Pfister, H.-R. & Mühlpfordt, M. (2002). Supporting discourse in a synchronous learning environment: The
     learning protocol approach. In G. Stahl (Ed.). Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported
     Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2002 (pp. 581-589). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Reiser, B. J., Tabak, I., Sandoval, W. A., Smith, B. K., Steinmuller, F. & Leone, A. J. (2001). BGuiLE: Strategic
     and conceptual scaffolds for scientific inquiry in biology classrooms. In S. M. Carver & D. Klahr (Eds.),
     Cognition and instruction: Twenty-five years of progress (pp. 263-305). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Resnick, L. B., Salmon, M., Zeitz, C. M., Wathen, S. H. & Holowchak, M. (1993). Reasoning in conversation.
     Cognition and Instruction, 11(3&4), 347-364.
Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects of students' scientific explanations. The Journal of
     the Learning Sciences, 12(1), 5-51.
Savelsbergh, E., van  Joolingen, E., Sins, P.,  deJong, T. &  Lazonder,   A. (2004,  April). Co-Lab,    Design
     considerations   for a collaborative  discovery learning environment.   Paper  presented at the    Annual
     Meeting of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching (NARST), Vancouver, Canada.
Schank, R. C. & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Slotta, J. D. & Linn, M. C. (2000). How do students make sense of Internet resources in the science classroom?
     In Jacobson, M. J. & Kozma, R. (Ed.), Learning the sciences of the 21st Century. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
     Erlbaum Associates.
Stein, N. L. & Albro, E. R. (2001). The origins and nature of arguments: Studies in conflict understanding,
     emotion, and negotiation. Discourse Processes, 32(2), p. 113-133.
Suthers, D. D., Toth, E. E., Weiner, A. (1997). An integrated approach to implementing collaborative inquiry in
     the classroom. In R. Hall, N. Miyake, & N. Enyedy (Eds.). Proceedings of the Second International
     Conference    on  Computer   Support   for Collaborative  Learning   (pp. 272-279). Toronto,    Canada:
     University of Toronto Press.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Weinberger, A., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2004, April). Knowledge convergence in computer-mediated learning
     environments: Effects of collaboration scripts. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the American
     Educational Research Association, San Diego.

                                                       
