             A Cognitive Tool in Handheld Devices for
Collaborative Learning: Comprehending Procedural
    Knowledge of the Addition of Common Fractions

     Siu Cheung KONG                               Sau Yin LAM                           Lam For KWOK
    Department of Information &          Department of Computer Science,            Department of Computer Science,
Applied Technology, H.K. Institute        City University of Hong Kong               City University of Hong Kong
of Education, sckong@ied.edu.hk                sylam@cs.cityu.edu.hk                    cslfkwok@cityu.edu.hk

       Abstract.  The   aim of  this research   is to design    a scenario  for collaborative  learning  using a
       handheld or mobile device to aid the comprehension of new procedural knowledge. A cognitive
       tool (CT) ­ the graphical partitioning model (GPM) ­ that aids the development of the procedural
       knowledge needed to add fractions with unlike denominators was established from the results of a
       series of experimental studies. This paper discusses the redesign of the CT for use in handheld or
       mobile devices. The key to mediating the generation of procedural knowledge of the addition of
       fractions with unlike denominators is the process of searching for common denominators in the
       GPM. A scenario for collaborative learning is depicted, and the distribution of the cognitive load
       of learners across the GPM and their collaborative learning partners is elaborated. Three essential
       structures  that promote    collaborative   work   are   discussed,  namely,  task structure,    incentive
       structure, and group motivation.

       Keywords: cognitive tool, collaborative learning, common fraction, handheld/mobile devices.

INTRODUCTION
Cooperative learning promotes self-directed and active learning through group interaction on interdependent
tasks (Johnson & Johnson, 1999). It has the potential to promote lifelong learning skills, such as critical enquiry,
reflection, and communication    capabilities,  that  are not   as readily  attained by  other   means. We   attempt  to
explore the pedagogy of deep learning through cooperative learning of the subject matter in this study, which is
the addition  and  subtraction  of fractions.  This   topic was    selected because  learners  seldom   understand   the
procedural knowledge that is associated such operations (Lamon, 2001; Pitkethly & Hunting, 1996), and there is
a need to overcome the separation of knowledge from meaning that occurs in classroom instruction. The goal of
cognitive technology is to develop cognitive tools (CT) that work naturally for human users and meet their
needs (Janney, 1999). We adopt the view that CTs are both mental and computational devices that can support,
guide, and mediate the cognitive processes of learners (Kommers, Jonassen & Mayes, 1992). The aim of this
research is thus to devise a computational CT to help learners to comprehend new procedural knowledge in a
collaborative learning environment.

A COGNITIVE TOOL FOR COMPREHENDING THE ADDITION OF FRACTIONS
Procedural knowledge is the knowledge that guides the performance of a task without providing the knowledge
that underlies the performance. The procedural knowledge that we are interested in teaching in this study is the
addition of fractions with unlike denominators. Traditional classroom teaching adopts the algorithmic approach,
which has the disadvantage of separating knowledge from meaning. We aim to design a CT that assists learners
to generate this new procedural knowledge. The CT to support the generation of procedural knowledge of the
addition of fractions originated from a Cognitive Task Analysis (CTA) of the domain. We formulated an initial
prototype from the CTA and defined a model of affordances from a case study evaluation (Kong & Kwok,
2002a, Kong    &  Kwok,   2002b).    Figures  1 and   2 show      the scaffolding support of   the  CT.  The  graphical
partitioning model   (GPM),    which  is a   rectangular    bar with   partitioning  capability, was  designed    as the
mechanism    that provides  the learning  support.    The   pedagogical  benefit  of the  GPM    is that it reveals  the
procedural structure for evaluating fraction expressions. It links the concrete manipulations of the partitioning of
the fraction bars to search for a common fractional unit with the meaning of finding a common denominator.

                                                          
  nLearners input two           oLearners obtain the graphical representation      pEach left-click on the bar reveals the next higher
  fractions for addition.      by pressing the display button.                     equivalent fraction term. For example,
                                                                                      2 ,  3,  4 and so on, starting from  1 .
                                                                                      4    6   8                           2

                                                                        qEach right-click on the bar reveals the next lower equivalent
  rThe fraction symbols are updated concurrently with the               fraction term.    For example,
  graphical displays.                                                   4,    3 , and   2 , until the simplest form 1 is arrived at.
                                                                         8    6         4                           2
Figure 1: Learners use the partitioning capability of the CT to find a common fractional part state with which to
                                                  carry out the addition process

  qLearners may restart the exploration process for the same addition by re-displaying the        rLearners may reset to calculate
  graphical representations of the fractions.                                                     another addition.

                                                  n  Learners  need to determine  when      to perform  the addition  during   the partition

                                                                       o Learners input the answer here.

  p Learners can check the answer by pressing the check result button. The graphical representation of the answer will be displayed.

Figure 2: CT for developing the concept of requiring a common fractional part for the addition of fractions with
                                                      unlike denominators
A series of experimental studies was conducted to test the effectiveness of the CT in helping students to learn
about the addition and subtraction of fractions with unlike denominators (Kong & Kwok, 2002a; Kong & Kwok,
2002b Kong & Kwok, 2003, Kong & Kwok, in press). These studies explored the potential of the CT, and
validated the effectiveness of the dynamic graphical model through evaluation studies. Figure 3 shows the
improved hypothesis-testing interface of the GPM, which promotes reflection on the procedural knowledge that
is needed for the addition of fractions with unlike denominators.
oLearners can drag the fractional parts from adder to addend if the parts are equal in size. Learners can partition the
fraction bars to find fractional parts of a common size for addition.

                            n A graphical                                         p       A  menu   for  the  selection    of   either  an
                            representation will be                                addition animation or the addition of parts by
                            displayed when                                        learners will be displayed when the right button
                            learners input two                                    of the mouse is clicked on the area outside the
                            fractions for addition.                               fraction bar. Learners are given the opportunity
                                                                                  to repeat the addition process.

     Figure 3: The GPM as hypothesis-testing bed for reflection on procedural knowledge of the addition of
                                                fractions with unlike denominators

                                                                    
  The effectiveness of the enhanced CT was then further validated in a quasi-experimental pre-test-post-test
control group study  (Kong   &   Kwok,   2003, Kong  &   Kwok,  in  press). The   results of   the evaluation   study
indicated that procedural knowledge of the addition and subtraction of fractions with unlike denominators would
indeed  be generated  in  learners who   worked with  the   CT if  the knowledge     of fraction   equivalence  were
developed from a conceptual understanding of its meaning.

AIM AND OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY
Scaffolding refers to the focused support that is offered to learners to help them to accomplish tasks, and
especially difficult tasks, at critical times. We developed the CT for learning about the addition of fractions with
unlike denominators by first assessing the learning difficulties of learners, and then designing the necessary
scaffolding to support them. As handheld devices and mobile technologies are readily available nowadays, we
saw the potential for developing the GPM as a collaborative learning tool for use with such devices, and thus
decided to redesign the CT accordingly. Pervasive learning is a new way of using mobile and wireless devices to
facilitate learning everywhere. In this study, we take pervasive learning to mean learning anywhere within a
classroom. Pervasive learning through handheld devices and wireless technology provides a new dimension of
mobility and connectivity, which increases communication between students and teachers, allows for a new type
of collaborative learning experience, and, more importantly, increases the motivation of learners to participate
actively in the learning process. We wanted to develop a pervasive learning environment to promote learning by
reflection through collaborative learning in a physical-affordance environment (Roschelle and Pea, 2002). Thus,
the aim of the study is to address the problem of redesigning the CT to facilitate collaborative learning. There
are two objectives: to redesign the CT for handheld devices, and to add new functions to the CT to facilitate
collaborative learning.

A COGNITIVE TOOL FOR COLLABORATIVE LEARNING
We needed to address two main issues in redesigning the CT for collaborative learning in handheld devices: the
human-computer  interface    and the communication    model   between   students  and   teachers.  In designing   the
human-computer  interface,   we  needed  to preserve the  original features of the   CT,  but  also   provide a  new
interface to facilitate collaborative learning and to allow for the constraints and limitations of handheld devices.
Figure 4 shows the interface of the redesigned CT in handheld devices for paired collaborative learning.

 Learners can partition the                                                                        Learners can
 graphical representation of a                                                                     request a new
 fraction by adjusting the                                                                         fraction from
 common multiplier to find                                                                         the teacher by
 its equivalent fraction.                                                                          pressing the
                                                                                                   "New" button,
                                                                                                   and can get an
                                                                                                   updated
 A warning message pops up                                                                         fraction from
 if Student A attempts to add                                                                      their partner by
 one half to one third by                                                                          pressing the
 pressing the equals button                                                                        "Get" button.
 before searching for a
 common denominator.
                                    Student A                     Student B
       Figure 4: The interface of the redesigned CT in a handheld device for paired collaborative learning

  The original GPM of the CT was preserved in the redesigned version, in that learners can still partition the
graphical  representation of a  fraction by adjusting   the common     multiplier to find  its equivalent  fraction.
However, two new features to aid communication between students and teachers were added: the Get and New
functions. Learners can request a new fraction from the teacher by pressing the "New" button, and can get an
updated fraction from their partner by pressing the "Get" button. The key to mediating the generation of the
necessary  procedural   knowledge   is the  process  of searching  for  common     denominators.      Our  pervasive
collaborative learning environment allows learners to distribute their cognitive load to the handheld device and
to their learning partner during the search process. However, for this to work, there is a need to encourage
genuine collaboration. There are three important factors in the promotion of cooperative behavior: task structure,
incentive structure, and group motivation (Slavin, 1980). To promote cooperative behavior, the task structure,

                                                        
incentive structure, and group motivation must be designed so that the group member are mutually dependent
(Sharan   &  Shaulov,   1990).     In  this section,  we  discuss the  design of  a  pervasive collaborative    learning
environment   in the  classroom     to aid   the comprehension    of the  procedural knowledge     through  cooperative
behavior.

Task Structure
The basic   task that must      be collaborated  on   is to evaluate a common    fraction expression   that has   unlike
denominators. Fraction expressions with two common fractions are generated by the computer system. All of the
learners in the class are assigned to work in pairs by the teacher, and each pair of learners is assigned a fraction
expression to evaluate. However, each learner receives only one half of the pair of fractions in the expression,
and has to obtain a "New" fraction from the computer system for each task. Each learner then has to "Get" an
updated version of the other fraction from their partner to start and continue the addition. Figure 4 shows that
both learners have obtained a new fraction to add and a fraction from their counterpart to start the addition
process, and that Student A has attempted to add one half to one third by pressing the equals button before
searching for a common denominator. A warning message pops up and advices the student to search for a
common denominator before undertaking the addition.

  To accomplish this task, the learner must therefore determine an equivalent fraction to the fraction that is
initially given  to attain    a pair   of   common   denominators    with their learning  partner.  This task   requires
cooperation between the learners in a pair. The rule that guarantees collaboration is that a learner has no right to
change the equivalent state of the common fraction of their partner. In summary, the design of this task has three
implications for the promotion of collaboration. Firstly, learners must cooperate before they can successfully
add together two fractions with unlike denominators. Secondly, learners have to communicate and learn how to
improve   the efficiency   of   the search   for a   common  denominator,   which   means that they    have to  reach  a
consensus   with  their   partner   to obtain    the lowest  common    denominator.  Thirdly,  learners  may    seek   to
understand the procedure by discussing the graphical meaning of the search for the common denominator with
their partner. Figure 5 shows Students A and B attempting to find equivalent fractions in the search for a
common denominator.

3. The graphical model                                                                     3. The graphical model
changes immediately when                                                                   changes immediately when
the equals button is pressed.                                                              the equals button is
                                                                                           pressed.

1. Student A can use a stylus                                                              1. Student B can use a
to choose the multiplier.                                                                  stylus to choose the
                                                                                           multiplier.

2. Pressing the equals button                                                              2.  Pressing   the   equals
confirms the change.                                                                       button      confirms    the
                                                                                           change.

                                   Student A                   Student B
    Figure 5: Students A and B attempt to find equivalent fractions in the search for a common denominator

Incentive Structure
According to Slavin (1980), incentive structure and group motivation are as important as task structure in the
promotion of collaborative learning. A common practice in the assessment of performance in group work is to
assign the same score to each individual learner in the group. However, this structure of assessment does not
provide the individual with the incentive to contribute to the learning process, because learners obtain the same
result regardless of how much effort they put in. Therefore, an incentive structure that encourages individual
effort was attempted in this study. The computer checks the time that each individual takes to accomplish the
task. Figure 5 shows that Student A has successfully found the common denominator for the addition, but that
Student B is still searching for it. In this instance, Student A will get a higher score than Student B. The
performances of learners with greater ability will thus be reflected by a shorter task accomplishment time.

                                                             
Group Motivation
A teacher  can   define  the tasks   as group  work,   so  that learners    have to  complete    the addition  tasks as a
requirement for the completion of the entire task. This encourages group motivation in the learning process. In
particular, group motivation can be achieved by organizing a competition between groups to complete as many
of the addition tasks as possible in a given period of time. Giving awards will promote collaborative work and
will provide more opportunity for learners to carry out reciprocal tutoring, which in turn will help them to better
comprehend     the meaning   of   the task.  Therefore,   in addition    to the  task  and   incentive  structures,  group
motivation  tactics  should  also be   considered  to motivate    learners  to  work   as  a group.  This  is particularly
applicable at the consolidation stage of the learning process.

CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we designed a collaborative learning environment using a CT for handheld or mobile devices that
aids the comprehension of new procedural knowledge. A scenario for collaborative learning is depicted, and
methods    for distributing  the cognitive   load  of learners    across the  graphical   partitioning  model    and their
collaborative  learning  partners  are  elaborated. Because     the key   to mediating    the  generation  of  procedural
knowledge   for  the addition of   fractions with   unlike   denominators    is the  process  of searching  for  common
denominators, the graphical partitioning model allows learners to comprehend the meaning through graphical
representations. Some learners may gain this meaning through individual effort, but some learners may not be
able to  comprehend     the  meaning    by   themselves.   Thus,   three  essential   structures for   the promotion    of
collaborative work ­ task structure, incentive structure, and group motivation ­ are designed and discussed.
Learners in this collaborative learning environment will have more opportunity to learn from their partners, and
thus more chance to comprehend the necessary procedural knowledge.

REFERENCES
Janney, R. W. (1999). Computers and psychosis. In J.P. Marsh, B. Gorayska, & J.L. Mey, (Eds.) Humane
      interfaces: Questions of method and practice in cognitive technology (pp. 71-79). Amsterdam: Elsevier
      Science.
Johnson,   D.  W.,  &   Johnson,  R.    T. (1999).  Learning    together    and  alone:   Cooperative,  competitive   and
      individualistic learning (5th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Kommers,    P., Jonassen,   D.H.  &   Mayes   T.  (Eds.).  (1992).  Cognitive    tools  for  learning. Heidelberg    FRG:
      Springer-Verlag.
Kong, S.C. (2003). A study of modeling a computer-mediated learning environment for supporting the process
      of learning. Unpublished doctoral thesis, City University of Hong Kong.
Kong, S.C., & Kwok L.F. (2002a). Modeling the process of learning common fraction operations: Designing an
      Internet-based integrated learning environment for knowledge construction. In Kinshuk, R. Lewis, K.
      Akahori, R. Kemp, T. Okamoto, L. Henderson, & C.-H. Lee (Eds.), Proceedings of the International
      Conference on Computers in Education (Vol. 1) (pp. 767-771). Auckland: IEEE Computer Society.
Kong, S.C., & Kwok, L.F. (2002b). Modeling a cognitive tool for teaching the addition/subtraction of common
      fractions. International Journal of Cognition and Technology, 1(2), 325-349.
Kong, S.C., & Kwok, L.F. (2003). A graphical partitioning model for learning common fraction: Designing
      affordances on a web-supported learning environment. Computers and Education, 40(2), 137-155.
Kong,  S.C.,   &   Kwok, L.F.    (In press). A  cognitive    tool for teaching   the   addition/subtraction   of common
      fractions: A model of affordances. Computers and Education.
Lamon, S, J. (2001). Presenting and representing from fractions to rational numbers. In A.A. Cuoco (Ed.), The
      roles of representation in school mathematics (pp. 146-165). Reston, VA: NCTM.
Pitkethly, A.   &  Hunting,  R.  (1996).   A  review  of  recent  research   in  the  area  of initial fraction  concepts.
      Educational Studies in Mathematics, 30, 5-38.
Roschelle, J., & Pea, R. (2002). A walk on the WILD side: How wireless handhelds may change computer-
      supported collaborative learning. International Journal of Cognition and Technology, 1(1), 145-168.
Sharan S. & Shaulov, A. (1990). Cooperative learning, motivation to learning, and academic achievement. In S.
      Sharan (Ed.), Cooperative learning: theory and research (pp. 173-202). New York: Praeger Publishers.
Slavin, R.E. (1980). Cooperative learning. Review of Educational Research, 50, 315-342.

                                                           
