         Language Learning in a Virtual Classroom:
         Synchronous Methods, Cultural Exchanges

            Deborah K. LaPointe                                         Kerrin A. Barrett
            Health Sciences Center                                Organizational Learning and
         University of New Mexico                                 Instructional Technologies
         dlapointe@salud.unm.edu                                     College of Education
                                                                  University of New Mexico
                                                                        kbarrett@unm.edu

       Abstract.   Exploring language development through using synchronous (real-time) voice and chat
       technology will be the focus of this paper. Researchers interviewed students, teaching assistants,
       and teachers of an online English as Second Language program based in Taiwan, using grounded
       theory to begin generating a theory of language learning using this new technology.      Students of
       all ages reported preferring the online environment because they were less fearful of speaking
       online due  to  the anonymity  afforded by  the technology.    Engaging article content motivated
       learners to interact with teachers and, as they became comfortable to interact collaboratively with
       each other. The opportunity to speak English with native speakers enabled students to obtain the
       necessary fluency for business, school and travel.

       Keywords.      Synchronous   communication,    voice  over  Internet   protocol (VoIP)   technology,
       computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL), English as a Second Language (ESL)

INTRODUCTION
Lee*, a 24-year-old native of Taiwan who speaks Taiwanese, Mandarin and English, began studying English in
elementary school and continued through university.    Initially, Lee was not interested in learning English as the
lessons were uninteresting and there was no one with whom to speak English.       However, she wanted to please
her parents by studying English. Years later Lee made plans to travel to the United States, and she sought an
online course to prepare her to communicate with the Americans she would encounter.          She joined a course
offered through the Internet using synchronous (real time) voice and text chat, taught by native English speakers
located in the United States.   Teaching assistants located in Taiwan, who were bilingual in Mandarin and
English, co-taught the course, called "Speak2Me LiveUSA," offered by Ladder Publishing, Ltd.         Students from
Mainland  China   and  Taiwan  logged  into the course    to discuss articles primarily  about  American  culture.
Through this interaction, Lee improved upon her English, learned to use American idioms, and became familiar
with English as a tool to understand American thought.    A year later, Lee visited the United States, taking a job
at a large amusement park so that she could travel and experience a culture outside her own.
  Stories similar to Lee's will become more prevalent during the next ten years as access to online learning
expands and opportunities for cross-cultural exchanges are made possible through synchronous technologies.
Through online learning, access to learning other languages will become more convenient and flexible.         But
more  importantly  for second  language learners,  the technology    of online learning  offers  the possibility to
interact with members of the target culture, thereby contextualizing language learning. Wong Fillmore's (1991)
model of language learning in social context recognizes the importance of interaction with target language
speakers for  the  development   of a second   language.     When  language   is contextualized,  speech  is used
productively, shared background knowledge is utilized, and the target language's thought pattern is acquired.
Given the opportunities presented for contextualization and learning with someone from the target language,
language  development   in   a synchronous   online   environment    with voice  over   Internet protocol   (VoIP)
technology can be just as effective as face-to-face language learning in a brick and mortar classroom.    Indeed,
with rigorous course design, synchronous online language courses may enhance and even surpass face-to-face
courses, as it well must given increasing global ties among nations.
  Language learning through the Internet will increase with mounting pressure to learn other languages as we
enter a new expansive area.  Every  expansive area in the history of humankind   has coincided with the operation
of factors which have tended to eliminate distance between peoples previously hemmed off from one another
(Anderson,  2003).  Language    development   meshes   with   the Computer    Supported   Collaborative  Learning

* All names are pseudonyms and identifying information has been changed.

                                                        
(CSCL) ten-year agenda as it focuses on the intersection of technology with the socio-cultural aspect of learning
another language through collaborative methods that bring together very different cultures around topics of
common interest.    As CSCL's aim is to explore how technology can be used to facilitate collaboration, we
foresee language development using synchronous technology as a part of the new innovations in education
arising out of the increasing availability of high-speed Internet access and use of VoIP.

PURPOSE
The  purpose   of this    exploratory study  is  to discover    the  interactions necessary   for individual  language
development in an online, synchronous, voice-enabled environment, using a sociocultural approach resulting in
a  preliminary grounded     theory.   At   this stage of  the   research, interactions  will  be  defined  generally  as
communication that takes place in English among the learners, teaching assistants, and teachers.
   This preliminary study endeavors to begin the development of a theory about learning another language in a
synchronous  virtual environment using     VoIP.  This paper  seeks to make its   contribution to the inductive process
of language development theory building by adding phenomena discovered when researching an English as a
Second Language program offered by Ladder Digital Education Corp., and enabled through the synchronous
(real time) technology of VoIP, in contrast to evaluating the use of the program's features. The synchronous
technology  of voice   over   IP enables   communication,    educational   avenues,  and   community    building across
cultures, previously considered difficult due to the constraints of the text-based, asynchronous (not occurring at
the same time) nature of online learning.
   McIsaac and Gunawardena (1996) affirm that the concept of interaction is fundamental to the success of
learning.  Language use, the way we use or do not use words (e.g., silence) expresses a way of thinking and
interacting (Ochs,  1986).    Given   this orientation,  individuals  who   have  a  strong  desire to  be accepted   as
members of a new linguistic community must interact with that community.
   The research questions this study seeks to answer include:       How does an online, synchronous, voice-enabled
environment    facilitate language  learning?   How   should    each class be  designed    to encourage    collaborative
learning?  What kinds of interactions occur?

METHODOLOGY
To  explore  how   interaction   enabled   through  online,  voice-enabled    synchronous   communication    facilitates
language learning, the grounded theory approach developed by Glaser and Strauss (1967) was used in this study
to generate  a theory  from   data  collected   because,  as yet, no  theory  exists for   language development    in a
synchronous,   voice-enabled   online  environment.   This   is a preliminary    study based  on  initial findings of a
theoretical sample of 18 informants ranging in age from 20 to 35.      Data collected were coded using AtlasTi,, and
constant comparison was used to examine the data and place it into categories according to their relationships
with each other to allow themes to emerge. As participant observers, we took care to view the data with respect
for the Chinese culture and the beliefs of Confucianism that underlie education in China and Taiwan.

Data Collection
The primary data for this study includes data collected between October 2003 and November 2004 through
interviews of six Speak2Me (S2M) Live USA students, ten teaching assistants, and two S2M staff members.
Interviews  were  conducted    in order  to capture   the data  through   the words    and voices   of the participants.
Interviews were semi-structured and conducted face-to-face in Taiwan, through Yahoo Instant Messenger Voice
Chat, and through e-mail.   The data collected was    triangulated using teacher field notes, teaching  assistant notes,
Speak2Me administrative policies related to teaching and providing learner support, and information related to
standardized tests that certify English proficiency.

Analysis and Results
The data collected was analyzed using grounded theory, which uses a constant comparative method of data
analysis.  During the process of open coding the data, we found that through synchronous technology, the role of
the English language learner changes from isolation to connectedness, from unaware to informed, from passive
to active. The impact of the connected, informed, and active learner is manifest in many ways.          Our informants
reported   having access   to an  unprecedented     number   of ways  to   learn  English--after-school    cram  school,
EnglishTown on the Web, private tutors, English foreign language magazines sold on newsstands, CDs, and
television and radio programs.      While many opportunities to read and write English exist, there are fewer
opportunities to hear English spoken by Americans or other English-speaking people.            Informants commented
that often nonnative English speakers teach English classes and they mispronounce words.

                                                          
  Several informants stated that often the content of the English lessons is boring.            Frequently content is
another repetition of lessons previously studied throughout grade school, middle school, and high school.        Jason
remarked that content on Chinese dynasties is covered in their history classes and repeated in their English
classes.   Using English to study Chinese dynasties in a Chinese classroom provides an opportunity to use
English vocabulary.    Yet such a study is outside the context of a conversation with English speakers.          Jason
relayed that with S2M Live USA, learners enjoy articles about current topics such as sports, new technology,
celebrities, movies, health fads, and other topics relevant to American culture.         When the articles stimulate
learners, discussions ensue around topics to which the students feel connected.
  Informants said they enjoy learning about the ordinary events of life as shared in the virtual classroom.      Even
though learners can read about these life events, they enjoy talking about them with Americans.           Through the
discussion of the articles, teachers and learners exchange stories of enjoying similar things in life--celebrating
holidays, weddings and births, their favorite coffees and teas, and favorite local specialties.      For example, in a
lesson that discussed American baby showers, students shared Chinese and Taiwanese traditions.              Interacting
synchronously gives learners access to a culture's stored knowledge.
  While the unique differences in Chinese and American traditions, food, celebrations, rituals, and other topics
discussed provided interesting topics to discuss, the discussions took place within a context that both American
instructors and Chinese learners and teaching assistants could identify with and relate to--the classroom.        The
classroom   setting,  even  though    virtual, provided   a representation   for   how   to participate and   exchange
information in a familiar setting.  Jason expressed the need for having an image or representation of the topic of
a lesson.  Jason mentioned that when neither he nor his relatives had experience with the topic of a lesson, he
could  not find   the words to    participate in the discussion.  Initially, both  American   instructors and  Chinese
learners were uncomfortable in the classroom as the American instructors expected the Chinese learners to
speak at will as students do in American brick and mortar classrooms.              Moreover, American teachers were
initially uncomfortable with the long, reflective pauses in the synchronous voice communication.          However, as
time   has passed,    instructors and students    have become    more comfortable      interacting spontaneously   and
collaboratively, at times with the students greeting each other at the start of the class and prompting one another
when they have difficulties.
  Despite prevalent access to technology and a desire to improve one's self, many individuals have a basic fear
of speaking English with native speakers.        Jason observed, "We Taiwanese--if we can't speak English very
nice, very fluent--we want to learn English and speak, but we are afraid.         We are afraid to talk with foreigners
because we are afraid if I can't speak the proper words or listen to it."         Results suggest that communicating
using a synchronous Internet connection lessens some of that fear.           Because students, teachers, and teaching
assistants do not see each other face to face in the virtual classroom, novice speakers said they felt more
comfortable speaking.     Lee mentioned feeling "nervous to join the class," yet participated in a number of
lessons.  Lee  said that the ability to use the chat box instead of being forced to  speak aloud was a helpful feature
in lessening her anxiety.
  Conversely, some students will use the technology as a reason for not speaking or participating beyond
typing comments into a textbox.     Teaching assistants and students interviewed spoke of some students typing in
the textbox that they "do not have a microphone that works", when in fact they were not experiencing such
problem.
  Informants stated that Chinese and Taiwanese children begin studying English in elementary school.             Many
reported attending cram schools after school, often until university.     Moreover, they said that they were never
really interested  in  learning   English until  they  reached university    level and began   planning   for a career.
Proficiency in English is seen as a means to good jobs, opportunity, and access to information on the Internet.
They want to be understood, use slang and idioms correctly, and speak English, not Chinglish.        Some informants
planned to attend school in the United States; others looked forward to travel in the United States, and still
others planned to work in a country where the dominant language is English.              During the summer of 2004,
Richard took a job as a camp counselor in a northern state in the United States.      He was hired for the position in
part because of his English language fluency.        Upon his return to Taiwan, he was in the Speak2Me LiveUSA
classroom the very next day, reporting on his adventures, not the least of which included calling his mother the
day after arrival and asking her to send his warm jacket.      "I'm from the tropics, and this was like winter even
though it was summer!" he exclaimed.       Two observations can be drawn from this story.       One, that Richard felt
enough of a kinship to his teacher, teaching assistant and fellow students to join a class immediately upon
returning home, and two, that his English had improved.
  The Taiwanese teaching assistants also responded in the interviews that they wished to remain proficient in
English.   They had traveled to the United States, Australia, Canada and England, and obtained jobs based on
their  ability to speak  English    well.     When   they returned home      they  found that  they, too, had   limited
opportunities to speak English with native speakers, and feared losing their ability to speak fluently.       John said
that becoming a teaching assistant for Speak2Me was not only a good opportunity as it allowed him to "keep

                                                           
using English at a more meaningful level, rather than just say `Can I have a chicken sandwich?'            Without the
opportunity to speak English online, John said he would "not use it, period."

DEVELOPING A GENERAL THEORY ABOUT LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT AND
SYNCHRONOUS TECHNOLOGIES
Developing a general theory about language development through the synchronous communication of VoIP
through the Internet requires joining the fields of ethnography, CSCL, computer-assisted language learning,
distance education, and language development.        Each of these fields offers its respective theories pertaining to
the interaction  of   teachers and   students through   the    Internet while learning  English.  In  its  Joint  Policy
Statement, CALICO      declared   in 1999    that "the field   of CALL    is inherently multidisciplinary"  (CALICO,
EUROCALL, & IALLT, 1999).
    One field in which researchers have been describing, speculating, accumulating facts, and creating guiding
theories for more than 40 years is language development (Bohannon and Bonvillian, 2001).                  Ochs (1986)
suggested  that  the  development    of language    is modeled     by   communication   with  others  as  sociocultural
information is generally encoded in the organization of conversational discourse.          Language learners acquire
sociocultural   information    as well  as    situationally  appropriate    ways  of  turntaking,   speaker  selection,
interruptions, and conversational sequencing, along with grammar, vocabulary and pronunciation.              Vygotsky
(1986) wrote that language is a tool to develop thinking.      Studying lists of vocabulary is not language learning in
and of itself. Language provides the entrance to a culture as it informs the learner how thought is structured in
that culture.

Computer       Assisted   Language        Learning     (CALL)      Facilitated   by    Synchronous        (Chat/VoIP)
Technologies
To  facilitate  learning  when     learners,  teaching  assistants,     and  teachers  are  separated  geographically,
communication    among   the   participation  is  mediated  by    technology.  For over  20  years, computer-assisted
language teaching has been used to teach foreign languages, with the past decade in language learning theory
seeing a shift from highly guided to a learner-centered, constructivist learning environment (Ruschoff, 2002).
The new technologies,such as those afforded by synchronous VoIP, offer great potential for innovation in
CALL.   Indeed, selected communicative behaviors can reduce perceived distance between people.                 Through
asking questions, addressing each other by name, initiating discussion, and sharing personal examples, a sense
of  psychological closeness    (Woods   &  Baker,   2004)   is perceived.    Gunawardena and Zittle (1997) describe
humanizing communications between individuals in computer-mediated environments as a predictor of overall
learner satisfaction.

Development of a Virtual Community
Supporting one another in a non-judgmental way leads to community, sharing, trust building, and a sense of
belonging that enables individual learners to be risk takers.     Wenger (1998)  wrote
        "[t]he concept of practice connotes doing, but not just doing in and of itself.       It is doing in a
        historical and social context that gives structure and meaning to what we do.          In this sense,
        practice is always social practice. It includes the language...[and] the implicit relations... (p.
        47)"
    When children begin learning a second language with friends, they are usually at a beginning level (e.g.,
"throw me the ball").   Yet adult language    learners usually  do not get the chance to interact at this level. Instead,
adults are often in situations where greater language fluency is demanded of them, such as explaining where
they need to go, or talking with teachers about their children.     In the online synchronous classroom, adults and
children are able to interact in a safe environment, with no pressure to speak.       Gray & Tatar (2003) examined
Tapped In to understand how symbolic systems mediate interpersonal interactions and refer to shared cultural
models.  In their case study they found that their participant's use of chat allowed interpersonal interactions
inside group boundaries.  Likewise, students, teaching assistants and teachers in LiveUSA routinely use the text
box to exchange greetings, clarify   vocabulary,   and otherwise communicate     informally. This informal   text-based
communication is enhanced by the use of VoIP, which provides the opportunity to listen and respond verbally to
others, adding nuance and depth to meaning making and relationship building.

Limitations
Limitations of this study must be identified.     As participant observers who have participated as online instructors
since Spring 2003, we acknowledge our prior, tacit knowledge and its impact on our theory development.

                                                           
  Other limitations are the self-selection process that most certainly occurred as the result of the synchronous
nature of this language learning program.    Individuals who are not technologically savvy and/or lack the time to
learn new technologies may have found working in the online LiveUSA environment too difficult to master.
Therefore, our sample is limited to those who possessed the requisite computer skills, access to high speed
broadband connections, and patience necessary to tackle new technology.

Future

As the virtual community has formed, roles have changed.      The pattern of interaction is becoming group based,
and the question is "What is the right combination of task, people, and technology?"

CONCLUSION
Our  initial results suggest that synchronous     VoIP technology   facilitates language  learning across cultures
through stimulating virtual classroom interaction through the use of engaging content and collaborative teaching
methods.  Online language learning offers many benefits--contextualized interaction with the target culture in a
safe learning   environment.  The    ability to use synchronous  (real-time) voice  and  chat technology  engages
learners in the language development process, regardless of ability or level of anxiety. Students are able to learn
idiomatic American English in a location of their choosing, making learning English as well as maintaining
fluency accessible for many learners who otherwise could not attend classes.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We wish to thank Prof. Julia Scherba de Valenzuela, Ph.D., University of New Mexico, for her guidance.

REFERENCES
Anderson,    T. (2003).  Modes    of Interaction  in Distance Education:     Recent Developments    and  Research
      Questions.     In M. G. Moore and W. Anderson (Eds.) Handbook of Distance Education.          (pp. 129-146).
      Mahwah, NJ:     Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Bohannon III, J. N., & Bonvillian, J. D. (2001). Theoretical approaches to language acquisition. In J. Berko
      Gleason (Ed.), The development of language (pp. 254-314). Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
CALICO, EUROCALL, & IALLT (1999). Scholarly Activities in computer-Assisted Language Learning:
         Development, Pedagogical Innovations, and Research. Retrieved 2/26, 2005.
Glaser, B. & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: strategies for qualitative research.       New
         York, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Gray, J. H. & Tatar, D. (2004). Sociocultural Analysis of Online Professional Development: A Case Study of
         Personal, Interpersonal, Community, and Technical Aspects. In S. A. Barab, R. Kling & J. H. Gray
         (Eds.), Designing for Virtual Communities in the Service of Learning (pp. 404-435). Cambridge, U.K.:
         Cambridge University Press.
McIsaac, I. & Gunawardena, C. N. (1996).         Synchronous communication in a web-based senior high school
      course:    Maximizing   affordances    and minimizing  constraints of  the tool.   The American Journal of
      Distance Education, 17(4), 235-246.
Ochs, E. (1986). Introduction. In B. B. Schieffelin & E. Ochs (Eds.), Language socialization across cultures (pp.
      1-13). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.Strauss, A. (March 1995).         Notes on the nature
      and development of general theories. Qualitative Inquiry, 1(1), 7-18.
Ruschoff, B. (2002). Introduction: New Trends in CALL. New Technologies and Language Learning Seen in
      Perspective. Universidad de Murcia, Spain: Universidad de Murcia.
Vygotsky, L. (1986).    Thought and Language.    Cambridge, MA:   The MIT Press.
Wenger.  E.   (1998)  Communities    of practice: learning, meaning  and  identity. Cambridge,     UK: Cambridge
      University Press.
Wong Fillmore, L. (1991a). Second-language learning in children: A model of language learning in social
      context.   In  E. Bialystok (Ed.),  Language    processing in bilingual   children (pp. 49-69).  Cambridge,
      England: Cambridge University Press.
Woods, R.H. & Baker, J.D. (2004).       Interaction and immediacy in online learning.     International Review of
      Open and Distance Learning, 5(2).       Retrieved September 15, 2004, from:
      http://www.irrodl.org/content/v5.2.

                                                         
