            Vulgar competence, ethnomethodological
                      indifference and curricular design
                   Oskar Lindwall                                                 Gustav Lymer
             Department of Education                                        Department of Education
                Göteborg University                                            Göteborg University
                                              oskar.lindwall@ped.gu.se

       Abstract.   In  the paper,   we   discuss the  relation between   ethnomethodologically      inspired video
       analysis and curricular design. Often the relation between analysis and design is taken as a relation
       between descriptive and prescriptive accounts. Conceptualised in this way, ethnomethodology and
       curricular  design  is  a world   apart.  With a  focus  on   ethnomethodology's    take on   analytical and
       normative questions, however, some ethnomethodological insights might play an interesting role
       in investigation as well as development of computer based learning environments. The discussion
       is structured around four analytical commitments: become vulgarly competent; be indifferent to
       formal analytic methods, not member concerns; focus on actions and immanent pedagogies, not
       learning; and, do hybrid studies.

       Keywords:       Ethnomethodology,       video  analysis,  conversation   analysis,    design    experiments,
       methodology

INTRODUCTION
The last years growing interest in designed based research1, has partly developed as a response to the limitations
of using standardized    tests in order   to  investigate educational   interventions (e.g., The    design-based  research
collective, 2003). As   Berger   et  al. (1994)  puts it  "even the  best  pre-post  and  randomized    designs"  (p. 476)
cannot provide an "understanding of what is going on while students are learning using instructional technology"
(ibid.). Recognizing this problem with most studies of computers in education, Roth et al. (1996) argue for a
methodological   change:   from   treating   the technological  interventions  as   independent    variables or factors to
approaches where students' interaction with technology is investigated. Such an approach also concurs with the
growing recognition that general statements about technological or curricular interventions seldom are functional
if one wants to understand and further improve educational activities. As Erickson (1986) points out:
       Answering   the   question,   "What   is happening?"    with  a general answer    often is  not very  useful.
       "The  teacher   (or students)  in  this  classroom  is  (are) on-task"  often doesn't   tell us the specific
       details that are needed in order to understand what is being done [...] Nor is an answer like the
       following sufficient usually: "The teacher is using behavior modification techniques effectively."
       (p. 121)
Erickson continues    by  arguing   that questions   concerning  how   the  teacher  use the techniques    and  what  these
techniques consist of are potentially more rewarding than general questions. This makes him draw the somewhat
paradoxical conclusion that "to achieve valid discovery of universals one must stay very close to concrete cases"
(p. 130). In line with this, our research group have increasingly been concerned with the relation between theory
and practice; or, to be more precise, between video-analysis and curricular design. Two questions have recurred,
in different guises,   in  discussions   with   colleagues, teachers   and  students:  in  what    way  can  one  perform
investigations that are useable in the development of learning environments and how can the development and
assessment of educational settings inform our research? Although the relation between descriptive studies and
design has   to be dealt   with  in  relation to each  particular  project, we  hold  that issues   concerning   analytical
commitments,     normativity     and relevance    have    consequences    for  both   research    and  curricular  design.
Furthermore, we believe that ethnomethodology (EM), by its focus on the practical details of interaction and
interest in the reflexive relationship between competencies and settings, has a take on these issues relevant to the
CSCL community.

EM, CA and hybrid studies
Beginning in the 1950's, EM has its roots in the work of Harold Garfinkel and has subsequently developed and
diverged into   rather different  strands  of   research (Maynard    &  Clayman,    1991). In   an  often-recounted  story,
Garfinkel coined the term ethnomethodology when he, together with other researchers, was to investigate the
work and reasoning of juries (cf. Garfinkel et al., 1981; Heritage, 1984; Hill & Crittenden, 1968). To borrow a

                                                            
phrase  from   Hutchins      (1995),    the researchers   tried  to investigate   reasoning    "in the   wild"   by analyzing     tape
recordings  of   jury  deliberations     from  an   actual  case.   Instead   of using    predefined    categories,  such  as  Bales
Interaction Process Analysis (Bales, 1950)2, Garfinkel was interested in capturing the particular (ethno)methods
through which the jury was constituted and made recognizable as a jury. A fundamental premise in this research
­  and  arguably   the    most   fundamental    assumption      in  all EM    research   since  then  ­  is that  social   action  are
produced and recognized in orderly and intelligible ways since members of a setting have recognizably shared
methods  for   producing     action.    How   members'     methods   create   order   are  therefore to  be   found  in witnessable
interactional details; and, consequently, the production of order can be discovered if a researcher conducts close
investigations of practical activities3.
    In  the sixties  until   the    mid  seventies,    Garfinkel   was   collaborating     with Harvey     Sacks,   the  initiator of
conversation analysis (CA). By transcribing and thoroughly examining tapes of ordinary conversations, Sacks
and colleagues    ­  such    as  Gail   Jefferson  and    Emmanuel      Schegloff   ­  developed   an   approach    to the study   of
naturally occurring conversation, focusing on the sequential organisation of talk-in-interaction. Ground breaking
studies was provided regarding structures such as turn-taking (Sacks et al., 1974), adjacency pairs (Schegloff,
1972; Schegloff & Sacks, 1973) and repairs (Schegloff et al., 1977). Nowadays, many researchers consider CA
an  established   academic       discipline  and   the research    program    has   accumulated    a  large   body  of  studies   (for
overviews, see: Goodwin & Heritage, 1990; Hutchby & Wooffitt, 1998; Psathas, 1995; Silverman, 1998; ten
Have, 1999). Studies conducted in the tradition of Jefferson and Schegloff are often concerned with interaction
sequences regardless of the particular setting examined, "whether it be the home, the laboratory, the office or the
street" (Psathas,   1999,    p.  141).   This could    be  seen  as a   consequence    of  the  attempt    to find  as  high a  level
generalisation as possible concerning the role and significance of particular practices of interaction.
    Although CA might be the most successful offspring of EM, a growing number of studies have focused on
the particularities   of   interaction   in  organizational     environments     such   as  the laboratory     or  the  office  (e.g.,
Goodwin, 1995; Heath & Luff, 1996; Luff & Heath, 1993; Suchman, 2000; Whalen, 1995). There are also EM
studies that have investigated the particularities of a range of educational settings. In the introduction to a edited
book,   Hester   and Francis     (2000)   classify  studies   of "local  educational     order" in   six categories,   for instance,
studies of  educational      decision-making     or  studies   occupied   with   classroom   control   and  the  identification   and
management     of deviance.      For    our purposes,  the studies   mentioned      in connection    to  Hester  and   Francis' fifth
theme, studies concerned with the organisation and accomplishment of academic knowledge, are of particular
interest since they carefully examine how competencies are made visible as the relevant business of the setting, a
topic potentially rewarding to the analysis of computer supported learning environments.
    Among    the  researchers       "in this relatively   neglected   area"   (Hester  &   Francis,  2000,    p. 10),  one can    find
Garfinkel and a few of his second generation of students and collaborators such as Lynch (Lynch & Macbeth,
1998) and Livingston (1986, 1987). These researchers, as well as some researchers within the field of CSCW
(e.g., Button & Dourish, 1996; Crabtree, 2001), have begun to use the notion of hybrid studies to characterise
their work. In an introduction to a recent book by Garfinkel (2002), Rawls claims that hybrid studies can be seen
as a kind of "practical or applied research [...] done by outsiders who are also insiders" (p. 40), with the aim
"that  practitioners  in     the specialty   area  being   studied   will   be   as interested  in   the   studies  as  professional
sociologists"    (ibid.). Thus,   although    EM   traditionally    have  been   categorised    as social   science proper,   hybrid
studies are applied social science since such studies directly address practitioners. In the same book, Garfinkel
maintain    that hybrid      studies "are    written   to  be  read  alternately    and   interchangeably     as  descriptions    and
instructions" (2002, p. 102). This could be seen as contrasting with a claim made by Koschmann et al. (2004), in
a  paper that    discuss     ethnomethodologically      informed    video     analysis4,   who  maintain    that   EM   "are  purely
descriptive and cannot be used to form prescriptive judgments" (p. 4). As we see it, however, the seemingly
conflicting statements do not necessarily have to be opposed. From Garfinkel we take that hybrid studies should
be  instructive  and  usable     to practitioners  in  the specialty    area. Koschmann     et  al's statement    could  be  seen  as
pointing to  the  problem        of transforming    EM    studies   into  simplified   guidelines    ­  or  into  the  characteristic
"implications for education" section in the end of otherwise descriptive articles5 ­ and treat these transformations
as EM.   As  we   see  it,   the often-used   distinction  between      description   and  prescription   might   actually  hide   the
particular ways EM could be used in educational research.
    Before we proceed with the discussion we want to point out that the goal is not to provide a reading of what
the ethnomethodological        program      really means.   Instead,    we focus    on insights  that   could  be  furnished   to  the
particular  demands       of research    aimed   toward    the  development    of   education   practice.   Although    we   thereby
discuss what Wilson (2003) call "soft ethnomethodology", we still think it can be rewarding to explore some of
the more radical tendencies inherent in EM. The discussion of these matters take the form of four analytical
commitments:     become       vulgarly   competent;    be   indifferent    to formal   analytic    (FA)   methods,     not members
concerns;   focus    on    instructed    action    and  immanent     pedagogies,       not learning;     do   hybrid   studies.   The
commitments are to be taken mainly as summaries of (or glosses on) one way EM could be used in educational
research. There is an internal order among them, where each commitment builds on the previous and where they
­ in an indirect way ­ point towards different phases or activities within the research process.

                                                                   
BECOME VULGARLY COMPETENT
The first analytic commitment is to become vulgarly (ordinarily) competent in relation to the phenomenon or
practice under scrutiny. For instance, Garfinkel insisted that his students, who set out to investigate specialized
professional  domains     such    as  science,  truck   driving and     mathematics,      had  the appropriate    training  in the
practices of their fields of study. At first glance, this commitment could be seen as trivial. Of course the analyst
has to have an understanding of the investigated phenomena. As Rawls (Garfinkel, 2002) points out, however,
many researchers put more emphasis on formulating research questions, clarifying concepts and operationalizing
terms than getting an initial understanding of the setting. Additionally it is often seen as unscientific "to change
the research question, or research protocol, in the midst of research" (p. 27), with the consequence of "treating a
researcher's  increasing     understanding   of  a research    site as  `subjective,'   while   research   conducted   in  relative
ignorance is considered `scientific'" (ibid.)6.
    The research projects we are involved in deal with settings that are highly specialized. For instance, in one
project we are investigating the use of simulations by nurses who are training to be specialists; in another project
we  are  looking  at how    engineering    students  perform    lab work.   In  all  projects,  we  investigate  practices  where
members are supposed see certain things in professionally accountable ways: the nurses are supposed to see a
high pulse rate as an indication of pain and act accordingly, and the engineering students have to be able to see a
cluster of points on a computer screen as a relation between force and acceleration. In order to recognize what an
event is, that is, what it is heard and seen as, by members to the setting studied, we as researchers have to be
vulgarly   competent   in the  work     of the setting. Put differently,    as  any  formulation    made   by  a  member    means
more than can be said in so many words (Garfinkel & Sacks, 1970), how a formulation is presumably heard is
for its  recognition    tied  to  being    a competent     member       of  the   setting studied.  For    competent   members,
formulations and activities make sense, but for a newcomer to a specialized setting it is impossible to fully grasp
what is going on. As Lynch (1993) points out:
        As   should  be   obvious    to anyone   who    has attempted      to  read  specialized   scientific  journals,  a
        mastery of disciplinary techniques is required for making adequate sense of the prose, graphics
        and  mathematical     expressions.   To  comprehend        the  unique  `what'    at the core   of each   coherent
        discipline  requires  a   reciprocally  unique   method     for  coming     to  terms  with it. Such   method    is
        inseparable from the immanent pedagogies by which members master their practices. (p. 273)
If  video-analysts     want   to  understand     the  practical    competencies      of   anaesthesiologists    or scientists   in
interactional  detail  it is not  enough    to have  a  general    idea of  what  anaesthesiology,    physiology   or  science  is
about; it is not enough with a "layman's gloss" (which we could gain simply by asking a member or reading a
popular textbook on the subject). When Lynch writes about the reciprocally unique methods for coming to terms
with the specific "what" at the core7 of each discipline, he touches on a critical and distinctive aspect of EM:
methods    ­ any  methods,    be  they  methods    of  scientific   practice   or of ordinary    rationality ­ are in  each    case
locally occasioned and bound to a specific competence system (Lynch, 1993). This idea has sometimes been
formulated as the unique adequacy requirement of method which:
        is identical   with  the  requirement    that  for  the analyst     to  recognize,   or  identify, or  follow  the
        development of, or describe phenomena of order* in local production of coherent detail the analyst
        must be vulgarly competent in the local production and reflexively natural accountability of the
        phenomenon of order* he [or she] is "studying" (Garfinkel & Wieder, 1992, p. 182) 8
The unique adequacy requirement could be seen as an alternative to approaches that focus on generic theories,
abstract   models   or underlying    structures. The    focus   is  on  the particular,   the  specific and   the ordinary.  This
requirement also have the consequence of making each area of investigation unique, and the whole corpus of
ethnomethodological       studies highly    diverse,  since the    "the commitment        to `real worldliness'   of phenomena
means   that  how    studies  are done     and  presented   is  (should    be)  shaped    by  the  distinctive  character   of  the
phenomena under investigation." (Hester & Francis, 2000, p. 4). The commitment to the "real worldliness of
phenomena" is intrinsically bound to another commitment, the indifference to formal analytic methods, which
will be dealt with in the next section.

BE   INDIFFERENT               TO       FORMAL          ANALYTIC            METHODS,              NOT      TO     MEMBERS
CONCERNS
According    to the    policy ethnomethodological        indifference,     no   set  of standardized    rules  from   the   social,
behavioural or natural sciences can be seen as operating behind those methods that members recognizably use.
What  is   specific for EM    is  the way    formal  analytic   methods     of  science   used  in classical  studies9 ­   such as
modelling and coding ­ are given no privilege in relation to the methods under investigations. This stands in
sharp contrast to much educational research were models and theories of learning often are seen as necessary

                                                                
components in doing investigations. The exercise of ethnomethodological indifference could therefore be seen as
a way    of abstaining   from    applying   "a  gratuitous   `scientific' instrument:     a social science   model,   method,   or
scheme of rationality for observing, analyzing, and evaluating what members already can see and describe as a
matter of course" (Lynch, 1999, p. 221). This does not mean that there is no difference between practitioners and
the ethnomethodologist or that the analyst is indistinguishable from other competent participants in a particular
activity. In   contrast  to practitioners,  the    ethnomethodologist     are  doing   studies  with   the goal    of making    the
results:
      tutorially available to staffs of order production [i.e., members of that particular discipline] as a
      descriptive/pedagogic       order   of   argument     without incongruities,     absurdities,  without    errors  of
      worldliness or facticity, without gaps, omissions, hiding out, faking, or changing the subject; but
      before everything else, for the work-enhancing edification that the local production staff whose
      work it describes demands independently of and indifferent to whether staff can prespecify those
      demands as a condition for making them (Garfinkel, 2002, p. 266).
In place of imposing theory and scientific method, EM studies tries to recover the endogenous rationality and
naturally accountable character of interaction, an achievement that requires a vulgar competence in the work of
the setting studied and an disciplined eye toward the practical interactional details and a way of presenting these
results in a way appreciated by the "staffs of order production" (ibid.). As Lynch (1997) points out, the policy is
not ­ as    it is often  claimed  to be   ­ a  way    to put the  researcher   in  a position  above   others,  or  providing   an
ethnomethodological       ground    zero,   but as    a  reminder  that   "professionals     (social scientists,   administrative
analysts, and social engineers) do not monopolize the development and use of rules, formulae, algorithms, maps,
guidelines, rules of thumb, maxims, instructions, and the like" (p. 372). This attitude of rejecting the FA methods
normally    applied   in social  science    is often   seen  as  strange  and  it  has frequently    created  confusion    among
researchers. Much of social sciences legacy is built on general methods for corroborating or refuting results.
What is left if these methods are removed and in what ways are other researchers supposed to make claims about
the validity of the results? These questions have often been posed to ethnomethodologists and one occasion that
in an illuminating way highlights this confusion, and EM's seemingly strange answer to these matters, is the
Purdue Symposium on Ethnomethodology (Hill & Crittenden, 1968), which was arranged to provide practicing
ethnomethodologists       and    other    scholars     an   opportunity    to  discuss      a  range   of    issues   concerning
ethnomethodology's relation to sociology. In the symposium non-ethnomethodologists repeatedly tried to find
general methodological procedures they could use in order to validate ethnomethodological claims.
      McGinnis: What criteria would you accept as grounds for arguing that it is false? What criteria
      would        you   require     from      me   to    assess  my      assertion    that   your     claim    is  false?
      Garfinkel: Why don't you just state your objection? (Hill & Crittenden, 1968, p. 34)
In a comment on this exchange, Lynch (1993) claims that "Garfinkel's rejoinder casts McGinnis's academic
question    into  a  `vulgar' conversational       frame"   (p. 146). While    the   question   presupposes     that  Garfinkel's
observation10 should be able to be tested according to some general criteria of falsification, Garfinkel's answer
was pointing      to the particular  case   and   the  potential  problems    with  that  observation   (such   as incongruities,
absurdities,   errors of  worldliness  or   facticity,   gaps,  omissions, hiding    out  or  faking). In  this way   Garfinkel's
reply questions the rationality of method "not through an explicit argument, but in the way it is submerged into a
`vulgar' competency" (ibid.)11. Taking an EM position, there is no time out from ordinary mundane society, no
privileged analytic vantage point or method that provide a guarantee of valid results.
    It is common to interpret indifference as a claim that EM studies cannot pass judgment or be prescriptive. As
have been discussed earlier in this section, approaching practices from the position of EM indifference means
refraining from using exogenous theoretical categories when doing analysis and when making judgments. Such
indifference does not, however, present any principled objection towards the subsequent use of descriptions in
forming prescriptive judgments, only towards accounts that explain and analyze interactions in terms of such
normative exogenous categories. Consider this original formulation of EM indifference from Garfinkel (1967):
      A     leading   policy  is to  refuse    serious  consideration   to the  prevailing    proposal  that  efficiency,
      efficacy,       effectiveness,    intelligibility,    consistency,      planfulness,     typicality,   uniformity,
      reproducibility     of  activities--i.e.,    that  rational properties   of   practical  activities--be   assessed,
      recognized, categorized, described by using a rule or a standard obtained outside actual settings
      within      which  such    properties    are recognized,    used,   produced,    and   talked  about   by  settings'
      members. (p. 33, emphasis added)
The emphasis on outside is important, since it identifies as a study object the rules or standards for recognizing
and talking    about  efficiency,   intelligibility,  consistency  and    the rest,  that are  used  inside  actual   settings, by
settings' members. Thus, normativity can be part of descriptions and thereby point to sensible suggestions of
prescriptions. Given such an approach, issues of normativity are approached from the standpoint of the setting

                                                                 
itself, and  the interests    and concerns     of  members.  It  should   thus  be  possible, in   principle,  for  a vulgarly
competent ethnomethodologist to make judgments on local pragmatic grounds as to what could constitute an
improvement on, for instance, an instructional innovation, provided that the sense of these categories does not
derive from an a priori definition but rather from their presence as "professional designations" (Macbeth, 2002)
in the setting itself.

FOCUS ON ACTION AND IMMANENT PEDAGOGIES, NOT LEARNING
In  studies conducted     by  Charles  Goodwin     (e.g., 1994,  1995, 1996,    1997,  2000a,   2000b),   the  disciplined  and
accountable nature of competent seeing has been a recurrent topic. In these studies, Goodwin focuses on the
actions  through  which     practitioners  highlight,  make  visible  and  learn  to  see aspects   of their  surroundings    as
relevant objects of their profession and, in relation to this, how professionals construct representations of these
socially organized surroundings. Studying the visible and instructable character of competence like this could be
seen as a way of describing the "immanent pedagogies by which members master their practices" (Lynch, 1993,
p. 273). As we have mentioned earlier, our general interests is in the way that participants in an educational
setting are made accountable for the disciplined competence that is purportedly being taught in that setting. In
this way we hope to gain a sense of how a subject matter is made visible and instructable, especially with regards
to  the  "interactional    bringing   to life"  of "instructional  innovations"    (Koschmann      et  al., 2004).    Although
Goodwin     does not    take any  interest in  instructional innovation    or  education,  we   believe   they are  exemplary
examples of how immanent pedagogies can be investigated without resorting to theories of learning. To show
what we mean, we provide a rather thorough account of one of Goodwin's analyses.
    Goodwin (1994, 2000a) reports on a study where an archaeological field excavation of a prehistoric village
was  inspected   and    recorded. Maps     of  the excavation   site are  central  to  archaeological   practice.  In order    to
produce a map, relevant cultural features ­ such as the remains of a cooking fire and the outlines of the posts that
held up a building ­ have to be marked out. Features are often visible as colour differences in the dirt and in
order   to produce    a  map    these differences   are   systematically  classified.  In one   analysed    episode,  a  young
archaeologist,   Sue,    is drawing   a   map   under   the guidance   of   Ann,   a  senior  archaeologist.     Seeing  as  an
archaeologist, manifested here as being able to draw a correct map, is a central element of what it means to be an
archaeologist. When collaborating in the production of a map, the two archaeologists have to see the scene in
common,     and  see  it in a way   defined   by  archaeology   as a  profession.  Since  Sue   is inexperienced,    Ann    must
organize this professional seeing as a form of public practice by linking her actions to the dirt under scrutiny. In
the concerted   work     of the two   archaeologists,  some  of  the  embodied    methods   required   to see  and  define   the
objects and distinctions central for subsequent description and analysis are made visible. In order to uphold a
pragmatic   intersubjectivity   (Edwards,     1997) sufficient  to get the  job done,  Ann   is using   different  methods     to
show how the correct way to categorise the dirt is performed, which results in a "progressive expansion of Sue's
understanding,   as    the  distinctions she   must   make  to  carry  out  the task   assigned  to her   are  explicated   and
elaborated [...] such that Sue is finally able to understand what Ann is asking her to do, that is understand in a
manner that permits her to make an appropriate, competent response to Ann's request" (Goodwin, 1994).
    Goodwin claims that situations such as the one described, where "multiple participants are trying to carry out
courses of action in concert with each other through talk, while attending to both the larger activities that their
current actions are embedded within, and relevant phenomena in their surround" (Goodwin, 2000a, p. 1492),
could   be seen  as  "the   primordial   site for the analysis  of human    language,  cognition,   and   action"  (ibid.). The
reason for the "multiple participants" provision is mainly methodological. It makes available for the analysts,
through    the members      instructions and  corrections,  how  one   conducts   oneself  knowledgeable      in the  face  of a
certain task. A related consideration lies in the specific choices of domains of study; the participant frameworks
in the settings studied are often asymmetrically organized with respect to competence or "epistemic position"
within the field. This provides for, again, the highlighting of the methods that go into the making of a competent
practitioner; explicit sequences of repair and instruction of the novice's actions bring into view what constitutes
right and wrong and so make visible the professional competence of the field12. We claim that these features of
the sites  and  situations   studied  by Goodwin      make  them   primordial   sites for studying,  not  only   language   and
cognition generally, but also instruction and competence. Through paying close attention to the details of how
corrections and instructions are organized in a specific setting, one can gain a sense of how this setting shows the
subject matter in structured ways. One can then construe the specificity of a setting in terms of how a lived work
is done as the formal competence of that setting.
    Goodwin     seldom     mention    learning  in his  studies, although   he   do   use  normative    descriptions  such    as
"progressive expansion of understanding" and "appropriate, competent response". More importantly, he does not
theorize learning. As Goodwin's studies make obvious, practical reasoning embedded in social interaction can be
studied without ever treating it as learning. To be sure, people learn stuff, and if the analyst looks at what they
do, he  or  she  will  see  interaction  and  practical reasoning,   and  could  in   some particular   cases  also  see that  a
person   has   learned   something,   but  that   does not  imply    that learning  is interaction   or practical   reasoning.
Learning already has an everyday grammar that involves, among other things, ascriptions of achievement and

                                                              
judgments about changing competences. But using it as a theoretical term designating something that people do
constitutes a reworking of the grammar of the word that seems hard to motivate. We believe that analysis would
benefit from   being   indifferent  to any    such  arguments    and   simply   say that  learning  is, to paraphrase     Coulter
(1999),   "a polymorph   of  our   language"     and  be  content  with   that. This   does  not mean    that a  researcher,  by
investigating  a particular  course    of interaction   can say   that a  participant   has learned    something.  We   propose
letting "learning" remain an after the fact characterization and that we refrain from thinking about learning as an
object of theoretical reflection13.

DO HYBRID STUDIES
The notion of hybrid disciplines envisages ethnomethodology as closely associated with the work-practices that
it studies: "The intention of the hybrid programme is clear: it is to inform the ongoing professional development
of occupational    practices whose     workaday     objects are  under    `praxiological'   study"  (Crabtree,   2004).   Such a
programme      would   dissolve ethnomethodology          into a  host  of  hybrid     disciplines  taking  active   part in the
development of the studied practices. In the case of education, a hybrid science would be directed at studying
educational practice with the intention of partaking in the development of that same practice. Now, the branch of
educational    research  we  have     been    discussing   has  just this  interest:   informing    the  ongoing   professional
development of occupational practices. Much of the problem with existing educational research, as we see it, is
that it deals in theoretical abstractions and tends to miss the interactional "what" of educational practice; and we
see ethnomethodology's contribution as providing the missing interactional what of instructional innovations,
what they    are as  "brought   to  life"  interactional    achievements.   We      think that this    could  be an   influential
achievement with parallels to how ethnomethodological studies of technology has been received, or as Hester
and Francis (2000), puts it:
        Indeed, if ethnomethodological studies of technology are taken as a precedent (Button, 1993), then
        professional educationists may find more of practical relevance in ethnomethodological studies of
        the detail of educational activities than can be found in other kinds of sociological work. Arguably,
        it is through such detailed inquiries that `self-reflection' and hence improved practice may best be
        promoted. (p. 6-7)
In this field, the notion of hybrid disciplines has been developed in discussions concerning ethnomethodological
input to technology design. One of the earliest initiatives in this area was made by Button and Dourish (1996),
who proposed that design and EM was to forge a "foundational relationship", and then approach design from a
new position (ibid., p. 22)14. Crabtree (2004) has sought to articulate what could be meant by such a foundational
relationship. He sees ethnomethodology and design merging in a new organization of work that is iterative in
structure,  involving  successive   alterations    of  innovations   worked     up  in concert by   ethnomethodologists      and
designers. This hybrid lets the design process as a whole adopt the analytic mentality of ethnomethodology, at
the same time as ethnomethodology "dons the practical mantle of design" (Button & Dourish, 1996, p. 22). An
iterative way   of  working  is also   to be  found    in several accounts  of   design-based      research.  According   to the
Design-Based Research Collective (2003), good design-based research include five characteristics:
        First,  the  central  goals    of  designing      learning   environments      and   developing    theories   or
        "prototheories" of learning are intertwined. Second, development and research take place through
        continuous cycles of design, enactment, analysis, and redesign [...]. Third, research on designs
        must   lead to sharable   theories    that help communicate      relevant   implications    to practitioners and
        other  educational   designers    [...]. Fourth,   research  must   account     for how    designs   function in
        authentic settings. It must not only document success or failure but also focus on interactions that
        refine our understanding of the learning issues involved. Fifth, the development of such accounts
        relies on methods that can document and connect processes of enactment to outcomes of interest.
        (p. 5)
This is thus an approach to educational research that has tried to move beyond the purely descriptive explorative
variety   of qualitative research      in education     and    approach   questions    of   prescriptive  judgments   that   has
traditionally  been  reserved   for quantitative    or  purely  theoretical studies.   Instead   of comparing    an  innovation
against   a  set of    standards,   a  process     of  formative   evaluation      with   iterative cycles    of development,
implementation     and  study allows      the researcher   to  make    an ongoing    assessment     of  how  the innovation    is
working. The outcome is seen as an interaction between context and innovation, a view that eschews randomized
trials as the only or even an appropriate way of evaluating an innovation (ibid.). It is in such an iterative work
that we see a place for ethnomethodology.
   The analytic mentality of ethnomethodology, as we conceive of it, is described above in relation to the three
first "imperatives"; it emphasizes vulgar competence, it is indifferent to formal analytic theory, and its adoption
in actual studies reveals "seen but unnoticed" organizations of educational settings, through a focus on immanent

                                                               
pedagogies, rather than on theoretical terms such as learning. The contribution of such a mentality to an iterative
design-work within education can be said to consist of a short-term influence on specific designs and a long term
influence on the methodological and empirical foundations of educational design through, as Heath and Luff
(2000, p. 240) phrase it, "taking practical action and human agency seriously".
  As      indicated  above,  vulgar    competence     enters  as a  prerequisite      for  conducting  analyses   of   how            learning
environments show a subject matter and make instructable relevant competencies. Given the way such analyses
reveal the standards of accountability that are used inside the setting ­ and the endogenous normativity involved
therein ­ partaking in the making of prescriptive judgments should not be beyond the scope of the analyst's role.
This   is only true   given  that prescriptive   judgments    are  based       on local pragmatic   considerations     arising           in the
actual    iterative  design-work    of   which    they    are part. They         are also  to  be   assessed against     such             local
considerations. The way we see the role of the ethnomethodologist in the design process is thus based on a way
of thinking that attempts to steer clear of general characterizations, an "in each case" way of thinking, where the
claims we make are to be seen as pointing to an imagined iterative design-process. The EM account does not
figure here as a stand-alone isolable product, but rather forms part of an on-going practical work of continuously
refining and analyzing the way an instructional innovation plays out in practice. In providing design evaluation
and    analysis     with the    analytic    mentality  of   ethnomethodology,           educational  design  can    move                 beyond
unproductive generalizations and untoward use of formal analytic theory.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Knowledge Foundation, through its research programme LearnIT, and the Swedish Research Council have
contributed with financial supported. The paper reflects previous discussions carried out within the Network for
Analysis   of  Interaction   and  Learning    (NAIL),     a network  of        researchers from Scandinavian      Universities             who
share an interest in studies of interaction in technology-based learning environments. We are also indebted to
many   colleagues     at the Department      of  Education,   Göteborg         University, for valuable  contributions                to earlier
drafts of the paper. We especially like to thank Tim Koschmann and six anonymous reviewers that provided a
wealth of insightful comments, many that we have not addressed here but which will profoundly influence our
further discussions and, more importantly, empirical work.

1 Building on the work of Brown (1992) and Collins (1992), the notion of designed-based research or design experiments has the last few
years been developed in special issues of Educational Researcher (Kelly, 2003), the Journal of the Learning Sciences (Barab & Krishner,
2001; Barab & Squire, 2004) and Educational Psychologist (Sandoval & Bell, 2004).
2 When using this method, the researcher codes utterances based on a system of twelve different categories such as "shows solidarity", "gives
an opinion" and "disagrees". Similar approaches of coding utterances are also common among educational researchers (e.g., 2001). By
coding the interaction, events are made statistically analysable and surveyable. On the other hand, coding makes parts of the interaction
invisible and the researcher might lose the practical details through which actions and activities are produced and recognized as those of a
particular situation; thereby losing the possibility to "discover just what [an] innovation might be" (Koschmann et al., 2004, p. 7).
3 As Rawls (Garfinkel, 2002) maintain, the assumption "that orders is displayed in the concrete details of enacted practices is not only, or
even firstly, a theoretical assumption, but also something one feels when observing empirically the patterned orderliness of certain social
occasions" (p. 23).
4 This formulation is taken from a manuscript that later was presented at the ICLS conference and our paper started off as a direct response to
the paper by Koschmann et al. Since then, however, their paper has changed form and will be published in a forthcoming book on video
research in the learning sciences (Koschmann et al., in press) and as part of a chapter in a book on collaboration, learning and technology
(Stahl, in press, chapter 18). When we wrote the first version of this paper, we had only access to the first version of their conference
manuscript. Since we are more in agreement with later versions of the text, which might be due to a misreading of the original manuscript,
we have reformulated or removed some of the explicit discussion of their text.
5 See Plowman, Rogers, and Ramage (1994) for a critique of papers ­ within the field of CSCW ­ that "tend to offer a description of a case
study, followed by an implications for system design section at the end of the paper in which a number of highly generalisable or semi-
intuitive recommendations are made" (p. 4).
6 Some research traditions, however, do not follow this scientific ideal. For instance, some ethnographers emphasize the importance of going
native (Malinowski, 1922) while within hermeneutics and phenomenology, the centrality of the notion of sharing interpretative horizons of
the societies, individuals or texts under study (Gadamer, 1975) points to similar issues. In a general sense, then, the claim that the researcher
has to be competent in relation to the investigated phenomena is not specific to ethnomethodology. This is not the place to discuss all
similarities and differences between EM and these traditions, though, especially since ethnography and hermeneutics could mean different
things (and sometimes qualify as EM). For further discussion of the relation between ethnomethodology and phenomenology, see Heritage
(1984, pp.  37-74)  and  Lynch, (1993, 117-158). Crabtree (2001) proposes      a way of conducting ethnographies under the premises           of
ethnomethodology and Meehan (1999) discusses some differences between ethnomethodology and traditional ethnography.
7 This formulation should not be taken as implying an adherence to a view of a stable and unique foundation of the discipline, a foundation
that social science accounts could somehow depict or be about. The `what' does not afford, or require, exhaustive description, but rather
points to the mastery needed, in each case, for membership in the discipline. To emphasize this, Garfinkel's early use of the word `whatness'
(or quiddity) was subsequently dropped for its cognate `just-thisness' (or haecceity), a term with a more obvious indexical character. As
Garfinkel himself write: "When Willard Van Orman Quine published Quiddities it was clear that quiddities had nothing at all to do with
what EM had uncovered. Most emphatically EM studies did not mean essential detail. EM is not interested in essential in any sense of
generic provision for a properly formulated propertied class of thing. [...] EM studies was not looking for quiddities. They were looking for
haecceities - just-thisness; just here, just now, with just what is at hand, with just who is here, in just the time that just this local gang of us
can make of just the time we need, and therein, in, about, as, and over the course of the in vivo work, achieving and exhibiting everything

                                                                 
that those great achievements of comparability, universality, transcendentality of results, indifference of methods to the local parties who are
using them, for what they consisted of looked like, the `missing what' of formal analytic studies of practical action." (Garfinkel, 2002, p. 99)
8 The asterisk following the word "order" is used "as a marker to hold a place for any of the endless topics in intellectual history that speak of
logic, purpose, reason, rational action, evidence, identity, proof, meaning, method, consciousness, and the rest. Any of the topics that order*
is a proxy for should be read with an accompanying suffix: (order* - in-and-as-of-the-workings-of-ordinary-society. Then the topic of order*
would be understood to speak of a phenomenon of order*, a practical achievement" (Garfinkel, 1991, p. 18).
9 Garfinkel sometimes     use the term classic   studies or   classic methods interchangeably   with formal analytic   methods  and   constructive
analysis. All these terms, in somewhat different ways, point to alternates and alternatives to EM.
10 From the case study Agnes, reported in (Garfinkel, 1967).
11 In the same symposium, Sacks replies in a similar way when asked to tell "without reference to the subject matter" (p. 41) what an
accepted EM "demonstration would be" (ibid.). He does this by reformulating the question: "Do you know what that us asking? You are
asking, `Could you tell me, without knowing what kind of world we are in, what a theory would look like?'" (ibid.), claiming that he does
not "know in the first instance what it is that sociology should look like to be satisfactory" since "that is not an available phenomenon"
(ibid.). See Lynch (1993, pp. 144-147) for a more throughout discussion of these exchanges.
12 It makes visible the lived work that is glossed by abstract designations such as "mastery" or "competence".
13 One way of theorise learning that has been criticized by ethnomethodologists is the common distinction between authentic and inauthentic
settings (J. S. Brown et al., 1989; Roth, 1995). Hemming et al. (2000), for instance, questions the comparison between the authentic
everyday learning of language with the inauthentic classroom learning and claim that generalised descriptions of different pedagogies cannot
capture the activities that constitute the settings. Instead they claim that the dichotomy between authentic and inauthentic settings "can be
little more than rhetorical devices in service of a moral project" (ibid.) Similarly, Macbeth (1996) points out that there is a paradox inherent
in the   distinction since everything  that  are commonly      ascribed  to authentic  practices such  as "essential   indexicality, intertwining,
enculturation, and the rest" (p. 274) must also be found in classrooms "in and as the fundamentally situated character of sense and meaning."
(ibid.). As Macbeth argues, since all practices are situated, the notion of situatedness does not offer a way distinguishing between different
activities or an empirical or analytical ground for reforming education. He further maintain that the distinction neither works as an analytical
criteria since sorting activities into the "right" category would probably only slow down the investigation and direct the attention away from
the practical conduct of the participants. In the work of Hemming et al., this line of critique is also directed towards Lave and Wenger's
(1991) notion legitimate peripheral participation: "If learning can happen in `ordinary settings', and occur in the course of activities not
primarily or explicitly defined as `educational', then what analytic constraints should govern the use of these descriptions? What is it about
some activity which warrants the description of it as `learning' and/ or `teaching'? Notions such as Lave & Wenger's (Lave & Wenger,
1991) `legitimate peripheral participation', however useful as the basis of a critique of cognitivist theories of learning, raise the serious
methodological question of their own legitimate application. If learning is an unnoticed `by-product' of other activities, activities whose
primary participant recognised function is something other than the transmission of knowledge, then when (and on what grounds) is it correct
and/ or incorrect to say that `learning' is (possibly, relevantly) taking place?" (Hemming et al., 2000, p. 229). Not only situative accounts of
learning makes such transformations of analytical starting points, however, as Cobb et al. (1999) notice, in constructivism the "assumption
that learning is a constructive process often leads to the slogan `telling is bad' because it deprives a students of the opportunity to construct
understandings for themselves." (p. 12) Taking a social constructivist position would from the same rationality imply that "students should
continually discuss their differing interpretations" (ibid.).
14 Button and Dourish list three different ways that the design-ethnomethodology relationship has been realized in CSCW research, phrased
in terms of how design has "learned" from ethnomethodology. First, there is design "learning from the ethnomethodologist". The rich
ethnographic understanding that the ethnomethodologist acquires in conducting her investigations of "user" practices allows her to function
as a stand-in for the setting in which a design is to be incorporated. There is thus a division of labour, where the ethnomethodologist provides
general ethnographic domain knowledge, and designers use this resource for formulating requirements for design. Ethnomethodology itself
gains only a marginal role here, the ethnomethodologist's contribution being general domain knowledge. From the standpoint of design, she
becomes    substitutable  for any  fieldworker   with    detailed knowledge     of the setting.  Second,  there is design   "learning    from  the
ethnomethodological account", where the division of labour is even more pronounced. In this organization of work, design does not learn
directly  from the   ethnomethodologist, but from  the   accounts  of  practice that the ethnomethodological    analyses result in.  The locus  of
ethnomethodology as such is more central in this model, in that specifically ethnomethodological accounts are used, which requires of
designers the ability to understand and use ethnomethodological analyses. The role of the ethnomethodologist however, is marginal. Third,
there  is the  view    of  design and  ethnomethodology        forming  a   deeper  connection,  where   design as   a discipline    "learns from
ethnomethodology". This is the alternative preferred by Button and Dourish, and they propose that the design of technology should be
informed by specifically ethnomethodological insights about the nature of social interaction, not just from the rich ethnographic knowledge
gained by the ethnomethodologist or from specific accounts of practice. They illustrate their point with an example from their own work,
where the notion of accountability was used to inform the design of user interfaces.

REFERENCES
Bales, R. F. (1950). Interaction process analysis: A method for the study of small groups. Chicago: Chicago
           University Press.
Barab, S. A., & Krishner, D. (2001). Guest editors' introduction: Rethinking methodology in the learning
           sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 5-15.
Barab, S. A., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the Learning
           Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Berger, C. F., Lu, C. R., Belzer, S. J., & Voss, B. E. (1994). Research on the uses of technology in science
           education. In D. L. Gabel (Ed.), Handbook of research on science teaching and learning (pp. 466-490).
           New York: Macmillan.
Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex
           interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
           Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.

                                                                        
Button, G., & Dourish, P. (1996). Technomethodology: Paradoxes and possibilities. Paper presented at the the
       1996 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Vancouver, Canada.
Cobb, P., & Bowers, J. (1999). Cognitive and situated learning perspectives in theory and practice. Educational
       Researcher, 28(2), 4-15.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.), New directions in
       educational technology (pp. 15-22). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Coulter, J. (1999). Discourse and mind. Human Studies, 22(2-4), 163-181.
Crabtree, A. (2001). Wild sociology. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Lancaster University, Lancaster.
Crabtree, A. (2004). Taking technomethodology seriously: Hybrid change in the ethnomethodology-design
       relationship. European Journal of Information Systems, 13(3), 195­209.
Edwards, D. (1997). Discourse and cognition. London: Sage.
Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In M. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research
       on teaching (Third ed.). New York: MacMillan.
Gadamer, H.-G. (1975). Truth and method. New York: The Seabury Press.
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Garfinkel, H. (2002). Ethnomethodology's program: Working out Durkheim's aphorism. Lanham, MD: Rowman
       & Littlefield.
Garfinkel, H., Lynch, M., & Livingston, E. (1981). The work of a discovering science construed with materials
       from the optically discovered pulsar. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 11, 13158.
Garfinkel, H., & Sacks, H. (1970). On formal structures of practical actions. In J. C. McKinney & E. A.
       Tiryakian (Eds.), Theoretical sociology: Perspectives and developments (pp. 337-366). New York:
       Meredith.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
Goodwin, C. (1995). Seeing in depth. Social Studies of Science, 25(2), 237-274.
Goodwin, C. (1996). Transparent vision. In S. Thompson (Ed.), Interaction and grammar (pp. 370-404).
       Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Goodwin, C. (1997). The blackness of black: Color categories as situated practice. In B. Burge (Ed.), Discourse,
       tools and reasoning: Essays on situated cognition (pp. 111-140). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Goodwin, C. (2000a). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32(10),
       1489-1522.
Goodwin, C. (2000b). Practices of seeing, visual analysis: An ethnomethodological approach. In C. Jewitt (Ed.),
       Handbook of visual analysis (pp. 157-182). London: Sage.
Goodwin, C., & Heritage, J. (1990). Conversation analysis. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19, 283-307.
Heath, C., & Luff, P. (1996). Convergent activities: Line control and passenger information on the London
       underground. In Y. Engeström & D. Middleton (Eds.), Cognition and communication at work (pp. 96-
       129). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Heath, C., & Luff, P. (2000). Technology in action. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hemming, T., Randall, D., Marr, L., & Francis, D. (2000). Talk, talk and closure: Situated learning and the use
       of an 'interactive' museum artefact. In S. Hester & D. Francis (Eds.), Local educational order:
       Ethnomethodological studies of knowledge in action.
Heritage, J. (1984). Garfinkel and ethnomethodology. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Hester, S., & Francis, D. (Eds.). (2000). Ethnomethodology and local educational order. Amsterdam: Johan
       Benjamins.
Hill, R. J., & Crittenden, K. S. (Eds.). (1968). Proceedings of the Purdue symposium on ethnomethodology.
       Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press.
Hutchby, I., & Wooffitt, R. (1998). Conversation analysis: Principles, practices and applications. Cambridge,
       UK: Polity Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kelly, A. E. (2003). Research as design. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 3-4.
Koschmann, T., Stahl, G., & Zemel, A. (2004, 22-26 June). The video analyst's manifesto (or the implications of
       Garfinkel's policies for the development of a program of video analytic research within the learning
       sciences. Paper presented at the The Sixth International Conference of the Learning Sciences,
       University of California, Los Angeles.
Koschmann, T., Stahl, G., & Zemel, A. (in press). The video analyst's manifesto (or the implications of
       Garfinkel's policies for studying practice within design-based research). In R. Goldman, B. Barron, S.
       Derry & R. Pea (Eds.), Video research in the learning sciences. Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
       Associates.
Kumpulainen, K., & Wray, D. (2001). Classroom interaction and social learning: From theory to practice.
       London, UK: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

                                                       
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, MA:
       Cambridge University Press.
Livingston, E. (1986). Ethnomethodological foundations of mathematics. London, UK: Routledge & Kegan
       Paul.
Livingston, E. (1987). Making sense of ethnomethodology. London, UK: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Luff, P., & Heath, C. (1993). System use and social organization: Observation on human-computer interaction in
       an architectural practice. In G. Button (Ed.), Technology in working order: Studies of work, interaction,
       and technology (pp. 184-210). London: Routledge.
Lynch, M. (1993). Scientific practice and ordinary action: Ethnomethodology and social studies of science. New
       York: Cambridge University Press.
Lynch, M. (1997). Ethnomethodology without indifference. Human Studies, 20(3), 371-376.
Lynch, M. (1999). Silence in context: Ethnomethodology and social theory. Human Studies, 22(2-4), 211-233.
Lynch, M., & Macbeth, D. (1998). Demonstrating physics lessons. In S. Goldman (Ed.), Thinking practices.
       Marwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Macbeth, D. (1996). The discovery of situated worlds: Analytic commitments or moral orders? Human Studies,
       19(267-287).
Macbeth, D. (2002). Classrooms as installations. In S. Hester & D. Francis (Eds.), Local educational order:
       Ethnomethodological studies of knowledge in action. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing.
Malinowski, B. (1922). Argonauts of the western pacific. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Maynard, D. W., & Clayman, S. E. (1991). The diversity of ethnomethodology. Annual Review of Sociology, 17,
       385-418.
Plowman, L., Rogers, Y., & Ramage, M. (1994). What are workplace studies for? Paper presented at the Fourth
       European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, Stockholm, Sweden.
Psathas, G. (1995). Conversation analysis: The study of talk-in-interaction. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Psathas, G. (1999). Studying the organization in action: Membership categorization and interaction analysis.
       Human Studies, 22(2-4), 139-162.
Roth, W.-M. (1995). Authentic school science: Knowing and learning in open-inquiry science laboratories.
       Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Roth, W.-M., Woszczyna, C., & Smith, G. (1996). Affordances and constraints of computers in science
       education. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 33(9), 996-1017.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking in
       conversation. Language, 50(4), 696-735.
Sandoval, W. A., & Bell, P. L. (2004). Design-based research methods for studying learning in context:
       Introduction. Educational Psychologist, 39(4), 199-201.
Schegloff, E. A. (1972). Sequencing in conversational openings. In D. Hymes (Ed.), Directions in
       sociolinguistics. New York: Blackwell Publishers.
Schegloff, E. A., Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The preference for self-correction in the organization of
       repair in conversation. Language, 53, 361-382.
Schegloff, E. A., & Sacks, H. (1973). Opening up closings. Semiotica, 7(4), 289-327.
Silverman, D. (1998). Harvey Sacks: Social science and conversation analysis. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Stahl, G. (in press). Group cognition: Computer support for collaborative knowledge building: MIT Press.
Suchman, L. A. (2000). Embodied practices of engineering work. Mind, Culture, and activity, 7(1&2), 4-18.
ten Have, P. (1999). Doing conversation analysis: A practical guide. London: Sage.
The design-based research collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educational
       inquiry. Educational researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
Whalen, J. (1995). A technology of order production: Computer-aided dispatch in public safety communications.
       In P. ten Have & G. Psathas (Eds.), Situated order: Studies in the social organization of talk and
       embodied activities (pp. 187-230). Washington, DC: University Press of America.
Wilson, T. P. (2003). Garfinkel's radical program. Research on Language and Social Interaction, 36(4), 487-
       494.

                                                       
