                               We        Learn            Better           Together:
   Enhancing eLearning with Emotional Characters
             Heidy Maldonado1, Jong-Eun Roselyn Lee2, Scott Brave2, Cliff Nass2,
      Hiroshi Nakajima3, Ryota Yamada3, Kimihiko Iwamura3, Yasunori Morishima4

                       1. School of Education, Stanford University. heidym@cs.stanford.edu
           2. Communications Department, Stanford University. {jroselyn, brave, nass}@stanford.edu
   3. Control Technology Lab, Omron Corporation. nak@ari.ncl.omron.co.jp, {ryamada, kiwamura}@oas.net
                 4. Division of Languages, International Christian University. morishima@icu.ac.jp

       Abstract. In this paper we explore a new direction for pedagogical computer characters, which we
       believe will maximize students' learning gains and enjoyment. To the traditional scenario where
       students   interact  primarily    with   a single   coach   or tutor  character  on-screen,    we   introduce      the
       addition of both a social, animate colearner, and the student's own avatar character. Variations of
       the colearner's attributes, informed by research literature on human partners, are explored through
       an  online   testbed  application  of   English    language    idioms.  Results   from  an    experimental    study
       with  76  Japanese    college  students    reveal  that   cooperative  colearners  have     a positive  impact     on
       students'    performance    and    experience,     as  well   as increasing    perceptions     of  the  character's
       intelligence   and    credibility.   Findings      provide  grounding     for  a  fruitful    new   direction      for
       pedagogical characters, where students learn alongside emotional companions.

       Keywords: Pedagogical computer characters, evaluation of computer characters, language learning,
       colearners.

INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence  applications    in  education    most    often appear   as  tutoring systems,     diagnosing     students'
misconceptions    on  subjects   such    as  algebra  through     problem   solving     activities   and prearranged      prediction
patterns. Recently a new breed of agents has begun to surface in everyday applications: these agents appear on
screen as  embodied   entities   ­ whether     humans,    or   anthropomorphized      objects and    animals   ­   facilitating   our
interactions with   software   applications,    navigating     menus   and  web-pages,   offering    tips and    customizing      our
online purchases.   These   embodied     agents   converse    and interact with   humans   through    text  bubbles,   sometimes
accompanied    by   sound    clips  of   their  utterances,    often  expressing  colorful    personalities    through    animated
gestures.
   Drawing inspiration from traditional cartoon animation and comic layout processes, these characters resemble
actors in  their emotional   range   and  improvisational      responses.  From   the   Microsoft    helper   agent,   to company
spokesperson,    to customer     service  representatives     on Dell.com   and   buy.com,    computer    characters   are    rapidly
gaining   prevalence  in our     everyday   online   activities,  and  with  good    reason.  Computer     characters     have been
shown to be effective proxy sellers, customer service representatives, and teachers, by engaging our unconscious
social nature through life-like language, presence and behaviors (Reeves and Nass, 1996; Thomas and Johnston,
1981; Reeves, 2001). Of particular importance for the educational domain, characters, when properly deployed,
may generate additional interest and motivation in the content presented              (Moreno et al, 2000), and influence a
proactive change in everyday behavior (Bickmore et al, 2004).
   Pedagogical    characters   have  appeared     in language    learning  applications   (Hayes-Roth      et  al, 2002),     middle
school curricula    (Lester et al, 1997;    Moreno   et   al, 2000;  Biswas   et al., 2004),  oral   storytelling   (Kehoe     et al,
2004), corporate    training (Extempo,      2004),   health   behavior  change   interventions (Bickmore       et  al, 2004),     and
even military instruction (Johnson et al, 2004).
          Previous   research    and  industry     applications    on   embodied     conversational      computer    characters     in
pedagogical domains has conceptualized the interaction between the human and the computer character as a one-
to-one tutoring  or  coaching    intervention.    The learner    primarily interacts  with one     character  on   the screen    at a
time;  when  more    than   one    character   is present     simultaneously   in   the application,     their roles   tend   to  be
supplementary or supportive ones, providing background tips for the interaction as an articulate "Help" menu
option or enriching the background of the activity as non-interactive extras, often called non-player characters.
          We believe that giving the student a virtual presence in the environment, and enriching the learner's
world  with  a colearner    will lead  to greater  gains   in  learning and  enjoyment    of  the    educational   application.   To
that end, we have designed and built an online application testbed, where we vary characteristics of the colearner
to evaluate  research-based    predictions   of   factors that   maximize  achievement   and   enjoyment.      We   report    on  the
first experimental study using this eSchool application, focused on teaching Japanese college students American

                                                                 
idioms.   The  results  offer great promise      for breaking   free   of  the traditional   paradigm     of a  single  interactive
character on the screen, while revealing further research questions for pedagogical characters .
          In the  archetypical   pedagogical     character   application,    a computer      character  on   the   screen  presents
material, situations and questions, through images, videos, text and voice. The character may be embodied, or
represented   on   screen  as    photographic       images   and    videos,    photorealistic    3d    images,     and    even   2d
anthropomorphized      animal  characters.   To  respond,    human     learners  type     comments,    or  choose   from     options
presented by menus or buttons. Feedback on the learner's performance is then delivered through the characters,
such as an explicit rating or goal achievement scale, or through the environment itself. For example, in certain
simulations, the learner's behavior impacts the scenario illustrating, through the on-screen characters' behaviors,
potential  consequences   and    nuances  of   interpretation,   enriching     traditional   numerical     ratings  with  affective
performances. This feedback      can be both     formative,  as the  learner   progresses   through    the interaction,   and often
summative at the completion of the curriculum.
          Computer characters exhibiting realistic behaviors in the pedagogical arena tend to follow three primary
models, mirroring Taylor's 1980 taxonomy of computer usage in schools: tutor, tool and tutee. Characters may
be cast as expert teachers or coaches, presented as role-play partners in simulations of real-world situations, or act
as learners  whom     the human    student   teaches.     Most  often,  computer     character   inhabit   the role of    expert or
knowledgeable    teacher  (Hayes-Roth    et  al, 2002b;    Baylor   et al, 2004;    Lester  et al, 1997;   Moreno   et  al,  2000).
While these characters may be embodied as older or of a similar age to the human student, they interact with the
students as experienced coaches and erudite tutors.
          The second category, where characters are presented as partners in role-play simulations is prevalent for
on-the-job   training and  eLearning    situations,  where   the  learner  may      be older   and more    experienced.   In  these
cases, rather than an expert teacher, computer characters act as colleagues and coworkers. These characters foster
learning through realistic role-play scenarios as the human student practices concepts, strategies, and behaviors
(Extempo,    2004;  Johnson   et   al., 2004;    Aldrich's   Simulearn     company).      A  third  mode     of  interaction   with
computer characters prevalent today presents the computer character as a learner, progressing alongside the human
student (Maldonado et al, 2004), or being taught by him or her (Biswas et al, 2004). Peer characters, unlike the
expert  coach  and tutors, are   perceived  as   possessing  as  much     content   knowledge    on the    subject  as the   human
learner, and often less. In cases where students teach the peer character, the cyclical act of preparing content for
teaching, and successfully communicating it becomes the learning experience in itself.

LEARNING           WITH       CLASSMATES
In the last twenty years since Taylor published his taxonomy, we have developed the technologies to implement
and  render   believable,  animate   characters,     yet  we   have  made    comparatively      little progress    in  developing
applications for these characters that maximize the social and emotional relationship with human interactors. For
each of  the three modalities    described   above   the  human     student  tends     to be implicitly    present  alongside    the
character, rather  than   visually embodied      on  screen,   and  the   interaction   is limited  to   exchanges    between    the
human learner and a single computer character.            Graphical representations of the       human     users that  appear on-
screen, are often referred to as avatars, which can be directed in their interactions with other computer characters
in the environment, whether autonomous or directed avatars themselves. Despite few occasional appearances in
educational  applications  (Maldonado     1998a,     1998b;  Johnston     et al, 2004),    avatars frequently    appear   on  many
commercial sociable applications (Clanton et al, 2003; DiPaola, 1999; Wright, 2003), with varying degrees of
autonomy: users may direct the avatar to perform specific behaviors and utterances or, at a higher level, indicate
a  preference  or  direction  and   let  the avatar   fill  in  with   appropriately       corresponding     behaviors,   gestures,
onomatopoeias and comments.
          We   propose  a  radical  reframing    of  the   learning  context     in which    students   interact   with   animated
pedagogical computer characters, which we believe will maximize the students' learning gains and enjoyment. In
the eSchool application we have developed, students interact with two computer characters at the same time, a
teacher and  a peer   fellow  student,  within   one  screen.   Students     are themselves    represented     through    an avatar,
whom    they  can direct  in  emotional   and    subject   matter   responses.   The   avatar's  conversational     behaviors  and
gestures are autonomously derived from the directions given by the human learner and the learner's answers to
the teacher's questions. Research suggests this combination of high-level directions and autonomous behavior is
perceived as more natural than avatars whose behaviors are minutely controlled by the users, leading to increases
in perceived expressiveness of the conversation, and greater sense of user control (Cassell et al, 1999).
          Figure 1 shows the eSchool interface for handheld computers from 2003 using cartoon characters, and
Figure 2, the current interface on a PC using photographic images at the exact same moment in the interaction.
In both cases the teacher character is located on the upper right hand side of the screen, above the chalkboard,
which,  in turn,  displays   the multiple   choice   interpretations   the   student   must    decide  between,    mimicking     the
learning  space of a  classroom.   In   Figure   1, the   students' avatar is  Neko the     cat, and   the colearner   is Taro   the
Tiger, while in Figure 2 the students' avatar is Susy and the colearner is Ryota.
          Each  of the  three  interactors   has    their own   emotions     and  embodiment,      built   for  adaptation   across
platforms and conditions of analysis. The eSchool environment is written in Java, allowing students to conduct

                                                               
all their interactions online, perhaps across different days and computers as they progress through the lessons;
the system will record the state for every student that logs in through a database driven registration process.

   Figure 1: eSchool 2003 for Handhelds featuring                          Figure 2: eSchool 2004 for the PC featuring
                    cartoon characters                                                 photorealistic characters

          Figures 1 and 2 show only some of the possibilities available within eSchool: students can choose the
look and   feel of  their avatar  and   their colearner  from     a  wide  range    of  embodiment     options:  nine    different
anthropomorphized    animals  in  2003    and  ten  photorealistic    humans     in  2004,   five male  and   five female.    The
actions the avatar and colearner take affect each other's emotions accordingly, and this change is reflected in their
facial expressions, following the model of Ekman's (1992) universal or basic emotions: anger, sadness, disgust,
surprise, fear, and  enjoyment    or happiness.   Answering       a  question  right,   for example,   increases   the  student's
confidence and happiness, and also affects the emotions of the autonomous peer colearner, depending on his or
her personality traits. The emotion model is grounded on personality traits, and the underlying architecture that
modulates   the  emotions   of   all three    characters is    a  novel,   patent-pending      design, product     of  a unique
collaboration between Omron Corporation and Stanford University (for more implementation details, please see
Morishima et al, 2004; Nakajima et al, 2004), and allows for a synchronous learning experience as well. That is,
two students can interact through their avatars online in eSchool, although for the purposes of our experiments
we have isolated the behaviors under analysis by modifying specific attributes of the colearner as an autonomous
character. Unlike human confederates sometimes used in experimental studies, characters can reliably showcase
the same pattern of behavior, with slight improvisations, for every user.
    The colearner,  or  classmate,   as its   name  indicates,    is  learning   alongside   the  human    student and   has  no
additional knowledge on the subject nor explanations to provide. It is not privy to additional information than
the student views   on  the screen,  and  is  called to  answer      questions   as  often  as  the student,  on   average.   The
colearner  exchanges friendly   banter with   the  student's   avatar before     the teacher   poses a  question,  or   after the
answer is revealed. We have introduced this presence in the learning environment to determine the effects that
learning alongside a social animate character has upon the student's performance and attitudes, rather than using
the colearner to elicit nuanced explanations from the student, or model understanding, as is the case with some
intelligent tutoring systems (such as Goodman, et al., 1998).
    The focus   of  our eSchool   project on  the  coleaner    is an  innovative    aspect  of our  character-based    system, a
research direction we believe fruitful to explore for computer supported educational interventions in a wide range
of  contexts,   from    eLearning  seminars,    distance    education      programs,     to after   school  activities,  in-class
complementary      modules, and   behavioral   change    interventions.     Thus    far, experimental   research   has   focused
primarily on the modality of the exchanges between the teacher character and the human student, as well as the
character's believability: text vs. voice (Moreno et al, 2000), photo-realistic vs. drawn representations (Baylor,
2004);  two vs.  three  dimensional    presence (Shinozawa        et al,  2003); human-like     vs. anthropomorphic      animals
(Moreno et al, 2000). Some studies have varied the degree of animated behaviors (Lester et al, 1997; Moreno et
al, 2000), and others have explored ethnic and gender combinations between the learner and the character tutor
(Nass et al, 2003; Baylor, 2004). In contrast, we are conducting several experiments evaluating the effects that
different dimensions of the colearner have on the students' performance. Among the colearner dimensions we are
studying  are social ones   (competitiveness   and   cooperativeness),     personality   traits  (degrees  of introversion    and
extroversion), and performance (high- to low-achiever). We are seeking out instances where colearners influence
students' learning outcomes and attitudes through their behaviors, with the aim of gradually expanding the focus
to study how these behavioral expressions relate to the students background, performance, personality profile
and preferences.

PILOT      APPLICATION
We   inaugurated    the colearner  research   field  by  isolating     the  effects  of   the  autonomous     colearner   in   an
experimental  study  with   three conditions:   in  the  first of   these, the colearner    was not  present, and   the  student
interacted directly  with   the  teacher  character.  We    call     this  control   condition  the  "No   Colearner     Present"
condition. In   the second  condition,  the   colearner was    present    but did   not  interact with  the  student.   While  it
answered questions when called on, in this "No Emotion Colearner" condition, the colearner character did not

                                                               
exchange or respond to any social banter with the student avatar in neither words nor gestures. Researchers such
as Zajonc (1965) have noted that the presence of an audience tends to enhance performance and inhibit learning,
although   even he  points   out   that some   studies  suggest an  increase in  learning  scores   in the  presence   of  other
people who learn with the individual. With the "No Emotion Colearner" condition we sought to study how the
mere social presence of the colearner, even when it did not interact directly with the student, would affect the
learning experience.
  Research    suggests   that   studying  in  a cooperative group     leads to greater  learning   gains than     individual   or
competitive conditions, with improvements in critical thinking skills (Stockdale and Williams, 2004; Skon et
al, 1981), and to greater gains in motivation (Bickmore, 2005; Wentzel, 1997). Accordingly, our third condition
featured a cooperative colearner. While most previous research attributes the performance gains of students in a
cooperative  group    to shared  reasoning    and dialogue, we    are interested in  exploring  the    effects that  colearners'
social banter may have on the student's performance, even when it is devoid of educational content relevant to
the learning activity at hand. Therefore, our third condition is the "Cooperative Colearner" condition, where the
colearner's  social nature was manifested through utterances directed at the student's avatar, making             compliments
and showing concern, particularly as the difficulty level of the questions increased or when the student missed a
question. For example, when the student through his or her avatar answers a question correctly, the collaborative
colearner may utter one of ten supportive utterances, such as "I knew you'd get it right!" or "That was hard, and
you got it!" If the student's avatar had answered incorrectly, the collaborative colearner may say: "This is very
tough," "I didn't know that one either," "You'll get the next one!," "I would have given the same answer, this is
hard," among other possibilities.
  In addition to supportive utterances, in the "Cooperative Colearner" condition, the colearner also expresses
support through appropriate changes in its facial expression. By creating a sense of unity between the self and
the other, cooperativeness promotes friendship and perception of social support, which in turn may contribute to
enhancing social relationship and performance both in dyadic and group interaction (Argyle, 1989; Argyle 1991;
Deutsch,   1949).   Because     we sought  to   isolate the effects   of the   colearner character's   emotive,     the  teacher
character in this evaluation did not exhibit any emotions, in his speech or expression.
  For    the current  eSchool    web-based    implementation,   we    have  developed   an   intermediate   English   language
lesson, accompanying video, and evaluation instruments, primarily aimed at Japanese college students enrolled
in English language courses at Japanese universities. Students progress through fifteen multiple-choice questions
about  American   idioms,    a  topic   whose  relevance to the  target  population   was    predetermined     through   a focus
group  study. Our   target   population   has  already  mastered  grammatical    and  syntactical  nuances     of the language
and is   interested   in improving      their understanding  of   colloquialisms      commonly     used  by    their  American
counterparts. As Figure 1 highlights, the interface design of emotive cartoon characters for eSchool 2003, was
explicitly developed in Japan to be appropriate for the target audience, in terms of aesthetics, experience, culture
and age. As we shift our focus globally with the online release of eSchool 2004, available to students anywhere,
we have redesigned the interface for appeal to a broader audience, with photorealistic characters, and an emphasis
on emotional expressions based on globally recognizable features (Ekman, 1992).
  The    idioms   covered    in eSchool  lesson   plan  currently include:   "being a pain in the neck," "to drop off an
item," "to   drop in,"   "to drop  out,"  "getting  cold  feet,"  "getting  up   the  nerve," "being   tongue     tied," "being
chicken,"  "being   a scaredy   cat,"   "being  a couch  potato,"  "pulling    someone's     leg," "hitting the   books,"   and
"hitting the  town."     These  idioms   are  organized  in three groups    of   five questions    each, according      to  their
difficulty and  grammatical      similarity.  Progress   through  the  diagnostic,    basic, or advanced    question     sets, is
represented graphically on the screen through a progress bar between the images of the avatar and colearner, as
can be seen in Figure 3.

    Figures 3a and b: Typical question-answer interaction in eSchool 2004, featuring a cooperative colearner.
                  Highlights the avatar's emotional reactions to the questions posed by the teacher.

                                                             
                                                                               Sample Question, Diagnostic Set:
                                                                              Student attempts to quit application

                                                                                                                                                                                        After the teacher
                                                                                                                                                                                           explains the
                                                                                                                                                                                         expression, the
                                                                                                                                                                                        student  decides
                                                                                                                                                                                         he will stop the
                                                                                                                                                                                           interaction

                                                                                                                                                                                          The colearner
                                                                                                                                                                                          intervenes to
                                                                                                                                                                                        keep the student
                                                                                                                                                                                         engaged in the
                                                                                                                                                                                             lesson,
                                                                                                                                                                                            providing
                                                                                                                                                                                         encouragement
                                                                                                                                                                                        according to her
                                                                                                                                                                                           personality

     Figures 3c and d: Typical question-answer interaction in eSchool 2004, featuring a cooperative colearner.
                      Showcases the cooperative comments and expressions of the colearner.

   After  the initial diagnostic   questions, a video   featuring an  American  college  student   discussing    graduation
with a  Professor is  played, using   several typical idiomatic   expressions.  Students  are    able to see the                                                                                video      as
many times as they wish, in its entirety or by choosing segments to review, and we record the viewing pattern
for post-experience comparisons. Ten questions of increasing difficulty follow, based on the expressions covered
in the video. The student's answers to each question are stored in the eSchool database for comparison as well,
and affect both the confidence and emotional state of the characters.     For   example,  in Figure    3a we  see                                                                               both       the
avatar and the colearner autonomously making statements of confidence, after the teacher has posed a question,
based on their internal emotion model.
   The teacher character then calls on the student or the colearner to reveal their answer on screen, determines its
appropriateness for the question, and explains the origin or usage of the expression. On average, the teacher will
call on the learner for  60  percent  of the  questions,  while   the remaining  40    percent  will  be  answered                                                                                   by    the
colearner, which has been programmed to have a 50 percent chance of guessing the correct response each time
s/he is asked to  reveal  the answer.   Independently   of the  correctness of  the answer   revealed,   the same                                                                                    teacher
explanation will be seen by every student and colearner, to ensure that every participant is exposed to each aspect
of the lesson content. For example, in the previous question scenario, the teacher explanation is as follows: "To
drop  something   off is to  leave something   in a  place  for others to pick  up. One  can   use   the phrase  to                                                                                  lift  an
object off the floor, but there are other meanings to pick up. One can use it to mean collecting an object from a
place where it has been left, or where it is being fixed."
   In the previous example, avatar Manabu reveals his choice when called to present an answer. Given the high
level of confidence we can observe in Figure 3a, when the student's respond choice is incorrect, avatar Manabu
expresses surprise,   as we  can  see in Figure 3b;  this  emotional   expression   is appropriately   and   autonomously
produced by the emotion engine, rather than a direct input from the student. Immediately following Manabu's
surprise, the colearner  makes   a socially  appropriate  cooperative  comment,   captured   in  Figure   3c ("That                                                                                    was  a
hard one"). When    the  discouraged  student  tries to  quit the  application, the    colearner intervenes  to  entice                                                                                    the
student to continue the lesson, in a socially appropriate manner. In Figure 3d we can see the choices on avatar
Manabu's bubble ("Proceed to logout" and "Return to class") and colearner Roselyn's plea to continue: "Please
don't quit! Let's continue studying together!"

EVALUATION            AND      RESULTS
For our first evaluation of the eSchool system and underlying emotion-generation architecture, we partnered with
an English  language     college  class  at International   Christian  University,  in  Tokyo,    Japan,   and   sought                                                                                    to
determine   the impact    of  the  colearner  character  on   the students'  understanding,      recall, recognition,                                                                                     and
motivation. Seventy-eight students were randomly assigned to one of three conditions; of those that chose to
respond,  25  were    male   and  51  were   female.  Of   these  76  respondents,  25   students     interacted  with                                                                                    the
"Cooperative Colearner," a different group of 25 interacted with the "No Emotion Colearner," and a third group
of 26 students interacted with the eSchool system in the "No Colearner Present" condition. Students interacted
with the eSchool system at their school's computer lab, and then answered an online questionnaire. The entire
process of interaction within the eSchool environment and questionnaire response lasted approximately an hour.
The questionnaire covered attitudinal responses to the software system, probed their perceptions of the colearner
character, if there was one present, and included a learning assessment metric with open-ended questions. These
latter questions are of particular interest for our evaluation, as we sought to differentiate a gain in understanding
and learning from rote memorization, recognition, and chance guesses, that plague typical recall multiple-choice
assessment instruments. Students were asked to fill in the blanks in 11 sentences using some of the colloquial
idioms covered in their interaction, completing grammatically correct sentences similar in meaning and structure
to those presented through the lessons. For example, one of the fill-in-the-blank questions was "How could you
believe what he said? He was just ________________." (The correct answer would be "pulling your leg".)

                                                            
    Before   analyzing     the  results,  two   preliminary  checks    were  conducted    to certify  the  study   results.  Given
concerns on the differential number of participants' by gender, a contingency-table Chi-square test was conducted
to determine that the gender did not have particular effects on the intervention results. The observed Chi-square
value  indicated  that the participants'     gender was    balanced  across  conditions   (2   (2) =  1.59, ns.)   Because   of the
importance placed on the learner's feelings of being supported and cared for in the literature and in our research-
based design, we included items on the questionnaire to validate our belief that our cooperative colearner was
perceived as such. The participant's ratings of the colearner characters as "cooperative," "warm," and "caring" on
a 10-point scale were compared based on an additive index of the three items. Because the control condition did
not feature a colearner character, it was excluded from this comparison.
    For   this manipulation      check, the participants in     "Cooperative Colearner" condition       (M=     6.04,  SD=   2.84)
rated their colearner as more cooperative than those who were in "No Emotion Colearner" condition (M= 3.12,
SD= 1.88), and the mean difference was statistically significant (with equal variances not assumed according to
the Levene test for equality of variances) t (43.46) = 4.38, p < 0.001. Second, with respect to the rating of the
colearner character being "warm", the mean score of those who participated in the idiom lesson in "Cooperative
Colearner"     condition   (M=     6.62,  SD=   2.48)   was  significantly   higher  than   the  participants   in "No    Emotion
Colearner" condition (M= 4.80, SD= 2.31), with equal variances assumed, t (49) = 2.70, p < 0.01. In addition,
the participants    in  "Cooperative     Colearner"  condition   gave   a significantly   rating   of the colearner   character  as
"caring" (M=      5.31, SD=     2.21)   than  those who    were  in  "No  Emotion     Colearner"    condition    (M=   3.38, SD=
1.86),  t (50)    =  3.40,   p  <  0.01.  From    this  analysis,   we  conclude  that   participants  accurately   perceived   the
substantial    differences   in  the treatment    variable, and   interpreted the   emotive     colearner  to   be "cooperative,"
"warm," and "caring," as designed in the "Cooperative Colearner" condition.
    Yet   as   characters  in   books,    theater and    television  demonstrate,   viewers     can   attribute  cooperation    and
friendliness   to performers     without    perceiving these   attributed feelings  as  directed to   themselves,   the  audience.
Therefore,   we   set  out to   ascertain that  the students   felt supported  by   the  colearner  throughout   the   interaction.
Since studying in a cooperative group leads to greater learning gains than individual or competitive conditions,
with  improvements       in  critical   thinking  skills (Stockdale     and  Williams,   2004;   Skon   et  al,  1981),   we were
interested in whether our cooperative colearner was perceived as cooperative with the participants when compared
with the unemotional colearner.
    As  feelings    of  support,   and   of  being  cared   for have    profound  effects   in  cognition,  emotion     and  even
physiology,     effects that   are particularly   relevant  in  educational  settings   where   motivation    is key   (Bickmore,
2005; Wentzel, 1997), an index of "feelings of being supported" was created based on three items ("Not Alone,"
"Praised," and "Supported"). The participant rated how well the given adjectives described their feelings during
their interaction with the colearner on a 10-point Likert scale: constructed to indicate that the higher the score,
the more emotional support experienced. A factor analysis showed that the three items were loaded on a single
factor, and the reliability test   also indicated that   the   index could   be  reliably used   (Cronbach       = 0.74).   Hence,
the "Cooperative      Colearner"   condition    (M=  6.04,   SD=    1.75) and   the "No   Emotion     Colearner"   condition (M=
3.90,  SD=     1.07)  were   contrasted   based  on an   independent    sample   t-test. The   result  (equal   variance  assumed
according    to   the  Levene     test)  revealed   that the    participants  in "Cooperative       Colearner"   condition   gave
significantly higher ratings in feelings of being supported, t (50) = 4.47, p < 0.001, as can be seen in Figure 5.
This result confirmed our prediction that the participants in "Cooperative Colearner" condition would experience
the feelings   of being    supported     to a greater  degree   than  those  who    participated   in the  idiom   lesson   with a
colearner  character    that  neither   uttered nor  showed     emotional    expressions.   Moreover,   feeling    supported    and
interacting with a cooperative colearner         also impacted significantly students' learning during the intervention.
    For the learning assessment, we concentrate on the eleven open-ended questions posed, as they signal a deep
dominion     of the    idiomatic   expressions    presented    interactively through    the  eSchool   lessons.    A  preliminary
analysis of the fill-in-the-blank responses led us to drop two questions due to misleading or confusing cues, as
more than 80 percent of the respondents used content outside the lesson to answer. Therefore, only the responses
to the  remaining     nine  open   ended    questions   were   used  in this  analysis.   Students    typed into   the  text-boxes
provided expressions that they believed would make the partial sentences presented sensible and grammatically
correct,  which   resulted    in   wide  variations  of  answer   format.   Each answer     to  the open-ended     questions    was
assessed on a five-point scale, which ranged from "0" (left blank or irrelevant) to "4" (perfect answer), so that the
maximum score possible in this section of the questionnaire was 36 points. Participants received partial points
depending      on   the number      of   grammatical     or spelling    mistakes    made    per  answer;    two    coders worked
independently on the data set to ensure reliability. As few participants received scores above 25 points or below
12, we considered this assessment measure to be of adequate difficulty for our sample population.

                                                                 
  scored)Mean scores (points
                                                                                                                  Index scores based on
                                                                                                                                        Likert scale items
                           Mean Scores on the fill-in-the-blank Idiom Questions                     Experience with and Perception of the                                                                    Cooperative
                                            per Condition                                                                                                        Colearner Agent                             Colearner
                                                                                                                                                                                                             No Emotion
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Colearner
                      36                                                                                                                                   10
                      30                                                                                                                                   8
                      24                                                                                                                                   6
                      18                                                                                                                                   4
                      12                                                                                                                                   2
                       6
                                                                                                                                                           0
                       0                                                                                                                                         Feelings of      Perceived      Trustworthiness
                              Cooperative      No Emotion        No Colearner                                                                                      Being          Intelligence
                               Colearner         Colearner         Present                                                                                       Supported

  Figure 4: Participants' mean scores on the fill-in-                                           Figure 5: t-test comparisons between "Cooperative
                                   the-blank questions.                                                                                                    Colearner" and "No Emotion Colearner"

                      When    participants'   scores   on   these   nine        items  were  compared                                                         across   the   three  conditions,      the   One-way
ANOVA test                       indicated that     the means differ significantly,            F  (2,                                                      63) = 4.80,   p   <   .05, 2_       = .13.  In  order             to
examine the differences more specifically, a post-hoc comparison was conducted using Scheffé test, one of the
most                   conservative       post-hoc    comparison    techniques.         The   result                                    showed                      that the     participants    in  "Cooperative
Colearner"                    condition    (M=    27.21,    SD=    8.03)        performed    significantly                                                       better  on  the   fill-in-the-blank     questions
compared to                     those     who  were   in   "No  Emotion         Colearner"   condition                                                        (M=   20.35,    SD=     9.97)    and  in the             control
"No Colearner Present" condition (M= 19.79, SD= 7.26), as can be seen in Figure 4.
                      For learning at least, it would seem that the mere appearance of an additional face does not trigger the same
level of motivation unless it expresses emotions. And interacting with an unemotional colearner also diminished
enjoyment of the system: in the attitudinal questionnaire participants filled out, six 10-point Likert scale items
probed                    their feelings   about    the    eSchool  environment.           Students                                     were                     asked   to  quantify    their    agreement               with
statements such as "I would recommend this software system to other people," and "I would use this software
again." The analysis of covariance of these items covering participant's impression of the system showed that
the participants felt it was significantly less enjoyable to work with the system in the "No Emotion Colearner"
condition, compared both to the "Cooperative Colearner" condition and the "No Colearner Present" condition
[F(1, 76) = 5.25, p < .03]
                      Participants in     the "No   Emotion      Colearner"        condition    also                                                       rated their  colearner     as less    trustworthy               and
intelligent than those in the "Cooperative Colearner" condition. Since credibility and intelligence are considered
key in persuasion and motivation, it should come as no surprise that these participants did not perform as well
in                    the post-experience     evaluation.      The  index         for measuring    the                                                        perceived  trustworthiness         of  the  colearner
character                   was  created   based    on   three  10-point        Likert  scale  items                                                       describing    the  colearner     character    ("Honest,"
"Sincere,"                    and  "Trustworthy").        A factor  analysis       demonstrated    that                                                       there was    a  single  factor     extracted,              and a
reliability test calculated revealed that the index could be considered as a                                                                                     reliable    measure     (Cronbach         =             0.82).
A  t-test                  revealed      that the   "Cooperative    Colearner"         condition   (M=                                                        5.72,  SD=      1.76)   and      the  "No    Emotion
Coleaner" condition (M= 4.28, SD= 1.88) that there was a significant difference between the conditions (equal
variance                   assumed       according  to     the Levene  test).       As  can    be seen                                                     in    Figure  5,   the  cooperative       colearner            was
perceived as more credible and trustworthy than the no-emotion colearner, t (49) = 2.28, p < 0.01.
                      In order to examine the perceived intelligence of the colearner character, an index, which consisted of three
10-point Likert scale items ("Smart," "Intelligent," and "Confident"), was created. A factor analysis showed that
a  single                  factor  could      be extracted     from the         three items,   and a                                                       reliability  test  calculated    for   the  three             items
demonstrated that the index                         could   be  used  as        a reliable measure                                      (Cronbach                        =    0.70).  When       the "Cooperative
Colearner" condition                       (M=    5.04,    SD=   1.93)     and     the "No   Emotion                                                        Colearner"   condition     (M=       3.90, SD=               1.07)
were compared, the t-test result (equal variance not assumed according to the Levene test) revealed that there was
a significant difference, as can be seen in Figure 5. The "Cooperative Colearner" character received significantly
higher ratings in terms of perceived intelligence, t (38.91) = 2.64, p < 0.05.

FUTURE                           DIRECTIONS
Now                    that   we know     colearners   ­   even  autonomous           ones   ­ can                                      impact                   students'       performance,     we   are             looking
forward                    to following       up this experimental    study        to  determine   other                                                      characteristics    of colearners      that may              also
contribute towards enjoyment of the experience and learning gains. An overarching goal is to find out if it will
be possible to design a colearner in the future that will maximize learning for every student it interacts with,
regardless of age, culture, subject matter, preferences, or personality traits. Perhaps such as super-colearner is not
feasible,                   yet  we would        be delighted    to shed          additional light                                      into                  the   characteristics   of    successful    dyads              in
academic environments, real or virtual. Through this new line of research with pedagogical characters we may be
able                   to  realize the    promise     of   personalized    learning     through    companions,                                                          recommending           a  combination                of

                                                                                         
colearner attributes to maximize enjoyment and achievement based on a short personality quiz and background
profile.
    There are many factors that difficult arranging and evaluating such matches in real-world classrooms: among
them,   students  social  networks     and   status differentials,    heterogeneity  of   student   responses   and    high  levels of
distractions.    Heterogeneous    groupings   in   classrooms    are  often   perceived   as detrimental   for  some    of  the group
members, whether in terms of racial and social tensions, smaller performance gains, and additional distractions,
among others (Carter and Jones, 1994). Yet in online teaching environments it may be possible to customize the
colearner to best fit the needs of every learner, and to progressively adapt should these change.
    Within   our   group   we   will   continue   to  explore    dimensions     of   the  colearner,    cautiously    controlling   for
interaction  effects   among      these.   We  are    already  planning    to  evaluate   four     of   these  dimensions     shortly:
personality   traits,  cross-cultural     comparisons,    effects     of other  types    of  social     banter beyond     cooperative
comments and of the colearner's performance. As a first step, we have continued strengthening and adding value
to our  eSchool    platform,   so  that    future experiments     will   examine   potential    matches   and   mismatches      of  the
colearner's personality traits with those of the participant. Earlier research has showed preferences for interactions
with characters whose personality matches the experiment participants' (Reeves and Nass, 1996), and we would
like to extend this research by evaluating whether students learn more when they are matched with the colearner
or mismatched, even if their enjoyment of the experience is diminished.
    A  second    direction   that we are very     interested  in pursuing     within our  cross-cultural   team    is  that  of cross-
cultural  comparisons.    As   the Third     International  Mathematics     and   Science    Study    (Stigler et  al, 1999)    videos
demonstrate, countries vary widely in their educational values and practices. While the experiment described
above showed remarkable gains in learning and enjoyment for the cooperative colearner, it is possible that these
results  are culturally-specific.   Given    the  strong   collectivism     of Japanese     society,    would  students    from  more
individualistic   cultures    respond    as  strongly  to  the   "Cooperative   Colearner" as      the   Japanese  students     in our
sample?
    A recent experimental study within our lab (Ju et al, 2005) seems to indicate that American students at least,
also  enjoy      interacting  with    cooperative     colearners  more     than    with   competitive     colearners.     Fourty-four
undergraduates participated in a follow-up to our pilot study, using a web-based prototype similar to eSchool in
their use of a colearner, avatar, and teacher. However, in this emulation of eSchool, the characters appeared on
screen next to the chalkboard as stick figures, completely scripted and devoid of facial expressions. Rather than
evaluating American idioms in a population immersed in their usage, this stick figure study focused on morse
code lessons, and reported promising results for exploring performance variations in the colearners. This was one
of the  directions   we   were originally    interested in    pursuing:    as with   student    dyads   (Carter  and   Jones,   1994),
participants  with   high-achieving     colearners    performed   significantly    better in this   study than    those paired     with
low achieving colearners. We are very interested in replicating these results, both those varying the colearner's
performance and social banter, and hope through this research to enrich the understanding of how the interaction
of these different characteristics of the colearners impact participants' learning and enjoyment. Seeking to build a
robust   corpus   of  characteristics     of colearners,   in    our  next   experiment      we    will explore    combinations     of
cooperative and competitive colearners with introverted and extroverted traits, to determine possible interactions
between these two characteristics.
    In terms of the cross-cultural direction, while the stick-figure study holds promise, rather than conducting
experiments in multiple worldwide sites to determine cultural preferences, we are looking at abstractions from
the rich  literature  of  the international   math    and science     education comparative     studies   (Stigler  et  al, 1999),  as
well as psychology and corporate training (Hofstede, 2003) to determine which aspects or dimensions of cultures
may be applicable to, and general enough for, our educational goals.

CONCLUSION
    The  experiment    reported in     this  paper, as  well   as those    we  hope  to   conduct     shortly,  have   three  inherent
limitations  that  we  would      like to  resolve  gradually.   Firstly,   a  one-time   interaction    may   show    an   immediate
spark  in the    learning gains   that  may   not  be  maintained.     We,  as designers     of promising      educational   software,
hope it is indicative of long-term learning and transfer, and would like to re-evaluate the students that interact
with  eSchool     in future   experiments     several  days   and     weeks  after the  initial  interaction,   to determine     these
potential   longer   term  learning    gains. Because     motivation      effects  can   impact    attainment,    we   are  also   very
interested in a longitudinal study, where students would interact through the eSchool environment for several
weeks, perhaps as part of a college course. If these interactions were voluntary for a sample of the subject
population, we could explore whether colearners make the system enticing enough for students to progress on
their own.
     Secondly, we are considering how to best expand the colearner paradigm to other domains where the social
aspect of our interactions with emotional characters can be leveraged, extending it beyond language learning. As
mentioned,    pedagogical     characters    have  been  successfully      deployed   in   middle    school    curricula applications
(Lester  et  al, 1997;   Moreno    et  al, 2000;  Biswas    et   al., 2004),  oral storytelling    (Kehoe  et  al, 2004),    corporate
training  (Extempo,      2004),   health   behavior   change     interventions  (Bickmore       et al,  2004),  and    even   military
instruction  (Johnson     et  al, 2004).     We   are eager   to explore    other  domains      where   characters    offer a   unique

                                                                  
advantage to traditional drill-and-practice software, motivating and entertaining students through their emotions
and  improvisational    behaviors.   We  hope   to replicate the  colearner effects as  we break-free  from  the  classroom
emulation into richer environments, where other interactive dimensions can be explored.
  Among the suggestive findings we report are the implications for characters beyond pedagogical domains.
Given the gains in enjoyment, credibility and perceptions of intelligence, character designers in domains where
these three  areas are  critical may  want   to consider   adding  a  cooperative   dimension    to their  characters. From
information kiosks to customer service representative, help and sales characters could all benefit from supporting
their clients through cooperative behaviors.
  Lastly, the world of pedagogical characters has rarely been as populated as in our application, yet we would
like to  explore   interactions  beyond   the   dyad,  as  well as those   where   the  user  is implicitly embodied.     By
evaluating  the  effects of the   avatar's presence    on  social  exchanges and      achievement   we hope    to grow    our
understanding of how colearners improve learning environments, and to translate those findings to applications
with  multiple  colearner  characters.  While   our  innovative   focus thus  far   has been  on   dyadic   interactions, the
educational  literature suggests   that small   group  learning  may  be  as productive,   if not  more.   Nowadays,   most
software platforms and applications are capable of handling several characters operating simultaneously, which
brings  closer  the potential    for future  evaluations   with   multiple   colearners.  We     welcome   the  challenge  of
replicating the achievement and enjoyment gains colearners bring without losing our human participants in the
virtual melee.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank everyone that made this collaboration possible through Media X at Stanford University, and everyone
who   was  involved    with the   design  and   implementation     of the   system    and  pilot  studies,  as  well   as the
Kozmetsky Global Collaboratory Research            Assistantship.  Among     them,  Professors   Roy   Pea, Byron    Reeves,
and  Terry  Winograd;    students  Wendy    Ju, Gary   Tan,  Elizabette Amaral;     administrators  Kathy   Lung   and  Joan
Ferguson from Stanford; Omron personnel, Shigeyasu Kawaji, Thomas Kurian, Ritsuko Nishide, Masaki Aarao,
Hideki Kunii, Tatsuke Tateishii, Yuriko Iwashita, and from eBase, Wataru Hasegawa and Keiko Hayashi.

REFERENCES
Aldrich,    C.      (2004)    Simulearn's       Virtual      Leader.    Retrieved       November       10,     2004    from
        http://www.simulearn.net/leadershiptraining.html
Argyle (1989). The social psychology of work. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Argyle (1991). Cooperation: The basics of sociability. New York: Routledge.
Baylor,  A.L.  (2004) Designing      pedagogical    agents to address diversity    in learning.  Proceedings   of the  Sixth
        International Conference of the Learning Sciences, 2004. Lawrence Earlbaum & Associates. Mahwah, NJ.
        p. 586
Bickmore,   T., Gruber,   A.,    and Picard, R.  (in  press)  Establishing  the Computer-Patient     Working    Alliance   in
        Automated Health Behavior Change         Interventions.   Patient  Education   and Counseling.
Biswas, G., Leelawong, K., Belynne, K., Viswanath, K., Vye, N., Schwartz, D., Davis, J. (2004) Incorporating
        Self Regulated Learning Techniques into Learning by Teaching Environments. The Twenty Sixth Annual
        Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, (Chicago, IL).
Carter, G., Jones, M. G. (1994) Relationship Between Ability-Paired Interactions and the Development of Fifth
        Grader's Concepts of Balance, Journal of Research in Science Teaching 31, 8, 847-856
Cassell, J.  and   Vilhjálmsson,     H. (1999).  Fully    Embodied   Conversational     Avatars:  Making    Communicative
        Behaviors Autonomous. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 2, 1, 45-64.
Clanton,   C.,  Ventrella,   J.   (2003)  Avatar-centric     Communication      in  There.   Presentation   at  the  People,
        Computers and Design seminar, Stanford University (April 4, 2003).
Deutsch, M. (1949). A theory of cooperation and competition, Human Relations, 2, 129-139.
DiPaola,  S.  (1999) Internet-based     Interactive Character   Design:  From   Agents    to  Avatars. Presentation    at the
        People, Computers and Design seminar, Stanford University (December 3, 1999).
Ekman, P. (1992) An argument for basic emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 6, 169-200.
Extempo Systems Inc (2004). Extempo Expert Agents - People Skills Workshop. Retrieved November 10, 2004
        from http://www.extempo.com.
Goodman,    B.,  Soller, A.,  Linton,   F.,  and   Gaimari,  R.  (1998) Encouraging     student  reflection and   articulation
        using a learning companion. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 9, 3-4.
Hayes-Roth,    B.,  Knodt  E.,   and Maldonado.     H. (2002)   Language    learning  with an    adaptive coach and  lifelike
        conversation   partners.  Computer      Assisted   Language   Instruction   Consortium      (CALICO)    Courseware
        Showcase. March 28, 2002: University of California at Davis, CA.
Hayes-Roth, B., Maldonado H., and Moraes M. (2002) Designing for diversity: Multi-cultural characters for a
        multi-cultural world. Proceedings of IMAGINA 2000 (Monte Carlo, Monaco). 207-225.
Hofstede,  G.  (2001)   Culture's  Consequences:     Comparing     Values,   Behaviors,   Institutions and   Organizations
        Across Nations, SAGE Publications.

                                                              
Kehoe,   C., Cassell,  J., Goldman,    S., Dai,   J., Gouldstone,     I., MacLeod,     S.,  O'Day,  T., Pandolfo,   A.,  Ryokai,
        K.,  Wang,   A. (2004)   Sam    Goes   to School:    Story    Listening  Systems    in  the Classroom.    In    Kafai,  Y.,
        Saldoval,   W.,    Enyedy,    N.,  Nixon,     A.S.,  Herrera,     F. (Eds.)   Embracing     Diversity  in the   Learning
        Sciences: Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2004), 613.
        Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson,    W.  L., Choi,  S., Marsella,   S., Mote,   N.,  Narayanan,    S.,  Vilhjálmsson,    H.  (2004).   Tactical  Language
        Training    System:    Supporting    the    Rapid    Acquisition     of  Foreign    Language     and   Cultural     Skills.
        Proceedings of InSTIL/ICALL-NLP and Speech Technologies in Advanced Language Learning Systems,
        June 17-19, Venice, Italy.
Ju, W., Nickell, S., Eng, K., Nass, C. (2004) Influence of Colearning Agent Behavior on Learner Performance
        and Attitudes. Extended Abstracts of CHI 2005. ACM Press: Portland, OR.
Lester,  J. C., Convers,   S.  A., Kahler,  S. E.,  Barlow,     S. T., Stone,   B. A., &    Bhogal,  R. S.  (1997)  The    persona
        effect: Affective impact of animated pedagogical agents. Proceedings of CHI `97, ACM Press: Atlanta,
        GA. 359-366.
Maldonado,      H.,  Picard,   A.,    Doyle,    P.,   Hayes-Roth,      B.     (1998)   Tigrito:    A    multi-mode      interactive
        improvisational    agent.  Proceedings    of   the  International    Conference    on  Intelligent  User  Interfaces   `98,
        ACM Press, 29-32.
Maldonado, H., A. Picard, and B. Hayes-Roth (1998) Tigrito: A high affect virtual toy. Summary of CHI '98
        (Los Angeles, CA), ACM Press. 367-368
Maldonado,    H. and  Hayes-Roth,     B.   (2004)   Toward   Cross-Cultural     Believability   in  Character  Design.   In  Payr,
        S. and Trappl, R. (Eds.). Agent culture: Designing virtual characters for a multi-cultural world, 7, 143-
        175. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
Moreno, R. and Mayer R.E. (2000). Pedagogical agents in constructivist multimedia environments: The role of
        image   and  language   in  the   instructional  communication.       American     Educational     Research   Association
        Annual Meeting (New Orleans, LA, 2000).
Morishima,   Y., Nakajima,     H., Brave,  S.,  Yamada,     R., Maldonado,      H.,   Nass, C., Kawaji,    S.  (2004) The Role
        of  Affect and  Sociality  in  the Agent-Based      Collaborative     Learning  System.     In  E. Andre,   et  al. (Eds).
        Affective Dialog Systems: Tutorial and Research Workshop (ADS2004). Springer-Verlag New York Inc.:
        New York, NY. 265-275.
Nakajima,    H. Morishima,     Y., Brave,  S., Yamada,      R., Maldonado,      H.,   Nass, C., Arao,   M.,   Kawaji,   S.  (2004)
        Toward   an  Actualization    of  Social  Intelligence     in  Human    and    Robot   Collaborative    Systems.    Paper
        presented at the IROS 2004, IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems on
      Oct 2, 2004
Nass, C.     and Najmi,    S.  (2003)     Race  vs.   culture   in  computer-based      agents  and    users:  Implications     for
        internationalizing websites. Stanford University: Stanford, CA.
Reeves,  B.  and Nass   C.  (1996)    The  media  equation:     How    people  treat  computers,   televisions,  and  new   media
        like real people and places. 1996, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Reeves,  B.  (2001)   Conversational      agents  online:   Automating       human  social  intelligence   in web transactions.
        Invited talk, Symbolic Systems Forum, Stanford University, CA. (November 15, 2001).
Shinozawa, K., Reeves, B., Wise, K., Lim, S., Maldonado, H. (2003) Robots as New Media: A Cross-Cultural
        Examination of Social and Cognitive Responses to Robotic and On-Screen Agents. Proceedings of the
        53rd    Annual  Conference      of  the   International    Communication          Association,    Information    Systems
        Division. San Diego, CA. 998-1002.
Skon, L., Johnson, D.W., & Johnson, R. (1981). Cooperative peer interaction versus individual competition and
        individualistic efforts: Effects on the acquisition of cognitive reasoning strategies. Journal of Educational
        Psychology, 73, 83-92.
Stigler, J., Gonzalez,  P.,    Kawanaka,   T.,  Knoll,   S., and   Serrano,   A.   (1999)   The TIMSS      Videotape Classroom
        Study:   Methods    and  Findings   from      an Exploratory      Research    Project  on   Eighth-Grade    Mathematics
        Instruction in Germany, Japan, and the United States. National Center for Educational Statistics, Office
        of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Dept. of Education.
Stockdale,   S. and  Williams,     R. (2004)   Cooperative    learning    groups   at the  college level:  differential effects on
        high, average, and low exam performers. Journal of Behavioral Education, 13, 1, 37-50.
Taylor, R. (Ed) (1980) The computer in school: tutor, tool, tutee. Teachers College Press, New York, NY.
Thomas, F. and O. Johnston (1981) The illusion of life: Disney animation. New York: Hyperion Books.
Wentzel, K. (1997) Student Motivation in Middle School: The Role of Perceived Pedagogical Caring. Journal
        of Educational Psychology, 89, 3, 411-419.
Wright,  W.  (2003)   Design   lessons    from The    Sims   and   SimCity    titles. Presentation   at the   People, Computers
        and Design seminar, Stanford University (May 2, 2003).
Zajonc, R.B. (1965). Social facilitation. Science, 149, 256-268.

                                                                
