                 Cognitive                 Tutoring               of    Collaboration:
                 Developmental                           and       Empirical                 Steps
                                     Towards               Realization

Bruce M. McLaren*, Lars Bollen+, Erin Walker*, Andreas Harrer+, Jonathan Sewall*

             *Human-Computer Interaction Institute                                  +Collide Research Group
                      Carnegie Mellon University                                    University Duisburg-Essen
                        Pittsburgh, PA         USA                                       Duisburg, Germany
                       bmclaren@cs.cmu.edu,                                              harrer@collide.info,
         erinwalk@andrew.cmu.edu, sewall@cs.cmu.edu                                      bollen@collide.info

       Abstract.   In this  paper,  we  describe  developmental     and  empirical     steps we  have  taken  toward
       providing Cognitive Tutoring to students within a collaborative software environment.                 We have
       taken   two important   steps toward    realizing this goal.   First, we   have   integrated  a  collaborative
       software  tool, Cool    Modes,  with  software    designed  to develop  Cognitive     Tutors  (the  Cognitive
       Tutor Authoring Tool).      Our initial integration does not provide tutoring per se but rather acts as       a
       means to capture data that provides the beginnings of a tutor for collaboration. Second, we have
       performed an initial study in which dyads of students used our software to collaborate in solving a
       classification / composition problem. This study uncovered five dimensions of analysis that our
       approach  must   use  to help   us  better understand    student collaborative    behavior   and  lead   to the
       eventual development of a Cognitive Tutor for collaboration.          We discuss     our plans to  incorporate
       such analysis into our approach and to run further studies.

       Keywords:    Collaborative    learning, Cognitive   Tutors,    jigsaw design,    spatial effects  on  problem
       solving

INTRODUCTION
Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) have long been used to provide one-on-one (machine-to-student) instruction
(Wenger 1987).     We are interested, however, in using a software tutor to instruct multiple students collaborating
on a  single problem.  There    have   been steps  toward  providing    tutoring    in a collaborative   environment    (e.g.,
Goodman et al. 2003; Suthers 2003; Lesgold et al. 1992), but many difficult challenges remain.                  For instance,
the space of possible actions among collaborating users is huge for even the simplest of problems, thus making
the analysis of learner behavior much more difficult for collaborative tasks than for the single-student case.
   As   a step  toward  addressing   the  complexities   of   a collaborative  environment,      we  have    created a  tutor-
development methodology that leverages actual problem-solving data not only to guide ITS design, as has been
done  in  past work  (e.g., Koedinger   and  Terao,  2002),   but  also to contribute    directly to  tutor  implementation
(McLaren et al. 2004a; McLaren et al. 2004b).        Using    this approach,  called   bootstrapping    novice  data   (BND),
groups of collaborating students attempt to solve problems with a computer-based tool.                While they work, the
system records their actions in a graphical representation that combines all of the groups' solutions into a single
graph  that  can be  used   as the  basis  for building  a  tutor  and  analyzing   the  collaboration.    Our  initial BND
implementation is realized through the integration of a collaborative modeling tool, Cool Modes (Collaborative
Open   Learning  and  MODEling      System)    (Pinkwart  2003),   and  a  tutor authoring    environment,    the   Cognitive
Tutor Authoring Tools (CTAT) (Koedinger et al. 2004).
   Our ultimate research aim is to develop better support for collaborative learning through cognitive tutoring.
In this paper, we describe two steps we have taken toward realizing this ambition: (1) an initial implementation
of the BND methodology and (2) a study using the BND approach, including the results and the implications
for further development of the methodology. The study we have performed reveals some interesting aspects of
the way dyads solved a particular collaborative problem. More importantly, it has pointed us in the direction of
improving   our  implementation     of the  BND   methodology      and  realizing   cognitive   tutoring  in  a collaborative
environment.
   In our initial implementation of the BND methodology, depicted in Figure 1, Cool Modes (shown on the
left) provides the  graphical  user interface, including  a   shared workspace   that   all  collaborators in a  session  can
view  and   update, a  palette  with   objects that users  can  drag  onto   the workspace,     a chat  area,   and  a  private
workspace.     Cool  Modes sends     messages about      students' actions   (e.g., "create   an  IS-A   link")  to  CTAT's

                                                            
Behavior Recorder (also referred to as the "BR" and shown on the right of Figure 1), which stores the actions in
a behavior graph. Edges in the graph represent student actions and paths through the graph represent attempted
solutions to the problem.     The  current approach     keeps track  of  the   number  of times  actions are   taken  by  the
various collaborating groups and presents these "traversal counts"         on   the edges of   the behavior  graph,   e.g., 3
student dyads took the action from the "start state" Classification-Composition to State1.           Using CTAT,      a tutor
author can subsequently transform the generated behavior graph into a Pseudo Tutor, or problem-specific tutor
(Koedinger et al. 2004), by adding or deleting edges, labeling correct or buggy behavior, and adding hints to the
edges.  To use the finished graph as a tutor, the BR         is  switched    to  "model-tracing"   mode  in  which   student
actions are compared to the graph, instead of recorded, and error messages and hints are delivered to the student.
While our ultimate aim is use this approach to provide cognitive tutoring within Cool Modes, as well as other
collaborative environments,    our    initial focus is  somewhat     more  modest:    We  want  to  analyze   data that  was
collected using the BND methodology to help us better understand both collaborative behavior and how we can
enhance the BND    methodology     to provide more useful    analysis of that   behavior.  The  preliminary   study  that we
have performed is an example of such an analysis.

Figure 1: The student's view of the integrated Cool Modes (left) and the Behavior Recorder (right) environment.
This shared Cool Modes workspace is from a vehicle classification / composition task that was completed by a
    dyad of collaborating students. The behavior graph at right shows the amalgamated solutions of different
                                              collaborating groups of students.

DESCRIPTION            OF     THE     STUDY
The  research question  in    the  preliminary    study was   whether,     in  a graphical  problem-solving    domain,      an
organized arrangement      of objects  leads   to  quicker   and  better   collaborative  solutions  than   a  disorganized
arrangement. We also wondered whether student rearrangement of the objects facilitates quicker and better results
and how this rearrangement might be conducted in a collaborative scenario. To explore these questions and test
how the BND methodology might be a useful analysis tool, we assigned 16 students to 8 dyads and asked each
dyad to solve   an object-modeling    problem    using  the  Cool Modes      / BR   integrated system  (one   subject was   a
class assistant). The objects in the given problem were vehicles (e.g., "Car") and parts        of  vehicles  (e.g., "Tire").
The student dyads were asked to relate the objects using classification and composition links. The students were
volunteers from a "Modeling Techniques in Computer Science" course at the University of Duisburg, Germany.
Seven  of the students  (pairs  6, 7,  8 and   one  in  pair 5)  had had   previous    experience  with  Cool  Modes.     All
students received approximately 5 minutes of instruction on how to use the system before the experiment. The
student pairs worked at separate workstations, back-to-back in the same room. They shared a single Cool Modes
workspace.
    To  specify   IS-A (i.e.,  classification)  and  PART-OF      (i.e.,   composition)   links    between  objects   in  the
workspace, the    students used   the Unified   Modeling   Language,     a graphical   modeling    technique.  To  stimulate
collaboration we   used an    unequal  resources    design  akin  to jigsaw     experiments (Aronson    et al. 1978).    One
student was provided with IS-A links only and one with PART-OF links only, so that no student could solve
the problem   alone.   Students    communicated      by    typing statements      into a   chat  box.    The    only   other

                                                             
communication permitted was the actual composition and repositioning steps taken by the students in the shared
workspace.
    The  8  groups   were randomly     assigned   to  two  experimental    conditions.   In  Condition  1,   pairs attempted    to
solve a problem in which related objects were close to one another, providing an organized visual display of the
final network. For example, the two abstract classes "Vehicle" and "Vehicle Part" were located near the top of the
visual space, and most of the subclasses were located near their respective super classes.              In Condition 2, pairs
solved   a  problem  for  which    the  objects  were    positioned   in the   workspace    without  any   clear   organizational
principle.

STUDY       RESULTS           AND      ANALY S I S
All 8 dyads completed the task. Students' solutions can be divided into three categories: good solutions (groups
5 and 8), incomplete solutions (groups 2, 6, and 7), and poor solutions (groups 1, 3, and 4).                    All three poor
solutions   were  in the  disorganized    condition,     and  two   of  the  incomplete   solutions    were   in   the   organized
condition.  While    one  of  the  good   solutions    was   in  the organized    condition,  one   was    in the  disorganized
condition.  There were    negligible   differences    in the  time   required  to  complete   the task    between  the   different
solution   categories. The  informal    results suggested     that a clearly organized   problem    state does   not   necessarily
lead to quicker and better solutions than a disorganized problem state, but does lead to different types of errors.
It is of   course impossible    to  draw   statistical   conclusions   about   the relationship   between    the  solutions    and
starting conditions    with such   a small    sample   size, but   we  nevertheless  have    made   some   interesting   informal
findings.   We now describe those findings.
    The  conceptual    distinctions    between   good,     incomplete,   and   poor   solutions   were  related    to  the  errors
committed     in  solving   the classification    /   composition     problem.    In the    good  solutions,     errors  reflected
misunderstandings      about   the meaning      of  classes.  Otherwise,     students  correctly    divided   the  objects     into
subclasses  and   super   classes  and  correctly   placed   the   inheritance and   composition    edges.   In  the  incomplete
solutions, students only connected one inheritance or composition link from each class. As a result, they had too
few links, and left out key relationships. In the poor solutions, students would often connect a class to multiple
ancestor nodes of the same lineage. For example, in Group 3, students connected "Car" to both "MotorVehicle"
and "Vehicle." The poor solution groups also typically created too many edges and were logically inconsistent
about the connection decisions they made.
    Solutions can also be characterized by the way students tended to move nodes in the shared workspace. In
the good solutions, the students separated the two abstract classes, placing one at the top of the workspace and
the other   at the bottom.      IS-A and PART-OF           links  flowed in    opposite directions    and  crossed    only  when
necessary. Objects were organized in rows that reflected their level of abstraction. In the incomplete solutions,
the two abstract classes were placed relatively close to one another, all links pointed in one direction, and there
were  no crossed   links. The   objects   tended   to be clustered   together  and   were organized   into fewer   rows    than in
the good solutions, but the rationale behind the organization wasn't as clear.            Finally, the poor   solutions   had  the
abstract classes positioned without an obvious rationale. They had much longer edges pointing in all directions
and   frequently  intersecting  with   one another.      As   a result,  the poor  groups    tended  to   use the  entire   shared
workspace.
    We   then  analyzed   the processes   associated   with   the  development    of each   solution.  While    working     on the
problem, students could take three types of actions: chat actions, "talking" to a partner in a chat window, move
actions,   repositioning  an  object   in the   shared   workspace,    and   creation/deletion  actions,   creating   or deleting
edges. Solution types showed differences in collaborative and task-oriented behavior.               In terms of collaboration,
the students   with  the  good    solutions   had   different   approaches.  Group   8   worked   completely     collaboratively.
Members would take turns moving and creating objects and for a given group of objects, one member would
reposition  objects  while    the  other  would     create the   edges.  Conversely,     the  members     of  Group    5   worked
completely in parallel, coordinating their actions only to correct their partner's mistakes. In the incomplete and
poor groups, pair members shared the work.          The poor groups were informal in        their turn  taking,  while   students
in the incomplete groups would alternate taking the initiative. With the exception of Group 5, groups decided on
their actions using the chat window and ensured that both members agreed on the actions being taken.
    The  three solution   groups   coordinated   phases    of chatting,  moving,   and   creating/deleting    differently.  In the
good  solutions,   the approaches    of  two  pairs   were dissimilar.   Group  8  collaborated   by  alternating  chat    phases,
move   phases,   and   creation/deletion   phases.    Group   5   alternated between    move    phases    and   creation/deletion
phases, and primarily communicated visually. In both groups, adjacent phases referred to the same objects and
levels of abstractions, displaying a coherent problem-solving strategy. Both pairs were the only groups to have
more move actions than chat actions.       The incomplete groups had         fewer move actions, longer phases        of chatting,
and   fewer deletions. They    adopted    the inefficient  strategy  of  discussing  many    future actions,  creating   a  single
edge, and then repeating the discussion.        On the other hand, they would consistently reorganize objects before
creating edges, which may have contributed to the tree-like organization of the classes.            The poor groups      engaged
in long  phases   of chatting   or moving,    but   showed    less coherence   between    the objects   they  were    discussing,
objects  they  were  creating,  and  objects  they    were moving.      They   deleted a  lot of  edges   and   tended   to create
particular edges before repositioning them.           This   disorganized    approach  probably   led   to the   conceptual    and

                                                                
visual disorganization   of their final solutions. Another difference     was in terms    of the selection   of    objects: Both
the good and the incomplete solutions would focus on objects based on their level of abstraction; they would
manipulate a given superclass and all its subclasses, and then move on to another group of objects. On the other
hand, students in the poor solutions appeared to let the problem organization guide their actions. They would
draw edges based on classes that were close to one other in the shared workspace, rather than classes that were
semantically related. Differences in object selection probably related to differences in the consistency of the final
solutions.
   These results indicate that we should focus on five elements when evaluating students' performance (at least
on this particular task): conceptual understanding, visual organization, task coherence, task coordination, and
task selection, (see Table 1).      These elements were chosen because they represent different relevant aspects of
student action that appeared to inform groups' solutions. Students within each solution type (good, incomplete,
and poor) tended to make the same types of mistakes within each of these categories.
   Conceptual understanding refers to a pair's ability to correctly place the inheritance and composition edges,
while  visual organization   refers  to a pair's ability to visually   arrange   the  classes and   edges    in  an appropriate
manner.   These two  elements   are  linked;   conceptual   understanding     of  the problem    was   often    reflected in  the
visual organization, and therefore conceptual steps tended to parallel organizational steps.           For  example,    students
in the incomplete solution groups appeared to believe that they could create only one inheritance or composition
link extending from each object, and their solutions thus tended to take on rigid tree structures.

                 Conceptual                Visual           Task Coherence        Task    Coordination       Task Selection
                Understanding           Organization
Good          Translation           Based on             Adjacent   phases        Balanced phases and      Based on
Solutions     mistakes              abstractions         referred to the same     work    distribution     abstractions
                                                         objects

Incomplete    Overly restricted     Based on a rigid,    Chat phases referred     Strict  turn-taking      Based on
Solutions     definition of  super  tree-like structure  to far more objects      and overly long chat     abstractions
              class / subclass                           than   subsequent        phases
              relationships                              phases

Poor          Inconsistent          Disorganized         Little                   More informal turn       Based on
Solutions     definition of  super                       correspondence           taking  and overly       proximity
              class / subclass                           between selected         long   phases
              relationships                              objects in  adjacent     (particularly of
                                                         phases                   deletion)

                                   Table 1: Solution Types and Elements of Analysis
   Task   coherence,   task  coordination,  and   task  selection   reflect student   strategies   for    collaborating   on  the
problem.   Task  coordination   refers  to skills  in   coordinating   actions,   without  reference   to  the   content  of  the
actions. It includes distributing the work among group members, and spending appropriate amounts of time in
each phase.   The  good   groups    exhibited  successful   task coordination,    in  part  because    they  spent  more     time
moving objects than talking about them.        Task  coherence refers to    the  appropriateness of    the  content  of   student
actions.  Students  in   the incomplete    groups  showed    poor   task coherence    by  chatting     at length   about    many
different links and  then   creating a  single link.  Task  selection  refers  to a  student's  ability   to set   subgoals   for
solving the problem by drawing edges between classes in a sensible order. A breakdown in task selection leads
to disorganized  and   incoherent   solutions, as  seen  in the  poor  group.   These  three  skills   should   be  assessed  by
looking at the problem-solving process.

IMPLICATIONS                 FOR        IMPROVING               THE         BND        METHODOLOGY                        AND
CONCLUSIONS
One of the key goals of this study was to determine how to enhance the BND methodology to provide more
helpful data and analysis.   In theory, the BR should be able       to facilitate analysis   of all the   skills from Table   1.
However, these five  elements   are  not   supported  in the  current  BR,   making    it difficult to    classify behavior  and
provide tutoring support.    In an attempt to produce convergent       paths  in  the behavior   graphs,   we    restricted input
to the BR to creation and deletion actions. Unfortunately, analyzing creation and deletion appears too limited to
be useful. Although    the   BR    records sequences    of  actions at a  single  level   of  generality,   the  nature   of this
problem indicates that student skills at different levels of abstraction need to be addressed, and the BR needs to
be able to create hierarchies of behavior graphs.
   We intend    to  address    this  problem   by  modifying     the   BR   to  support   recording    at  different  levels  of
abstraction. Single chat, move, or creation/deletion actions, made by a particular user and referring to a particular
object, are at the lowest level of abstraction. Separate behavior paths can be generated for the creation/deletion
and move   actions,  and  used  for  analyzing   the  conceptual  understanding      and  visual organization.      The   middle
level of abstraction involves the analysis of phases of action, or chains of the same type of action, and can deal

                                                             
with task  coherence   and  task coordination. The    highest  abstraction   level addresses  sequences   of  phases,  or the
characteristics of the current phase in relation to previous and    subsequent   phases.   Skills related  to task  selection
will be evaluated and supported at this level. An approach to classifying actions and action sequences in Cool
Modes has been described in Harrer and Bollen (2004), and can be used to process actions at different levels of
abstraction.
   Given these changes, we       believe  the  modified    BR     will be  a   much   more    effective tool  for   analyzing
collaboration  and   providing   tutoring support  in  future  experiments.     Besides   the preliminary  study    we   have
already performed, we plan to perform two more experiments in the near term. In these studies, we will test how
students collaborate to solve a Petri Net problem. We wish to determine how well the five elements of analysis
we have uncovered generalize to other graphical collaboration tasks and to less structured problems.                We then
intend to enhance the BND methodology to allow us to compare and classify student problem solving strategies.
The  resulting annotated behavior    graphs  will provide     the  basis for cognitive    tutor  development    within  Cool
Modes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We  thank   Ken  Koedinger   who  was responsible     for bringing   us  all together  and   for some   of the  early   ideas.
Partial support  was   provided   by  Deutsche    Forschungsgemeinschaft        (DFG)     and   Kaleidoscope    "Network   of
Excellence" (IST-507838).

REFERENCES
Aronson, E., Blaney, N., Stephin, C., Sikes, J., & Snapp, M (1978). The Jigsaw Classroom. Sage Publishing
        Company. Beverly Hills, CA.
Bollen,  L,  Harrer, A.,   & Hoppe,  U.   (2004). An   Integrated    Approach   for   Analysis-Based    Report  Generation.
        Proceedings of Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT 2004), IEEE Press, Los Alamitos, CA, USA,
        pp. 1094-1095.
Goodman, B., Hitzeman, J., Linton, F., & Ross, H. (2003)           Towards Intelligent Agents for Collaborative
        Learning: Recognizing the Role of Dialogue Participants. In Proceedings of the International Conference
        on AI in Education.
Harrer, A.  &  Bollen,   L.  (2004)  Klassifizierung  und     Analyse  von   Aktionen   in   Modellierungswerkzeugen      zur
        Lernerunterstützung. In Workshop-Proceedings Modellierung 2004 . Marburg, 2004.
Koedinger, K. R., Aleven, V., Heffernan, N., McLaren, B. M., & Hockenberry, M. (2004) Opening the Door to
        Non-Programmers:     Authoring    Intelligent Tutor    Behavior   by   Demonstration.     In Proceedings     of  ITS,
        Maceio, Brazil, 2004.
Koedinger,   K.  R.  &   Terao,  A.  (2002)  A cognitive      task analysis  of using   pictures  to support    pre-algebraic
        reasoning.  In C.   D. Schunn     & W. Gray    (Eds.),    Proceedings   of  the 24th   Annual   Conference    of  the
        Cognitive Science Society, 542-547.
Lesgold, A.,   Katz,   S., Greenberg, L.,   Hughes,    E., &   Eggan,    G.  (1992)   Extensions   of   Intelligent Tutoring
        Paradigms to Support Collaborative Learning. In S. Dijkstra, H. Krammer, & J. van Merrienboer (Eds.),
        Instructional Models in Computer-Based Learning Environments. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 291-311.
McLaren, B.    M.,   Koedinger, K.   R.,  Schneider, M.,   Harrer, A.,   &   Bollen,  L.   (2004a)   Bootstrapping    Novice
        Data:  Semi-Automated     Tutor   Authoring   Using    Student   Log   Files; Proceedings    of  the  Workshop    on
        Analyzing Student-Tutor Interaction Logs to Improve Educational Outcomes, ITS 2004
McLaren,    B. M.,   Koedinger,   K. R.,    Schneider, M.,    Harrer,  A.,   &  Bollen,   L.  (2004b)   Toward     Cognitive
        Tutoring in  a Collaborative,     Web-Based   Environment;       Proceedings   of  the   Workshop    of AHCW      04,
        Munich, Germany, July 2004.
Pinkwart, N. (2003) A Plug-In Architecture for Graph Based Collaborative Modeling Systems. In U. Hoppe, F.
        Verdejo & J. Kay (eds.): Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, 535-
        536.
Suthers, D.   D. (2003).   Representational  Guidance     for Collaborative  Learning.    In the Proceedings    of  Artificial
        Intelligence in Education (AIED-03), IOS Press, Amsterdam.
Wenger, E. (1987) Artificial Intelligence and Tutoring Systems.          Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.

                                                            
