 Animal Companions as Motivators for Teammates
                             Helping Each Other Learn

                        Zhi-Hong Chen                                  Yi-Chan Deng
          Department of Computer Science &                 Department of Computer Science &
            Information Engineering, National               Information Engineering, National
                 Central University, Taiwan                     Central University, Taiwan
                       hon@lst.ncu.edu.tw                        ycdeng@lst.ncu.edu.tw
                       Chih-Yueh Chou                                 Tak-Wai Chan
          Department of Computer Science and               Center for Science and Technology of
               Engineering, Yuan Ze University,                 Learning, National Central
                             Taiwan                                 University, Taiwan
                 cychou@saturn.yzu.edu.tw                          chan@cl.ncu.edu.tw

     Abstract. This paper describes and discusses the design rationales of a system called My-Pet-Our-
     Pet    that intends  to realize an approach to   using simulated animal companions  to encourage
     students to help each other learn. A class of students is divided into several teams. Every student
     keeps her own individual animal companion, called My-Pet. An important component of animal
     companion is the student model of its master that supports self-reflection in different perspectives.
     Also, every team has a team animal companion, called Our-Pet, being kept by all the members of
     the team collaboratively. Our-Pet has a collective student model composed by all the student
     models of the team members. The design of Our-Pet help set a team goal through participating a
     competition game among Our-Pets of different teams, support collective reflections among team
     members, and shed light for the team how to help each other. We are currently conducting an
     experimental trail of the system in an elementary school where every student in the class has a
     Tablet PC.

     Keywords: Learning companion, team animal companion, student model, active student model,
     open student model

BACKGROUND
With the development and advance in computer and information technology, computer supported collaborative
learning (CSCL) environments bring more opportunities to foster communication and interactions in the social
learning settings. Two kinds of approaches to realizing the CSCL environment: computers simulate intelligent
agents to interact with learners, and computers provide smart tools or environments to foster social interactions
among learners. A typical example of the former approach is the learning companion system in which the
computer simulates two agents, a learning companion and a teacher, so that the user student can collaborate with
the learning companion under the supervision of the teacher (Chan & Baskin, 1988, 1990). Chan (1996) also
suggested that the student model can be used in different ways, other than hiding behind the student as an
internal component inside the ITS. An example for this is the four animal companions that play different roles
collaborator, troublemaker, peer tutor, and tutee ­ based on the variations of student models interacting with
learners to    benefit learning (Chang  et al.,1999). One   way to use student model is to  make it open      or
"inspectable" to the student for provoking self-reflection (Self, 1988; Kay, 1997; Bull, 1998; Bull, 2004) and
later some researchers have been working on this direction. PHelpS system is an example that provides smart
tools and environments to enhance social interactions among peer learners based on their student models (Greer
el al., 1998).
  Animal companions are simulated pets to be taken care by students who have to learn in order to earn the pet
food. In our previous study of a simpler version of animal companion, My-Pet, (Chen et al., 2001, Chen et al.,
2002; Chen et al., 2003) which was implemented in EduCities (Chan et al., 2001; Chang et al., 2003), we found
that students demonstrated compassion and affection towards their pets, like Tamagochi (Webster, 1998; Pesce,
2000). For example, they expressed numerous feelings by emotional words on a discussion forum to show their
care and concern about their pets. Because of these affective factors, students showed strong willingness of

                                                          
learning in the process of taking care of the pets (Chen et al., 2004). By the same reason, some students kept
their My-Pets for a long time, about 5 percent of them for more than a year. After that study, in addition to
improving My-Pet, we add Our-Pet in the system in order to promote positive interactions and helpful behaviors
among teammates.

My-Pet
A student participates in learning activities to get resources such as foods and tools, so that the student can feed
her My-Pet and play with My-Pet in many mini-games. My-Pet includes an important component, its master's
student   model, which   is externally represented to  the student   by the attributes   of My-Pet.  Currently,   the
representation of this student model is a simple one. However, it includes cognitive, social, and emotional
domains   and  there are a  few attributes representing   each domain.  While  the    student is  aware  of  her low
academic performance on the cognitive domain by viewing the domain representation of her My-Pet, the student
then participates more in learning activities. Similarly, when the student perceives her poor social performance,
the student, to demonstrate her positive social behavior, may assist her teammates in learning to demonstrate her
positive social behaviors. Figure 1 shows a student viewing the internal representation of multiple domains in
My-Pet to reflect.
  My-Pet plays three roles: a motivator, a reflector, and a sustainer. First, based on the human attachments to
real pets (Melson, 2001), the strategy of learning by taking care of an animal companion triggers a student's
emotional  engagement    and  involvement  in  learning activities. The good  will   for My-Pet   is the  cause  and
learning is the effect. Although this initial motivation for learning is not for the purpose of learning itself,
however, if the student later finds that the required learning is an intriguing and rewarding experience, this
initial motivation may   change  qualitatively to motivation   in learning  itself. Second,  self-reflection through
viewing the domain representation of My-Pet, which is essentially the student model of the student herself in
different domain, can help the student look at herself from different perspectives, and hence understand herself
better or enhance her self-awareness. Third, pet keeping is a regular and long-term activity. With appropriate
reinforcement, the system may be able to sustain some desired student behaviors and then to become a habit.
  Our current version of the student model is a simple one but the framework offers flexibility for future
extension and sophistication. The attributes of the cognitive domain include "what have learned", which is a
record of what topics the student supposes to have learned, "degree of understanding" of concepts involved in a
topic, "mastery level" of a topic, "overall performance", and so on. The attributes of emotional domain currently
include "confidence" and "interest". Confidence is evaluated by the rate of successes in answering questions
correctly or solving problems of a topic and that "interest" is determined by the frequency the student involved
in learning activities of a topic after class or even if the student is not asked to do so. The attributes of social
domain consist of "reminding" and "helping", which represent the student's collaborativeness. We use honor
system, that is, the student reports to My-Pet how many times each time she "reminds" or "helps" her teammates
to learn.

                                  Figure 1. Student viewing My-Pet to reflect

Our-Pet
A class of students is divided into 4-children teams and each team takes care a team animal companion, called
Our-Pet. As illustrated in Figure 2, a team's Our-Pet will interact with other teams' Our-Pets. An important
component of Our-Pet that largely governs the behaviors of Our-Pet is a collective student model, with attribute
values   based on  those in  student   models  of all the  team   members.  As this    collective student   model  is
"inspectable" by all members, it thus serves as a vehicle for promoting solidarity and collaborative behaviors of
the team. In cognitive domain, there are four kinds of attribute values in that domain for each topic, namely,

                                                         
"minimum", "maximum", "average", and "variance" of all team members' attribute values of cognitive domain
in the same topic. For example, "mastery level" of a certain topic is an attribute in the cognitive domain. Our-
Pet's mastery value if adopts minimum, that means its mastery value is represented by the value of weakest team
member. As all team members can view this value, other members will then naturally be urged to "help" or
"remind" the weakest member to do more remedial work. If it adopts maximum, Our-Pet's mastery value will
then be   the strongest team member's value, and it then   encourages   the strongest   member  to   do more for
enrichment and strive for excellence, but then it will increase their "variance" value. With similar reasoning,
"average" calls for more effort by all members and "variance" asks the stronger members to help the weaker
members so that they can minimize their differences and hence the "variance". The mechanisms of emotional
and social domains are similar to that of the cognitive domain.
  Besides, all Our-Pets involve in a competition game as a motivator for members of a team to take actions to
help each other learn. The rules of the game are designed so that winning and losing of a game depends on
attribute values of two competing Our-Pets as well as luck. The competing game may use either attribute values
in somewhat random way and thus the chance Our-Pet wins the game depends on all these attribute values and
thus it demands efforts of all team members to improve all these attribute values. Each game has four rounds of
competitions, and the game result is calculated by accumulating the results of four rounds. Each student stands
for the team in one round by rotating three turntables to determine which domain, which attribute, and which
kind of attribute value of Our-Pet to compete with the other team.
  In sum, there are two roles of Our-Pet sub-system. The first is that the competing game will serve as a
motivator for students to collaborate in order to win the game. The second is that the collective student model is
an indicator that indicates how the teammates should help each other.

                          Figure 2. Intra-team collaboration for inter-team competition

IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 3 (a) shows that the My-Pet is eating food while being fed, and the student can inspect into domain
attribute values of My-Pet.   The subject domain of  our   current   My-Pet-Our-Pet     is idiomatic phrases for
elementary students and can be easily transformed into other subject domains. For keeping My-Pet, a student
has to earn a living for it ­ learning to get the resources such as foods and tools. In the current case, the student
needs to participate in a series of activities for learning idiomatic phrase, including reading the historical story to
understand the original meaning, identifying the key words, and practicing the applications of idiomatic phrases
used in different contexts in our daily lives. If she can pass an assessment test, then she earns the required
resources. Figure 3 (b) illustrates a four-children team where each team member has a My-Pet, taking care an
Our-Pet. Every teammate can inspect the all other members' attribute values, in addition to Our-Pet's.
  Different from our previous version of My-Pet used on Internet, My-Pet-Our-Pet, an extension of My-Pet, is
used in the classroom where every student has a Tablet PC. My-Pet-Our-Pet now is being trial tested for future
improvement of the system in an elementary classroom with 31 fifth-grade students. The students use the system
fifteen minutes each time, and three times per week from November 2004 to January 2005. The results show
that most students not only paid efforts in individual learning to improve the My-Pet's attributes, but also
encouraged each other to study hard for Our-Pet's attributes. Some students also gave other teammaters hints on
how to do well in reading, or helped others solve problems in learning idiomatic phrases. But the interaction and
collaboration among teammates in learning activities still have many spaces to improve.

                                                        
                                                                                                         Our-Pet
My-Pet
                                                                                                         A team has
Different                                                                                                four My-Pets
learning
domains
          (a) Student inspects attribute values of My-Pet      (b) Four-children team with Our-Pet
                                   Figure 3. Snapshots of My-Pet-Our-Pet

SUMMARY
My-Pet-Our-Pet provides an ingenious way of adopting the metaphor of animal companion, underlying which is
a student model, in a collaborative learning environment. My-Pet is essentially an active student model; yet, it is
open to the student in an inspectable form. Harnessing affection and compassion brought by children's keeping
pet hobbit, it provides a driving force for students to learn since their emotional engagement can direct to
participation of some designed learning activities. Of course, we hope those learning activities can arouse their
intrinsic motivation in the subject to learn itself. Also, representing student model in multiple domains offers the
student a mirror  to  understand herself better    about her   own learning status  from   different perspectives.
Furthermore, allowing students to view other team members' animal companions, they know what others have
not learned, what have mastered, who need help, who can help, and so forth. Our-Pet, help establish the team
goals that impel the teammates holding together to endeavor to realize their team goals. Besides it sheds light on
directions how teammates help each other learn, hence positive social interactions among peers.

FUTURE WORK
As more and more researchers envision that one-on-one (1:1) educational computing, that is, every student has a
computing device with wireless capability used as indispensable as a pencil, in a future not too long, will lead
deep and far reaching changes in education (see www.g1on1.org), My-Pet-Our-Pet is being pilot tested in such a
1:1 classroom. In such an environment, our research team will develop a series of synchronous small group
activities in class, including reciprocal tutoring, learning by asking questions, competitive learning games, and
so forth. Also, we shall extend the content to some cardinal subject such as language and mathematics learning.
As the  subject matter and learning  activities  are getting more  sophisticated, both individual  and  collective
student models   will be more complicate   and     thus  these animal companion    behavior   will   become more
sophisticate. Thus My-Pet-Our-Pet is essentially a framework of incorporating all these efforts. Besides using in
1:1 classrooms, My-Pet-Our-Pet is also appropriate to be used via Internet after class to support individual or
group learning or used in a large learning community such as EduCities where there are 1.3 million students
using it (Chan et al., 2001; Chang et al., 2003)

REFERENCES
Bull, S. (1998). 'Do It Yourself' Student Models for Collaborative Student Modelling and Peer Interaction, in
       B.P. Goettl, H.M. Halff, C.L. Redfield & V.J. Shute (eds), Proceedings of International Conference on
       Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 176-185.
Bull, S. (2004). Supporting Learning with Open Learner Models, Proceedings of 4th Hellenic Conference with
       International Participation: Information and Communication Technologies in Education, Athens, Greece.
       Keynote.
Chan, T.W. (1996). Learning Companion Systems, Social Learning Systems, and the Global Social Learning
       Club. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 7(2), 125-159.
Chan, T.W. & Baskin, A.B. (1990). Learning companion systems. In C. Frasson & G. Gauthier (Eds.) Intelligent
       Tutoring Systems: At the Crossroads of Artificial Intelligence and Education, Chapter 1, New Jersey:
       Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Chan,  T.W., Hue,  C.W.,   Chou, C.Y.,   & Tzeng,    O.J.L.  (2001). Four spaces   of  network  learning models.
       Computers & Education, 37, 141-161.

                                                         
Chang, L. J., Wang, J. C., Hsu, B. Y., & Chan, T. W. (1999). Four applications of student modelingmy animal
       companions, Proceedings of The Third Global Chinese Conference on Computers in Education, Macau,
       336-370.
Chang, L. J., Yang, J. C., Deng, Y. C., Chan, T. W. (2003) EduXs: Multilayer educational services platforms.
       Computers and Education 41(1), 1-18.
Chen, Z. H., Deng, Y. C., Chang, L. J., & Chan, T. W. (2001). An motivating learning platform for children
       through the pet-raising mechanism. National Computer Symposium, Taipei, 203-210.
Chen, Z. H., Deng, Y. C., Chang, L. J., & Chan, T. W. (2002). An approach to cultivating reading habits for
       children with pet-raising games. the 6th Global Chinese Conference on Computers in Education, Beijing,
       213-216.
Chen, Z. H., Yang, J. C., Deng, Y. C., & Chan, T. W. (2003). Environment design through coupling pet-raising
       games with domain-independent learning activities. the 7th Global Chinese Conference on Computers in
       Education, Nanjing, 755-759.
Chen, Z. H., Yang, J. C., Deng, Y. C., & Chan, T. W. (2004). Motivation-Enhanced Learning Environment for
       Children  through   Coupling  Pet-Raising   Games     with  Domain-Independent Learning     Activities.
       Innovations in Education and Teaching International (submitted)
Greer, J., McCalla, G., Collins, J., Kumar, V., Meagher, P. & Vassileva, J. (1998). Supporting peer help and
       collaboration in distributed workplace environment. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
       Education, 9, 159-177.
Kay, J. (1997). Learner Know Thyself: Student Models to Give Learner Control and Responsibility, in Z. Halim,
       T. Ottomann & Z. Razak (eds), Proceedings of International Conference on Computers in Education,
       Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE), 17-24.
Melson, G. F. (2001). Why the wild things are: Animals in the lives of children. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       University Press.
Pesce, M. (2000). The playful world: how technology is transforming our imagination. New York, Ballantine
       books: Random House.
Self, J. A. (1988). Bypassing   the intractable problem   of student   modeling. International Conference of
       Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS'88), Montreal, Canada, 18-24.
Webster, N. C. (1998), Tamagotchi, Advertising Age, 69(26), 43.

                                                        
