     Promotion of Self-Assessment for Learners in
Online Discussion Using the Visualization Software

                                          Toshio MOCHIZUKI
                 Information Science and Technology Center, Kobe University
                                             tmochi@kobe-u.ac.jp
                 Hiroshi KATO                                         Shin-ichi HISAMATSU
 National Institute of Multimedia Education                Graduate School of Media and Governance
                hkato@nime.ac.jp                                             Keio University
                                                                            bm@sfc.wide.ad.jp
             Kazaru YAEGASHI                                              Satoru FUJITANI
     Graduate School of Interdisciplinary                        Faculty of Business Administration
Information Studies, the University of Tokyo                                Mejiro University
             kazaru@interlink.or.jp                                       fujitani@mejiro.ac.jp
                Tomoko NAGATA                                               Jun NAKAHARA
  Hyogo University of Teacher Education                    National Institute of Multimedia Education
         tnagata@life.hyogo-u.ac.jp                                       jun@nakahara-lab.net
            Toshihisa NISHIMORI                                             Mariko SUZUKI
 National Institute of Multimedia Education                  Faculty of Education, Shiga University
             nisimori@nime.ac.jp                                     mariko@sue.shiga-u.ac.jp

      Abstract.  This study   describes  a   method   of  self-assessment for  learners in a collaborative
      discussion. The authors propose a method of self-assessment in an online discussion and examine
      its effectiveness through the development and evaluation of a software program to visualize the
      discussion on a Bulletin     Board System.  The    software, referred to as  "i-Bee" (Bulletin board
      Enrollee  Envisioner), can    visually display  the co-occurrence   relation between  keywords   and
      learners. Thus, the i-Bee can display the content-wise contribution made by each learner to the
      discussion. In addition, the i-Bee can display the recent level of participation of each learner and
      the frequency of each keyword used by the learners. The i-Bee enables students to assess and
      reflect over their discussion, to understand the condition, and to reorganize their commitment in a
      discussion reflecting their learning activity.

      Keywords: Visualization, Self-assessment, Reflection, Online Discussion

INTRODUCTION
The study of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) is a challenge with regard to producing an
environment conducive to mutual learning among learners using computers. Recent researches in e-learning
have highlighted the significance of building an online learning community, which plays a role in the sustenance
of a fruitful online learning experience (Palloff and Pratt, 1999). The significance of promoting communication
among learners via the Computer-mediated communication (CMC) is rapidly increasing at present.
 However, there are some difficulties faced by learners in mutually recognizing the status of a learning activity
in the CSCL environment, which constitutes the most important research issue (Gutwin et al., 1995; Kato et al.,
2004). Japanese communication researchers, Kimura and Tsuzuki (1998), pointed out that group communication
in the CMC tends to be disorganized and to lack cohesion due to decreased interpersonal pressure, given the
nature of the CMC. Briefly, learners are sometimes confused about what they should and should not discuss.
This raises the question of  how    CSCL   environments   assist learners in  recognizing  their commitment  and
reorganizing their discussion in a content-wise manner?--if not, it may lead to a failure in the organization of a
fruitful discussion for learning.
  In order to address this issue, the authors propose a method to self-assess the online discussions in electronic
forums or Bulletin Board System (BBS). Self-assessment is very effective for learners seeking to improve their
knowledge and learning strategy (Shaklee et al., 1997), particularly in a collaborative learning setting. Learners

                                                         
are required to monitor the actual condition of their discussion, the learning process, and interpersonal relations
in order to improve their learning community, and to plan the course of their education, which will enable them
to make learning a significant experience.
  Messages exchanged in the electronic forums are useful in the assessment of collaborative learning given the
fact that they are visualized resources of interaction among learners in a collaborative learning setting. In other
words, the messages exchanged in a discussion are reflective of the learner's ability in the context of the activity
(in situ) (Pea, 1993; Palincsar, 1998)--according to the social constructivism perspective, the learner's ability in
a collaborative learning setting emerges socially; therefore, the ability should be assessed on the basis of a
visualized interaction among learners and the circumstances including artifacts and social factors. However, a
manual assessment of these messages by the learners is not practical given the tremendous effort that is required
of them.
 In this study, the proposed method of content-wise visualization of the communication produces a mapping of
coordinates, which indicates how strongly each learner relates to each keyword in his/her messages. Mapping
reveals the whole structure of communication in the learning community--the manner in which each learner
participates in the communication and the organization of group communication.
 In order to examine the validity and usefulness of the proposed method, the authors developed a software
referred  to as "i-Bee," (Bulletin  board   Enrollee Envisioner),  which  can  visualize the   relationship between
learners and keywords in online messages in real time. This software also provides snapshots of past discussions
and animations, which show the trajectory of change from a given period. Thus, the i-Bee aims to encourage
learners to perceive their discussion as a whole and to encourage them to assess their discussion.
 The purpose of this study is to examine the effectiveness of self-assessment of online discussions through the
development    and evaluation of   the   i-Bee based   on  the  proposed  method.  With  regard   to learners'  self-
assessment, this study primarily focuses on and discusses the experience of learners to recognize and improve a
discussion using the i-Bee.

VISUALIZING ONLINE CONVERSATION
Several recent studies in CSCL have focused on visualization of learner activities in CSCL in order to create
awareness among learners. For example, Nakahara et al. (in printing) developed a software, which visualized the
status of interaction and   activeness   of electronic forums   on a  mobile  phone  screen,   in order to  promote
participation awareness and encourage learners to participate in the discussion at any time. Other researchers
have attempted to visualize social networks in the community (e.g. Martínez et al., 2003) by confirming the
status of communities    in CSCL.     However,   to  date, very  few  precedent  researches  have   focused  on   the
visualization of contents of the discussion among learners. Puntambekar and Luckin (2003) have indicated that
it must be worthwhile to allow learners to view the contents of the discussion and learn through reflecting over
the process.
  In this study, the authors propose a visualization method using a text-mining technique to assess conversation
among learners on the BBS.

Application of Text-mining Technique
Researches in the field of text-mining have progressed in recent years. Numerous methods have been developed
for extracting  applicable  keywords     from  the  text  data. Additionally,  multivariate analyses    such as   the
multivariable dimension scale (MDS) and Correspondence Analysis (CA) are generally used to visualize the
relationship of individual keywords to the whole (Greenacre, 1984).
  CA   is a  graphically descriptive  method   that facilitates an intuitive understanding  of this  relationship by
presenting two or more discrete variables in a complex data matrix. For instance, when the matrix is based on
the frequency of each keyword written for each person or group, frequently co-occurring variables are placed in
close  proximity  to each   other. It is considered  to   be suitable for learners to recognize    the  content-wise
contribution made by each learner to the discussion as clusters (of keywords and persons) that are related
elements in the text data (Li and Yamanishi, 1999). In addition, rather than Latent Semantic Analysis (Landauer,
et al., 2004) which is suited for analyzing large amounts of data, CA is a more appropriate method to analyze
small statistical data like messages on the BBS in a small group activity, since CA is independent from statistical
assumptions.

Visualizing Discussion Using CA
In the method proposed in this study, if n learners discuss a relevant number of m keywords, which totals up to n
× m for a cross-tab of N, then CA yields a mapping of a row vector F and a column vector G. In other words,
the generalized singular value decomposition of the matrix P, which is the relative frequency matrix of N,

                                                         
         P = A Dµ BT

yields a left generalized singular vector A and a right generalized singular vector B. The use of these two
vectors,

         F = DR-1 A Dµ

         and

         G = DC-1 B Dµ,

results in the standardized principal coordinates F, G, which construct a mapping (Greenacre, 1984).
  In this mapping, Dµ is the diagonal matrix leading to the generalized singular value diagonal vector, DR is the
diagonal matrix that makes matrix P the diagonal vector, and DC is the diagonal matrix of the sum of the
columns  of   matrix P. Additionally,   F and G    correspond with  the coordinates    of learners   and keywords,
respectively.

The Significance of Mapping Generated by the Analysis
Generally, when a CA is conducted using the relative frequency matrix P, F and G are distributed in proximity
to each other if a coordinate of F and that of G have a strong co-occurrence relation. In contrast, if a coordinate
of F and that of G do not have a co-occurrence relation, they are distributed far away from each other. In
addition, a relatively high value in the matrix N represents a coordinate located closer to the original point and a
relatively low value represents a coordinate located far from the original point.
  Thus, it is believed that (1) the distribution of coordinates indicates the co-occurrence relation between each
learner  and  each  keyword  in  his/her messages   and (2) the total data of     (1) represents the  topics in  the
discussions. Hence, CA can display the status of an overall discussion in the BBS as well as each learner's
involvement in that discussion. Although other aspects of discussion, such as meaning and context, does not
taken into consideration in the analysis, CA is simple and applicable to incomplete and fragmental sentences as
seen in BBS messages.
  The authors have already conducted a pilot study to examine the appropriateness of CA in order to visualize
the discussion and to examine the effectiveness of mapping for the learner's self-assessment. The result is
indicative of  the  possibility of learners focusing  more  on  certain topics    of  participation, planning their
participation in topics of lesser interest, and following up on members with the inability to fully participate in
discussions (Mochizuki et al., 2003).

DEVELOPMENT OF THE I-BEE
Based on the method proposed above, the authors developed a CSCL software, referred to as i-Bee (Bulletin
board Enrollee Envisioner), to visualize small-group (mainly asynchronous) discussions on BBS in real time.
The i-Bee is a plug-in tool that works with discussion forums of exCampus and its databases, which is an e-
learning module developed and distributed free of charge by the National Institute of Multimedia Education in
Japan (Nakahara and Nishimori, 2003). It covers numerous functions necessary to build an e-learning site in a
university--course management, learning management, interface for video streaming, discussion forums, etc.
  The   features of  i-Bee have    been  discussed in the following section. The      i-Bee has  four  features: (1)
visualization of the relationship among keywords and learners in real time, (2) visualization of a time-series
trajectory and snapshots at certain past periods, (3) visualization of recent levels of participation of learners and
of recent frequency of keywords, and (4) location of messages containing corresponding keywords clicked as
flowers by a learner on the i-Bee.

                                                        
                                                                                                                                 A learner
    lo                                                                                                                           (Japanese)

                                                                                                                                 Topic 1
                                       intervention                                                                              (considered         on      the
                                                                                                                                 basis of the distance)
                       index
                                                                                               questionnaire
   frequenc
                        interactiv
                                                 understand                                      exam                               Topic 2

                                     feedback

                                                                                                                                 A keyword
                                            goa
                                                                 comparison
                                                                                                                                 Play, forward, and
                                                                                                                                 reverse      buttons     to
                                                                                                                                 reflect        previous
                                                                                                                                 status
                                                      Fig.1 i-Bee Outline
  (Arrows, circles, and English translations are not included in the original--only for explanatory purposes)

Real-time Visualization of Content-Wise Discussion
When a learner logs onto the BBS on exCampus, the i-Bee pops up as an additional window (Fig. 1). The i-Bee
displays participating learners (bees) and keywords (flowers) selected by teachers. The distribution of the bees
and flowers is based on the result of the CA conducted at that time. Each bee and flower is drawn with its name,
which represents what is being described. The i-Bee refreshes the status not only when the learner logs in but
also when the learner accesses every article; therefore, the i-Bee can display as new a status as possible.
  While visualizing the coordinates, the i-Bee displays each bee turned toward the flowers as an indication of
the number of times a learner uses the corresponding words. The angles of the bees are calculated based on the
frequency and location of the flowers (see Table 1).
  The i-Bee was developed for learners to recognize their status in the forums. Furthermore, it aimed at having
learners reflect over their attitude in a discussion in a content-wise manner. In order for learners to appropriately
assess their discussion, it is necessary to design a visualized image for them to easily recognize the overall
image and their involvement in the discussion.
  In   order  to       address this issue, the  authors adopted   the "bees                                        and flowers"     metaphor      to explain     the co-
occurrence    relation    between    the learners   and keywords   in the                                         discussion.  Based    on  the   algorithm      of  CA,
strongly related elements should be located as coordinates in close proximity to each other. A comparison of the
algorithm with the metaphor exhibits quite a resemblance--bees get drawn toward attractive flowers in order to

                Table 1. Expressed Information and its Indexes, Targets, and Facial Expressions
Information                                   Index                                                                   Target             Facial Expression
                                                                                                                     Distance     The  more  a learner  uses   a certain
 What eachlearner talks            Coordinates calculated by CA                                                      between      keyword,  the   shorter the  distancebees andbetweenthelearnerandthe
                                                                                                                     flowers      keyword.
                                                                                                                                  The more frequently a learner uses
Recent trendof keywordsused by eachlearnerWeighted coordinate value of keywords calculated withthe number of times each learner used the correspondingkeywords recentlyHeaddirectionof beesacertainkeyword,themorethecorresponding bee turns toward thecorrespondingkeyword(however,thedisplayislimitedtoanglesof
                                                                                                                                  45, 135, 180, 225, and 315 degrees)
Activeness of     i      number _ of _ the _ learner' s _ articles _ at _ a _ certain _ periodeach learneraverage_ number _ of _ the _ learner' s _ articles _ per _ a _ periodi  1: active beeBee1> i threshold: normal flying beethreshold > i: sleeping bee
Activeness of                                                                                                                     i  1: full bloom
 each topic(keyword) i    frequency _ of _ the _ keyword _ used _ by _ all _ learners _ at _ a _ certain _ periodaverage _ frequency _ of _ the _ keywords _ used _ by _ all _ learners _ per _ a _ periodFlower1>ithreshold: flowering periodthreshold > i: bud of flower

                                                                
suck their nectar, while flowers require the bees to distribute their pollen. Thus, the learners can view the
content and status of their discussion in the forum.

Visualization of the Discussion Process
A previous research indicated that learners can effectively reflect over their learning experience when a learning
support system provides trajectories or snapshots of their learning at several points (Collins and Brown, 1988).
Therefore, in order to promote an increased level of reflection by learners over their discussion, the authors
developed i-Bee in order to allow learners to view their previous status and the process of change during the
discussion.
   When a learner accesses the i-Bee, it displays a trajectory of the learner's coordinates from the unit time t-1 to
t before providing a snapshot at that time t (t is the number of unit time, which is calculated from the beginning
until a certain point of time). Using the configuration tool, moderators such as teachers or teaching assistants are
required to appropriately configure the unit of time in accordance with the learning activity. For example, if the
course is conducted once a week, the teacher may set the unit time as one week.
   Furthermore, learners can also view their previous status at every unit of time. In other words, learners can
view their status of discussion as snapshots for one week before, one unit of time before, one unit of time after,
or one week after by clicking on the operation buttons provided within the window of the i-Bee.
   While displaying the animation and snapshots, the i-Bee fixes the coordinates of flowers (keywords) and
mobilizes those of bees (learners) to naturally indicate the trajectory of how each learner (bee) has related with
the keywords (flowers) and other learners (bees).

Visualization of Activeness
Learners and moderators face difficulties in understanding the status of discussion on the basis of the simple
coordinates of bees and flowers produced by the CA since it does not display the recent amount of learner's
participation and that of the appearance of the keywords in the discussion.
   In order to visualize their activeness at certain points, the i-Bee displays bees and flowers at three levels (refer
to Table  1):  "sleeping  bee," "normal   flying  bee," and "active flying   bee"     represent the possible facial
expressions of the learner's recent level of participation. "Bud of flower," "flowering period," and "full bloom"
represent the recent appearance of keywords indicating their frequency. The i-Bee calculates each learner's
activeness as the proportion of his/her messages within the recent unit time to its average per unit of time. In the
case of certain keywords, the i-Bee calculates their activeness as the proportion of frequency of the keywords
used by all learners within the recent unit time to its average per unit of time.

Cooperation with exCampus Discussion Forums
   The authors developed the i-Bee to cooperate with the discussion forums of exCampus. Learners can launch a
search for messages containing certain keywords illustrated as flowers on the i-Bee. Hence, learners can easily
locate interesting messages while viewing the i-Bee by clicking on the corresponding flower. Thus, i-Bee assists
learners in locating interesting or surprising articles from large amount of messages.

Implementation
Figure 2 shows the workflow of the i-Bee. It requires a morpheme analysis system, e.g., "ChaSen" for Japanese
text (Matsumoto et al., 2000), to calculate the frequency of each word from the text of the discussion.
   In order to use the i-Bee in a course, moderators are required to set keywords using the configuration tool
because the automatic keyword selection, which is based on a statistical analysis, cannot choose the appropriate
words     representing     a    discussion.    The
configuration tool allows only the moderators to
modify    settings  (unit  of   time  to  organize
frequency   matrix,   users   whose   articles  are
analyzed, users who use i-Bee, keyword selection,
etc). These keywords are stored in the condition
database.
   In the keyword     database, the  frequency   of
keywords    is stored  along  with   the indexical
information in the discussion, reflecting over the
condition   database.  A    database  records   the
appearance of each keyword, using the following
information:
                                                                    Fig.2. Workflow of the i-Bee

                                                        
         z            Speaker/Author of the message in a certain period
         z            Total frequency of each keyword used in the messages by each speaker/author until a certain
                      period
   CA uses these data to construct a graphical display of the discussion profiles using Ox. Ox is a formula
processing    environment,              which is an      object-oriented       matrix  programming    language   with a   comprehensive
mathematical and statistical function library (Doomik, 2001).
   The i-Bee procedure is as follows: Firstly, the learners or the moderators open the visualizer (Fig. 1), which
was  developed            using       Macromedia  Flash     MX,    and      the calculator orders    the morpheme   analysis  system   to
calculate the appearance frequency of each keyword used by each learner until a given period of time. Upon
receiving the result, the keyword database stores the frequency matrix. In order to display the status at a certain
period or the previous status, CA calculates a matrix that conjugates one at the time t and another at the previous
period t-1, as mentioned earlier. In other words, when n (l, t, w) is the accumulated frequency that the learner l
uses the keyword w until the unit time t, Nt is organized as below:

                       ª n(1,t  1,1)        n(1,t  1, k)        n(1,t  1,W ) º
                       ««                                                   »»
                       « n(l,t  1,1)        n(i,t  1, w)        n(i,t  1,W ) »
                       ««                                                   »»
           Nt  2 L uW  «n(L,t  1,1)««n(1, t ,1)n(L,t  1, w)n(1,t, w)n(L,t  1,W )»», whereln(1,t,W )»1,, L,t1,T , w1,,W
                       ««                                                   »»
                       «   n(l, t ,1)         n(i,t, w)          n(i, j,W ) »
                       ««                                                   »»
                       «¬ n( L, t ,1)        n(L,t, w)           n(L,t,W )  »¼

The calculator orders the Ox to analyze the data using CA. However, if a learner does not use any keywords or
if a keyword does not appear at all, the operation is conducted with a matrix that omits the corresponding row or
line from Nt since the operation cannot be completed due to the zero-line or the zero-row. The analysis results
in some  value         of  the axis,     and coordinates    F    and G      are elected as the first and  second axis of  the result. The
calculator transforms the value of the coordinates to an XML format, and the visualizer receives the data from
the calculator.
   The graphical display produced by CA shows the co-occurrence relation among participants and keywords.
Learners can reflect over not only their condition in the group but also the flow of the discussion.

EVALUATION

Method of Evaluation
As described above, the authors developed the i-Bee to promote understanding in learners of their current
condition and to reflect over the overall discussion. Majority of us agree that it is extremely difficult to grasp
human higher-order thinking such as reflection or meta-cognition. Protocol analysis is one of the means by
which to reveal the human internal condition; for example, what the subject recognizes and how the subject feels
under a  certain          circumstance       (Ericsson    and    Simon,     1993).  Some   researches    in collaborative learning    used
protocol analysis          through       constructive    interaction  among       their subjects to  reveal  how  they  recognized    and
reflected (Roschelle, 1992; Miyake, 1986; Shirouzu et al., 2003). According to these researches, the authors
gave weight to ideas spoken by the subjects to understand how their cognition worked while the subjects used
the i-Bee.

Course Outline
The class studied for an evaluation of the i-Bee was referred to as "Preservice Training 7," a winter term
prerequisite course of 10 lectures in an undergraduate course for interns in elementary or junior high school in
Japan. Nine seniors participated in the course. They underwent internship during the summer semester. The
ultimate goal          of  the  course     was   to     reflect over their     internship  by preparing   their teaching  portfolios  and
discussing their experience on the BBS. The teacher, who placed emphasis on online discussions, requested the
students to reflect their own opinion in their portfolios what they thought of during the discussion.
   Discussion on the BBS was conducted for about 15 to 30 minutes at the beginning and the end of seven out of
the 10 classes. In the first four out of the seven discussions, the students discussed their experience during the

                                                                            
internship; in the next three discussions, they exchanged comments on each other's portfolios. Each topic was
discussed in different forums and was independently analyzed by the i-Bee.

Data Collection
  The authors observed a couple of students, Alice and Betty
(fictitious names),    using   video  cameras.   They    were  both
preparing their portfolios based on their internship in a junior
high school, while they were engaged in both elementary and
junior high   schools. In the  class, they usually   sat adjacent  to
each other,   as shown   in Fig.  3. Their computer    screens were
also recorded using video cameras.
  Even      though     the     BBS      supported     asynchronous
communication     (i.e.,threaded  discussion  board),  the  students            Fig. 3. A scene from the case
used the BBS synchronously during class hours. The reason is                     (Left: Alice; Right: Betty)
to collect their verbal data in a natural situation, in which they
sat close together and verbally shared comments about what they saw on each of their i-Bee. However, the
communication mode was partly asynchronous because the discussion was conducted across the lectures.
  The first author participated in the course as a teaching assistant and recorded the data in five out of the ten
classes. In the first class, the author sought the students' permission for data collection only for the purpose of
the evaluation of i-Bee; they agreed.
  The keywords for analysis with the i-Bee were selected on the basis of a consensus drawn between the teacher
and the first author. They selected the keywords from messages with respect to the educational purpose, the
learning context, and meaning of the keywords depending on the context of use. They altered the keywords
based on the progress of the discussion. The selection process was conducted not only during class hours, but
also mainly   in intervals  between   the  lectures. The  thresholds   for measuring the activeness of learners  and
keywords were 0.4 and 0.6, respectively.

RESULTS and DISCUSSION--HOW DID LEARNERS ASSESS WITH THE I-BEE?
The authors analyzed the videos and prepared transcripts based on them, including each utterance made by the
students.   A comparison    of  the  screens with  the   utterance allowed  the authors to study Alice and    Betty's
experience to recognize the representation of the i-Bee and the manner in which their recognition led to the
progress of their discussion.
  The results showed that (1) i-Bee can be a cognitive resource for learners to assess the conditions and (2) it
can encourage learners to reflect and reorganize their learning activity by comparing their present status with
their past status on the i-Bee.
  In this study, the authors present two cases that prove the findings summarized above. For reasons of privacy,
fictitious names have been assigned to the subjects used in the transcripts and figures. In the transcripts, the
codes  ":,"   "h,"   and  empty     double   parentheses   represent   prolonged   sounds,  exhausted  sounds,   and
unrecognizable utterances, respectively. Words enclosed in brackets indicate nonlinguistic action.

Providing Opportunities for Assessment of the Status of their Commitment in the Discussion
  In  this  section, the  authors   describe the  experience   of  the subjects to understand their commitment    in
comparison to that of other students. In this case, Alice found commonality with another student, as described
below; it assisted her in communicating with a student she had not previously interacted with.
 [Fragment       1]
 [2006]     Alice:    Ah,   here  it   is!
 [2006]     Betty:    ((             )) same    place    as everyone     else.
 [2007]     Alice:    Yeah,    I am   near   by  David
 [2009]     Betty:    You're    right.    ((                 ))
 [2011]     Alice:    Cathy    is blurring      again...hh...why   is  that?   Why  is  it blurring?
 [2017]     Cathy:    It's   really    sucking     a lot   of  honey.
 [2018]     Alice:    huhu   hh:  h
 [2020]     Alice:    Might    be poisoned!
 [2021]     Cathy:    What   should    I  do... it   has  a full    stomach.
 [2024]     Alice:    Hhhhh,    this   isn't    good.    (0.5)  Eliza    is   still  asleep.
 [2029]     Cathy:    Ha  hhhhh
 [2030]     Alice:    And   Flora    is too.    Wake   up,  wake    up!
 [2032]     ? :       ((              ))
 [2033]     Alice:    Ahahahahaha
 [2034]     Alice:    Really?

                                                           
                                preparation                                   preparation
                               Davi           experience
                                                                         Davi     writing on            personality
                                      Alice                                       the blackboard      Helen
                                                   easy to talktalk                    responseresignationCathy     cute
    resignation         elementary school                                                       Eliza                 junior high school
                                                                                   teacher            exam
            GeorgiaintentionIvapresentationBettyjunior high studentsCathysamecutewishexplanationFlorapersonalityGeorgiaBettyFlorapresentationwishelementary schoolIva
                                    road    Helen                        Alice
                                                          interest          experience
                                                Eliza

                                                                                                                                            
      Fig. 4. Status of i-Bee at the time of Fragment 1                    Fig. 5. Status of i-Bee at the time of Fragment 2
                (Japanese words are original expressions. English translation is attached to each element)
 [2038]      Alice:    "Preparing"           and   "experience"          are     there
 [2043]      Alice:    It's    friends          with   David
              [Alice     changes      screen       to     check     David's      remarks     and    reads    his    messages]
  Figure 4 shows a representation of the i-Bee during the above-mentioned online discussion. In this fragment,
Alice observed that her bee's location was closer to David's on the i-Bee, which is expressed by her statement,
"Yeah, I am near by David" [2007]. She then began reading David's messages, which is expressed by her
statement, "Its friends with David" [2043], although she did not pay much attention to his messages.
  At this point, we must draw attention to one of Alice's statements, "`preparing' and `experience' are there,"
[2038] before reading David's messages. Alice shifted her attention to "preparation" and "experience" although
one observes the use of other phrases such as "easy to talk," "talk," etc. It appears reasonable to assume that she
recognized commonality with David based on those two keywords at that time. In other words, the reason she
began reading his messages was because she recognized commonality with him.
  Stating that such an activity is a type of assessment of the discussion is not an exaggeration. Other similar
fragments were observed in our research. Viewed in this light, the i-Bee can be regarded as a cognitive resource
for learners    to  recognize   their      level   of  commitments,      which     encourages       them    to conduct     assessments,
particularly where they are less attentive.

Providing Opportunities for Reflection on the Discussion by Comparison with Past Status
The following fragment describes Alice and Betty's experience to reflect over their statements in a content-wise
manner by understanding the change in their position on the i-Bee. Figure 5 shows the status of the i-Bee at that
time.
 [Fragment       2]
 [4355]      Betty:    It's  interesting.
 [4356]      Betty:    I'm  starting            here.    [clicking       an   icon     on    i-Bee    with   mouse]
 [4363]      Alice:    Where   am     I?     Oh,   my    bee    is   here.
 [4366]      Alice:    It's    here,        but...I   can't        say I'm    happy     with      where     it is.       (1.5) I'm       in
                      a  slightly          awkward     location...
 [4373]      Alice:    Aww...My     bee    has    become        further   away    from       the  others.      I'm    so   lonely.
 [4377]      Alice:    Hey,  don't         you    think    my      bee  is lonely       and     distant     from    the    others?
 [4378]      Betty:    Where?
 [4380]      Betty:    I can't       find       you?
 [4384]      Betty:    Oh,  here      you       are,   I  see.
 [4385]      Alice:    Yeah.
 [4386]      Betty:     I`m  here.          As   I    predicted,        I'm    still      at    the   "elementary         school."        I
                      have  to      move     on   to   "junior       high   school."
 [4390]      Alice:    My location           changed      from      the  last    time.       It's   near    "experience"        now
 [4394]      Betty:    Oh,  you're         right,      you're       near  "experience".           h,   h,   hh
 [4396]      Alice:    ...but, the        flower      is  wilted.
 [4397]      Betty:    Big  trouble          for   you!

                                                       -- syncopation         --

 [4444]      Betty:    [She  began         to   write     a     message   titled       "about     junior     high     school
                       students"]
  As shown in Fig. 5, Alice's bee was located at a distance from the others, at a periclinal part of the mapping.

                                                                     
Alice stated, "I can't say I'm happy with where it is," "I'm in a slightly awkward location" [4366], and "I'm so
lonely" [4373], moving her mouse cursor between her bee and others very quickly, immediately after finding
her location [4366].
  At this point, we should notice that Alice stated "my bee has become further away from the others" [4373]
and "my location changed from the last time" [4390] in the transcript. These words "become further away" and
"change" contain significance regarding the speaker's recognition of the change in status. Briefly, it would not
be possible for her to make such a statement without comparing her present status of the i-Bee with her past
status.
  Therefore, it is clear that Alice used negative phrases such as "a slightly awkward location," "lonely and
distant from the others," [4377] etc. due to her recognition of the change in her status. These phrases are
considered as her assessment for her bee that was located in a relatively undesirable position than before; this
showed that she did not commit well to the discussion
  Betty also assessed her location on the i-Bee in this fragment of conversation. It is noteworthy that she
attempted to improve her condition expressed on the i-Bee on her own. At that time, as shown in Fig. 5, her
location was closer to the "elementary school" and somewhat further away from "junior high school."
  She confirmed her location and stated, "As I predicted, I'm still at the `elementary school.' I have to move on
to `junior high school.'" [4386] She then began writing a message titled "about junior high school students,"
which included her impression of the junior high school internship [4444].
  In this case, similar to Alice's, it may be stated beyond doubt that Betty remembered the previous location of
her bee as being closer to the "elementary school." She then "predicted" that the location scarcely differed from
the previous one and confirmed as the above-mentioned scene. She then engaged herself in writing messages
regarding "junior high school."
  Why did Betty state "I have to move on to `junior high school'"? At this point, we may recall their learning
context, i.e., they prepared their portfolios based on their internship in junior high schools. Her position on the i-
Bee expressed a lack of association between her commitment in the discussion and her practice in this course.
Consequently, she became aware of this disjunction and changed her statement thereafter. It can be stated that
such an activity on Betty's part indicates self-assessment and improvement of her statement in the discussion.
  All these statements clarify that the i-Bee can be a cognitive resource for learners to recognize a time-series
change of state, which encourages them to assess their level of commitment to the topics or the whole of the
discussion. Such recognition and assessment encourage learners to consider their level of participation at the
meta-level.

CONCLUSION and FUTURE ISSUES
This study deals with self-assessment during a discussion, wherein learners can view the discussion, reflect in a
content-wise manner, and reorganize their attitude in the discussion. The authors propose a method by which to
visualize  learners' commitments  to the content of   a discussion  and develop the  software, i-Bee, which      is
implemented in the algorithm to encourage learners to assess their discussion. The evaluation elucidates that
visualization of the discussion based on its contents should be a cognitive resource for learners to assess their
learning through discussion along with observation of the difference between the status at that time and in the
past.
  Thus,    the authors conclude that providing opportunities for   such assessments and reflection encourages
learners to improve their learning by comparing their learning context even in a collaborative learning setting.
  Our final points should be covered in keeping with the future issues. The first issue is more precise analysis of
the effect of the i-Bee, especially in the asynchronous situation, in order to reveal more concrete results which
indicate how the i-Bee supports students. The second issue is with regard to selection of keywords. In order to
assist even moderators such as teachers or assistants, a new method should be developed. This method should be
able to satisfactorily select keywords for learners and teachers based on the learning context and from the
viewpoint of social constructivism, which constitutes the basis of the collaborative learning theory. The third
issue is with regard to the information provided by CSCL environments like the i-Bee. It can be said that
providing awareness with regard to not only the discussion but also other social activities holds the possibility of
encouraging learners to assess and improve their activities in the CSCL. However, this is only conjecture at this
stage; we would like to empirically discuss in our future works.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A part of this research has received the assistance of Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Fellows for Toshio Mochizuki, Grant-in-
Aid   for Exploratory  Research (No.  15650171,  Representative:   Hiroshi  Kato), Grant-in-Aid  for  Scientific
Research (B) (No. 16300280, Representative: Hiroshi Kato), Grant-in-Aid for Specific Field (No. 15020103,

                                                         
Representative:   Mariko  Suzuki),     and Grant-in-Aid  for  Young   Studies  (B)  (No. 16700560,  Representative:
Tomoko Nagata) from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

REFERENCES
Collins, A. and Brown, J. S. (1988). The Computer as a Tool for Learning Through Reflection. In Mandi, H. and
      Lesgold, A. (Eds.) Learning Issues for Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Springer-Verlag, New York, pp.1­
      18.
Doomik,    J. A.  (2001). Ox:      An Object-Oriented  Matrix  Language   (4th Ed.). Timberlake   Consultants Press,
      London.
Ericsson, K. and Simon, H. (1993). Protocol analysis--Verbal reports as data. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Greenacre, M. J. (1984). Theory and Applications of Correspondence Analysis. Academic Press, London.
Gutwin, C., Stark, G., and Greenberg, S. (1995). Support for workspace awareness in educational groupware.
      Proceedings of CSCL'95 (Bloomington, IN, October 1995), LEA, 147­156.
Kato, H., Mochizuki, T., Funaoi, H., and Suzuki, H. (2004). A Principle for CSCL Design: Emergent Division
      of Labor. Proceedings of ED-MEDIA 2004 (Lugano, Switzerland, June 2004), AACE, 2652­2659.
Kimura, Y. and Tsuzuki, T. (1998). Group Decision Making and Communication Mode: An Experimental
      Social Psychological Examination of the Differences between the Computer-mediated Communication
      and     the Face-to-face     Communication   (in Japanese).  The   Japanese  Journal   of Experimental  Social
      Psychology, 38, 2, 183­192.
Landauer, T., K., Laham, D. and Derr, M.(2004). From Paragraph to Graph: Latent Semantic Analysis for
      Information Visualization. Proceedings of the National Academy Sciences, 101, Suppl. 1, 5214-5219.
Li, H. and Yamanishi, K. (2001). Mining from Open Answers in Questionnaire Data. Proceedings of the 7th
      ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (San Francisco,
      CA, August 2001), ACM Press, 443­449.
Martínez,  A.,    Dimitriadis, Y.,  Rubia, B., Gómez,   E.,  and  de  la Fuente, P.  (2003). Combining   Qualitative
      Evaluation and Social Network Analysis for the Study of Classroom Social Interactions. Computers &
      Education, 41, 4, 353­368.
Matsumoto, Y., Kitauchi, A., Yamashita, T., Hirano, Y., Matsuda, H., Takaoka, K., and Asahara, M. (2000).
      Japanese Morphological Analysis System ChaSen version 2.2.1.
      [http://chasen.aist-nara.ac.jp/chasen/doc/chasen-2.2.1.pdf, available on Nov. 1st, 2004].
Miyake, N. (1986) Constructive Interaction and the Iterative Process of Understanding. Cognitive Science, 10,
      151-177
Mochizuki, T., Fujitani, S., Isshiki, Y., Yamauchi, Y., Kato, H. (2003). Assessment of Collaborative Learning
      for Students: Making the State of Discussion Visible for their Reflection by Text Mining of Electronic
      Forums. Proceedings of E-Learn 2003 (Phoenix, AZ, November 2003), AACE, 285­288.
Nakahara, J. and Nishimori, T. (Eds.) (2003) e-Learning: New Challenges of the Japanese universities (in
      Japanese). Ohmu Publishing Co., Tokyo.
Nakahara,  J.,  Hisamatsu,     S., Yaegashi, Y.,  and  Yamauchi,   Y. (in  printing) iTree: Does  the mobile  phone
      encourage learners to be more involved in collaborative learning? Proceedings of Computer Supported
      Collaborative Learning 2005 (Taipei, Taiwan, May and June 2005), ISLS.
Palincsar, A.   S. (1998). Social     Constructivist Perspectives  on  Teaching  and   Learning.  Annual Review  of
      Psychology, 49, 345­375.
Palloff, R. and Pratt, K. (1999). Building Learning Communities in Cyberspace: Effective Strategies for the
      Online Classroom. Jossey-Bass, Inc. Pub.
Pea, R. D.    (1993). Practices    of Distributed Intelligence and Designs   for Education.  In  Salomon, G.  (Ed.).
      Distributed cognitions, Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, pp. 47­87.
Puntambekara, S. and Luckin, R. (2003). Documenting Collaborative Learning: What Should be Measured and
      How? Computers & Education, 41, 4, 309­311.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by Collaborating: Convergent Conceptual Change. The Journal of the Learning
      Sciences, 2(3), 235­276.
Shaklee, B. D., Barbour, N. E., Ambrose, R., and Hansford, S. J. (1997). Designing and Using Portfolio. Allyn
      and Bacon, Boston, MA.
Shirouzu, H., Miyake, N., and Masukawa, H. (2002). Cognitively Active Externalization for Situated Reflection,
      Cognitive Science, 26, 4, 469­501.

                                                           
