                 Explicit Referencing in Chat Supports
                                Collaborative Learning

                       Martin Mühlpfordt                             Martin Wessner
       Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Publication and Information Systems (IPSI)
                    {martin.muehlpfordt, martin.wessner}@ipsi.fraunhofer.de

      Abstract. In Pfister & Mühlpfordt (2002) a study was presented showing that chat discussions
      with a strict turn order combined with the requirement to assign a type and an explicit reference to
      each message lead to a higher learning score than discussions in a normal chat or in a chat with
      strict turn order only. Due to the experimental design it was not possible to judge the role of
      explicit referencing.  Now   we  present   the   "missing" data: The  higher learning  score   can be
      explained just by the explicit referencing. We argue that this is an important design issue for chat
      applications, because it seems that explicit referencing leads to a more homogeneous discourse
      behavior (more homogeneous participation, more participation in parallel discussion threads) and
      a better grounding. A case study explored the use of the referencing function in a less restricted
      everyday collaborative situation.

      Keywords: CSCL, Chat, Referencing, Experimental Study, Case Study

INTRODUCTION
Collaborative learning relies on successful communication. Successful means that the collaborators understand
each other's contributions  and build a  shared   understanding   of the  collaboration content. When    the group
communicates using chat, the communication is influenced by the medial properties. A prominent phenomenon
of chat communication is the somewhat "chaotic" discourse structure: Often the group discusses two or more
topics in parallel, and related turns are in contrast to spoken conversations not adjacent. Another important
requirement  for effective collaborative learning   is the combination   of communication   with  shared  artifacts
(artifact centered discourse; Suthers & Xu, 2002).
  In this paper, we propose that extending the medium chat with the possibility to assign explicit references to
a message and to shared material supports the group in their discourse.
  The  remainder    of the  paper  is structured    as follows.  In  the next  section, grounding   and  discourse
comprehension are presented as a theoretical basis for explicit referencing. Then we present an empirical study,
which shows that explicit referencing results in a higher learning score. A post-hoc analysis of the discourses
indicates that grounding is supported by explicit references (section 3). To explore acceptance and usage of
explicit references in less restricted chats, we conducted a case study in an everyday collaborative situation,
which is presented in section 4. In section 5 we compare our approach to related work. Finally, we conclude
with a discussion of the results and identify open research questions.

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
In this section, we present some theoretical background for the explicit referencing. We argue that explicit
referencing influences the grounding strategies of the communication partners and eases the process of discourse
comprehension.   Therefore,    we  shortly  present    the  concept  of  grounding   and   theories  of  discourse
comprehension. Then we discuss findings of chat research in respect to these aspects. Finally we describe the
concept of explicit referencing in more detail.

Grounding
Building a common ground is an integral part of collaborative learning (Baker et al., 1999). The communication
partners construct a shared understanding of what is said by giving mutual feedback. They reciprocally ensure
each other that the ongoing discourse builds on and extends shared knowledge. Only the contributions that are
grounded (mutually believed to be understood) become part of that shared knowledge, the so-called common
ground  (Clark,   1996).   For  achieving  and    maintaining    the  common    ground   in  spoken   face-to-face
communication,   various forms  of linguistic   and  non-linguistic  feedback are used.  People  use methods   like
giving oral feedback (e.g. "hm"), non-verbal attention cues (e.g. eye contact), or initiating turn-taking (e.g.

                                                         
asking  a question)    for grounding.    Mostly,    positive  feedback  that an utterance   is   understood  is given
simultaneously without interrupting the speaker's turn.
   The   effort for grounding    required by    the participants varies with  the  properties  of the  communication
medium (Clark & Brennan, 1991). The medium constrains the communication and thereby influences the costs
of grounding.   For instance,   the medium     may   constrain  the people with respect  to   cotemporality  (Can   the
production  of  an  utterance   be  perceived   by  the  communication    partners roughly    at  the  same  time?) or
sequentiality (Can the turns get out of sequence?).
   Following the principle of least collaborative effort, that "in a conversation the participants try to minimize
their collaborative effort ­ the work that both do from initiation of each contribution to its mutual acceptance"
(Clark & Brennan, 1991, p. 135), different media result in different styles of grounding.

Discourse comprehension
The concept of grounding describes the mechanisms used by the communication partners to ensure and keep
track of  the   mutual  understanding.   Theories      about discourse  comprehension  try  to   explain   how  people
comprehend, what others say. An important aspect of the comprehension process is to infer the relation ­ the
local coherence   ­  of the    utterance  to  the   surrounding  discourse (Hobbs,  1985).    Elliptic and   anaphoric
expressions refer back to objects introduced earlier in the discourse, and descriptive referential expressions point
directly to a previous utterance or paraphrase it (Eklundh & Rodriguez, 2004). This inference process can be
treated as problem solving to arrive at the speaker's intended interpretation (Clark, 1978).

Chat research
Chat is widely used to do conversations online. From the linguistic perspective chat-conversations share some
features of oral language although it is a textual medium (Koch & Österreicher, 1994), like accepting surface
errors (syntax and grammar), using informal phrases etc. It is claimed that this results from the similarities
between the communication situations (Murray, 2000), more specifically from the communicative attitude in a
spoken face-to-face communication and a chat conversation. Nevertheless, the medial properties of chat lead to
discourse structures that are different to the ones of from spoken face-to-face conversations. These medial
properties are:
1.  Separation   of production   and    presentation:   The  production of an  utterance (chat    message)  cannot  be
    perceived by the communication partners. The message is presented to them as a whole only after it has
    been sent by the contributor.
2.  Sequencing of messages: The contributor cannot determine the exact position of a message, which depends
    on the simultaneous (not observable) communication behavior of the communication partners.
   As  a  consequence,     the sequential order     of the messages  is characterized by   disrupted   turn adjacency
(Herring, 1999). This complicates the identification of the message, the new one is responding to and leads to
so-called phantom   adjacency    pairs,  i.e. pairs of  subsequent  messages  that seem  to   be  related, but are  not
intentionally related (Garcia & Jacobs, 1998). Another consequence is the lack on simultaneous feedback, which
is especially important for the grounding strategies in spoken communication.
   Facing these problems chat users adapt their communication strategies: For instance (1) a turn is broken
down in a sequence of messages, indicating at the end of the message, that it is going to be continued (Herring,
1999). (2) The addressee of the message is explicitly mentioned. (3) Responses to messages of parallel ongoing
threads are done with different messages, preserving the "inner-thread" sequential order (O'Neill & Martin,
2003). This shifts at least partially the costs from understanding to production of a message.

Concept of Explicit Referencing
Explicit referencing means that while producing a message an object in the shared environment can be selected
and assigned as a referential point to that message. We call the (directed) relation between the message and this
referential point a reference. This reference is transmitted together with the chat message and visualized as an
arrow starting at the message and pointing to the referential point. A previous message, a portion of it, or some
part of a material viewed in the shared environment can be selected as referential point. When receiving a
message, the reference is automatically shown. The reference of a previous message can be made visible by
selecting that message (see reference from a contribution to a part of the shared material in fig. 1).

                                                             
                Figure 1: Showing a reference from an old message pointing into the material.

We expect that explicit referencing influences the communication in the following ways:
1.   Message comprehension: The inference of a message's relation to the surrounding discourse (including
     other messages and shared material) is simplified.
2.   Message production: As the costs of understanding a non-adjacent message are reduced, participants are
     encouraged to respond also to older messages. This leads to more grounding activities, e.g. acknowlegding
     previous messages. In addition, referencing to shared material saves production costs as effort to repeat or
     describe parts of the material is reduced.

EFFECT OF EXPLICIT REFERENCING TO LEARNING SUCCESS
In a  prior study (Pfister, Mühlpfordt  &       Müller, 2003, preliminary results were presented    in    Pfister &
Mühlpfordt, 2002), the effect of system controlled so-called learning protocols on learning was explored. In that
study, the learning protocol controlled the turn order with only one participant contributing at a time.
   In this study, learning under three different conditions was compared. (1) The complete protocol condition.
Here, the participants were forced to create an explicit reference before actually writing the message, and the
turn order  was system controlled. (2) The      chat application used for the second condition    didn't  have    the
referencing function, but the strict turn order was applied. (3) The control condition. Here, the participants used
a normal chat tool without referencing and without turn control.
   Three different group sizes (dyads, triads, and quartets) and two different learning domains (causes and
consequences and different types of earthquakes vs. difference between to opine, to belief and to know) were
tested. The study showed for the earthquake domain superior learning across the different group sizes under the
complete protocol condition, and no effect of the strict turn order without referencing. Because of the design of
that study, it was not possible to check whether the superior learning was due to the explicit referencing alone or
the combination of both, strict turn control and explicit referencing. Therefore we extended that study by the
missing forth condition: learning without strict turn control and with explicit referencing.

Method
We decided to check only triads and quartets, because we expected that the impact of the explicit referencing is
low for dyads as only one other participant can disrupt the sequential turn order. Furthermore, we focused on the
earthquake domain, which previously has shown a clear effect. Together with the conditions of the prior study,
we have a three factorial between-subjects design with the factors Turn-Control (with and without), Referencing
(with and without), and Group Size (triads and quartets).
   A total of 31 subjects (students of the Technical University of Darmstadt) participated in the study, put
together in 5 groups of 3 and 4 groups of 4. Participants received 15 Euro for participation in a one-hour

                                                         
session. The sessions were organized according to the prior study: The learners and the tutor worked with
standard PCs in isolated cubicles (i.e. they could not see each other), simulating a distributed scenario. First, the
general scenario was introduced, a short questionnaire about experience with computers and the internet was
administered, and the user interface of the chat tool was explained. The participants learned how to refer to
previous  messages and  the material and how  the  messages  are actually   written         and sent. Then, a short
knowledge test was applied to assess participants' degree of prior knowledge. The test consisted of one open
question ("Explain shortly how earthquakes evolve."). Then, the participants started with the learning process. A
learning goal was provided and presented on a sheet of paper attached to the PC. The learning goal was "to
understand causes and consequences of earthquakes and different types of earthquakes". The time limit for a
learning session was 25 minutes. The tutor monitored the messages and whenever a message could be identified
as a question containing a key concept, the standardized answer was given; else, the tutor did not join the
discussion. Directly following each learning session, a knowledge test was applied to assess participants' degree
of knowledge after the session. The knowledge test consisted of a number of multiple choice items and one open
question.

                                      Without Referencing     With Referencing                   Total
          Without        Triad            15   (5)                15    (5)                   30  (10)
          Turn-Control   Quartet          16   (4)                16    (4)                   32   (8)
          With           Triad            15   (5)                15    (5)                   30  (10)
          Turn-Control   Quartet          16   (4)                12    (3)                   28   (7)
                         Total            62  (18)                59   (17)                  121  (35)
                          Table 1: Number of participants (groups) per condition.

Results
The data from the 90 subjects of the prior study and the data of the 31 new subjects were analyzed together (for
distribution of subjects to conditions see table 1). The effect of the three factors Referencing, Turn-Control and
Group Size was tested with a three factorial covariance analysis with the test score of the knowledge tests as the
dependent variable (range 0 to 17) and the test score of the pretest as covariate. The ANCOVA revealed a
reliable main effect of Referencing F(1,111)=9.9, p<.01. Neither the other main effects (Turn-Control and
Group Size) nor the interactions were reliable (see figure 2 for mean and standard deviation of the raw data).

                                                   Explicit Referencing
                          Without                          With                                   Total
Group                   Turn-Control                    Turn-Control                          Turn-Control
Size            Without     With      Total   Without      With      Total      Without           With      Total
Triad     mean     9.83      9.87      9.85    10.36       10.21      10.29     10.09              10.02     10.05
          SD       2.48      2.16      2.28     2.10        2.15      2.08        2.28              2.12      2.18
Quarte
t         mean     9.19      8.63      8.91    10.13       11.84     10.98        9.66            10.23       9.95
          SD       2.32      2.70      2.49     2.55        2.19       2.50       2.44              2.92      2.69
Total     mean     9.50      9.23      9.36    10.23       11.14      10.67       9.86             10.14     10.00
          SD       2.38      2.50      2.42     2.31        2.28      2.33        2.36              2.57      2.46
                            Table 2: Mean and standard deviation per condition.

Discussion
The conducted study shows that explicit referencing leads to a higher learning score. Applying a strict turn-
control, allowing only one participant to write at a time, has no reliable positive effect.

THE EFFECTS OF DIRECT REFERENCING ­ POST-HOC ANALYSIS
The post-hoc analysis aims to show evidence for the proposed effects of explicit referencing on the grounding
strategies. In the analysis we include only the chat logs of the groups communicating without turn control.
   The analysis faces two problems. First, changing the analysis level from individual to group data results in a
sample of only 18 discourses, 9 per condition, 5 from triads and 4 from quartets. Because of this small number
we cannot use statistical tests. The second problem is the heterogeneity of the discourses. For example, the

                                                       
length of the chats varies between 25 and 178 messages for the Without Referencing condition and between 35
and 73 for the With Referencing condition. Therefore, we present only descriptive data, but we think that this
illustrates the changes in the communication strategies due to the explicit referencing and gives valuable hints
for further research.
   Generally, the discourses are topic-centered and task-related. 95% of the learners' messages (947 out of 993)
are related to the earthquake-topic, especially to the different aspects of the learning goal. The 5% off-topic
messages deal mainly with the coordination of the chat. In 12 out of 18 chats less than two off-topic messages
occurred at all.
   We propose that explicit referencing changes the grounding strategies, because the explicit relation to the
surrounding discourse should reduce the costs for understanding a message (Clark & Brennan). This should
affect the participants in two ways:
1.  The pressure to keep the messages "near adjacent" should be lowered. That is, participants might be more
    willing to respond to older messages. As indicators for this, we counted the number of intervening messages
    between message-response-pairs. The analysis shows that in the discourses without explicit referencing
    nearly 34% of the messages-response-pairs are adjacent compared to 24% in the discourse with explicit
    referencing. The number of message-response-pairs with 4 or more intervening messages raises from 18%
    to 26% (see figure 2).

                   40                                                          Without Referencing
                   35       34                                                 With Referencing

                   30
                                                                                             26
                   25            24        24   24

                   20                                          17                       18
                                                          15
                   15
                   10                                                     9   10

                     5

                     0
                               0              1              2              3           4 or more

                       Figure 2: Mean percentage of messages per message-response-distance

2.  The tendency    to  send   affirmative feedback  should    be raised. As  an  indicator for   this we counted all
    messages that had no response, assuming that the affirmative feedback is not again commented. In the
    discourses without explicit referencing 35% of the messages have no identifiable direct response compared
    to 43% of the messages in the discourses with explicit referencing (see table 3).

                                                    Triads   Quartets
                                        Without      32.6       37.7      34.9
                                            With     41.0       45.5      43.0
                       Table 3: Mean percentage of messages without response per discourse

   Beside the changes in the strategies, we expected that the number of misinterpretations should be lowered.
As indicator, we counted all observable situations where a participant misinterpreted a message. The analysis
showed that there were quite few such situations: In the discourses without explicit referencing in 4 out of the 9
discourses 9 such situations could be identified, none in the discourses with explicit referencing.

USAGES OF EXPLICITE REFERENCING ­ A CASE-STUDY
In the design of the study presented above, some conditions were quite artificial and do not match the conditions
in everyday collaborative situations. The participants of the study had no real interest in the topic, were paid,
were assigned randomly to the groups, didn't know each other, had no or limited common ground, and were

                                                          
forced to set an explicit reference for each of their contributions. In addition, in one condition they had to follow
a defined turn taking method.
  These restrictions to the chat communication are expected to lead to a communication style different from
non-restricted communication. For example, we saw in the evaluation of the chat log that some participants
circumvented the original idea of the referencing by just setting a reference to the complete material. This is the
type of reference that requires the least effort; it is done with a right mouse click at any position in the material.
In the following case study, our goal is to find out how groups use the referencing functionality in everyday
collaborative situations. We  expected  that users use references mainly  to   indicate    the responds-to  relation
between two messages and to a lower extent to point to specific parts in the shared material (deictic use).

Method
We announced a chat session in a team meeting of our research group at Fraunhofer IPSI. The topic of the chat
session belonged  to ongoing  planning  work  in the  research group. The group   should       generate and discuss
scenarios to combine concepts and technology from two projects currently running in our group. These were the
DIGITAL   MODERATION         project, which  develops  a system  to facilitate face-to-face    workshops,   and the
ConcertChat project, which develops chat tools with additional features such as shared material and explicit
referencing (for example the tool used in this study). Four research associates volunteered to participate in the
chat session with the proposed topic. All participants had an academic background in computer science (3) or
information science (1). None had used a chat tool with referencing functionality before.
  In comparison to the preceding study, the tool differed in the following aspects: (1) There was no turn-taking
regulation. (2) Users were free to use the referencing functionality. (3) They could define multiple references for
each contribution, e.g., refer to two or more previous contributions or to refer to contributions and places in the
shared material.
  Figure 3 shows a screenshot of the tool: In the left part of the window the shared material is presented. The
upper right part presents a list of all persons currently online. Below is the scrollable list of all chat contributions
and in the lower right part the interface to enter and send a new contribution is located.

   Figure 3: The chat tool for the case study. It shows the usage of multiple references for one contribution.

                                                        
    After a short introduction to the usage of the tool to be used for the chat, the group split up into 4 separated
rooms each equipped with a networked computer running the chat tool. They filled out a questionnaire about
their chat competency and their knowledge about the two projects, which build the basis of the task. Then they
read the instructions and background material (1 page) in printed form. Following this, the group started to chat
for 50 minutes. The page with the instructions and background material was included in the material area of the
chat tool. Finally, the participants filled out a second questionnaire, gathered in one room and reflected on the
session together with the authors of this paper.

Results
Chat competence and familiarity with the two projects that form the basis for the task is relatively high: Three
participants chat on a daily basis. The fourth participant chats less than once a month. Three participants are
involved in the DIGITAL MODERATION project and feel informed about the ConcertChat project. The fourth
participant, a new member of the research group, has only minimal knowledge about both projects.
    In order to learn more about the usage of the referencing functionality in everyday collaborative situations
we analyzed the chat log. For 148 contributions out of the total 193, one or more references have been made to
the material section or to other contributions. For 10 contributions more than one reference has been made (8
contributions had 2 references, 1 contribution had 3 references, and 1 contribution had 6 references). In more
detail, there were 117 references indicating "response", 20 deictic references to other contributions, 20 deictic
references to the material, and 7 unclear or wrong references.
    Contributions with multiple  references    combine responses,    deictic references to other contributions and
deictic references to the material in various ways: Combinations for double-reference contributions include 2
responses (1), 2 deictic references to contributions (1), 2 deictic references to the material (1), 1 response + 1
deictic reference to the material (3), 1 response + 1 unclear reference (1), and 1 deictic reference to the material
+ 1 unclear reference (1). The contribution with three references has 2 responses + 1 deictic reference to a
contribution. Finally, the contribution with 6 references has 4 deictic references to contributions + 1 response +
1 unclear reference.
    In addition to "repsonds-to" and the deictic use, we found three ways for using references that we didn't
expect:
·   In twelve cases the reference was used to indicate that a previous contribution of the same participant is
    extended by the current contribution. In one case this connected three contributions, in all other cases it
    connected two contributions.
·   In one case a reference was used as a kind of personal bookmark or pointer to another contribution that
    contained an explanation but was made 30 contributions before. The contribution contained the text "ah .. I
    put this here, to find my reference".
·   In one case (the contribution with six references) the references were used to respond and simultaneously
    collect four ideas generated previously in order to sum up.

    The second  questionnaire revealed    that all participants regard  the  referencing to other contributions as
helpful to improve the chat discourse. Two participants regard the referencing to material as helpful as well. All
participants felt stimulated by the possibility to refer to other contributions.

DISCUSSION
The frequent usage of referencing shows that the functionality was accepted by the group. As expected, most of
the references (117)  indicated a "response"     relation, but  also 40 references    were made  to point to other
contributions or to the material (20 references each). The participants used multiple relations in 10 cases. And
there were unexpected usages of referencing ­ to connect split turns, to set a bookmark, and to sum up. Only 7
references were unclear or could be recognized as wrong. Altogether, this indicates that the participants quickly
learned to use the referencing functionality in a variety of meaningful ways to support the chat discourse.

RELATED WORK
This section consists of two parts: First, we look at tools offering similar functionalities. In the second part we
sum up related studies. The main functionalities of the chat tool we used in the studies above were:
    ·   provide chat communication and shared material
    ·   allow single or multiple references to other contributions and/or parts of the shared material.

                                                        
Tools
  From    the tool design    point of  view,  there are   two  principle approaches    to ease  chat   communication:
Providing  references to   other  contributions  (see Threaded   Chat   and  Academic     Talk  below) and  providing
references to shared material (see Anchored Conversation and Kukakuka below).
  Threaded Chat (Smith et al., 2000) is a chat tool that allows contributions to refer to one other contribution
as a "reply-to". The contributions are presented as a tree, which leads to significant problems, e.g. as new
contributions are added to different, potentially distant, branches of the tree. To deal with this problem, our tool
presented the contributions in chronological order and represented references as explicit arrows. Another path
was taken by Academic Talk (McAlister et al., 2004). It provides two panes in the chat window. One pane
presents contributions in chronological order, the other one presents the contributions in logical (tree) order as
defined by reply-to relations. In both systems, Threaded Chat and Academic Talk, multiple references and
shared material are not supported.
  The    Anchored  Conversations    tool (Churchhill   et al., 2000) allows    (normal)   chats to be  connected    to a
specific point in a related document. There is no support to refer from one contribution to another or to refer to
different parts of the material simultaneously. Kukakuka (Suthers & Xu, 2002) couples threaded discussion and
web pages. Multiple references to contributions and references to parts of the material are not possible.
  The GraffiDis tool (Leponiemi, 2003) combines relations to texts and graphics. Users enter contributions
(which can also consist of graphics and other material) at arbitrary places of the "chat" area. After a certain time
the contributions are faded out to the background color. With a "history slider" the user can navigate through the
discourse in chronological order. Relations between contributions are indicated by nearby positions in the chat
area. References to a contribution are not possible after a certain distance in time as the previous contribution
already faded out. Also, multiple references are difficult or even impossible if the contributions to be referred to
are at distant positions.
  To sum up, none of these approaches support references to contributions, references to shared material, and
multiple references.

Studies
  To the best of our knowledge, there is no previous study investigating the impact of explicit referencing in
chat. But there are two categories of studies that help to interpret our findings. On the one hand, there are studies
focusing on how variations of medial features influence the communication behavior and outcomes (McCarthy
et al., 1993). McAlister et al. (2004) compare discussions in a normal chat tool with discussions in a tool that
forces the participants to choose a sentence opener from a predefined fixed set and allows to explicitly define the
reply relation. The  discussions   in  that tool showed    more    on-topic messages   and  a   higher quality   of the
argumentations than the discussions in the normal chat tool. Smith et al. (2000) found no differences in the task
performance   between     groups using a normal   chat  and   groups using   a threaded   chat, but  a more  balanced
participation of fast and slow typists in the threaded chat. ýech et al. (2004) varied different aspects of the chat
environment (e. g. size of message editor, availability of chat history) and showed that participants adopt their
turn-taking and turn-packaging strategies.
  Another relevant category of studies investigate chat usage for solving visual tasks. Suthers et al. (2003)
compare face-to-face and chat interactions of dyads building a shared knowledge representation in a shared
graphical tool. The study focuses on how the participants manage deictic references to elements of the graph
representation. It is shown that the chat groups refer much less to the shared work space and in most cases to
recently  manipulated     items. The   authors  conclude   that  online  collaborators    need  better integration     of
information encountered over time and an easy insertion of visual references to the discussed elements.
  Studies of chat use conducted in real world situations show, that experienced chat users discuss in more
parallel threads (Isaacs et al., 2002), and that chat users can manage parallel threads when there are "observable
contextual relations" (O'Neill & Martin, 2003).

CONCLUSIONS AND OPEN RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Referencing has a positive impact on chat conversations. We expect that this effect is increasing with a growing
number of participants in the group as the risk of non-adjacent related turns increases with the number of
participants. References are used to express a variety of conversational relations as well as to point to important
objects in the chat log or in the shared material. We saw a tendency to focus on one reference per contribution to
highlight the most important relation.
  As was shown, referencing influences message production as well as message comprehension. This changes
also the communication behavior of the participants, especially their strategies for grounding. Referencing as
presented  here  exceeds   models   of threaded  discussions    in two   dimensions:   Messages    can  have multiple
references and  referencing   can  connect  a  message  to  other  messages    as well as  to  shared  material. Thus,

                                                          
participants can use referencing to express a variety of relation types, not only a reply-to relation as in threaded
discussion. By preserving the chronological order and using explicit references participants are still aware of all
ongoing threads, which might lead to increased participation in parallel threads. Multiple references might even
allow bringing together different threads. Further studies are needed to broaden the empirical basis for the
interrelations described above.
  In this paper we had only strictly synchronous chat scenarios, i.e. all participants attended the complete chat.
It would be interesting to investigate whether referencing has a positive effect also in partly or completely
asynchronous scenarios, e.g. supporting latecomers in their comprehension of the missed discussions or learners
who use the (referenced) chat log as a learning resource after the discussion has ended.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ute Linder, Tatjana Koch, and Alexander Schütte for their help in the experimental study, and Torsten
Holmer for many fruitful discussions about coherence in chat and for visualizing chat structures.

REFERENCES
Baker, M., Hansen, T., Joiner, R., & Traum, D. (1999). The role of grounding in collaborative learning tasks. In
     P.  Dillenbourg (Ed.),     Collaborative learning. Cognitive and  computational     approaches (pp. 31-63).
     Amsterdam: Pergamon.
ýech, C. G. & Condon, S. L. (2004). Temporal properties of turn-taking and turn-packaging in synchronous
     computer-mediated communication. Proc. of the 37th HICSS, 107-116.
Churchill, E. F., Trevor, J., Bly, S., Nelson, L., & Cubranic, D. (2000). Anchored Conversations: Chatting in the
     Context of a Document.       Proceedings   of the  SIGCHI Conference  on Human       Factors  in Computing
     Systems, 454-461.
Clark, H. H. (1978). On inferring what is meant. In W. J. M. Levelt & G. B. Flores d'Arcais (Eds.). Studies in the
      Perception of Language, 295­322.
Clark H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H. & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D.
     Teasley (Eds.)  Perspectives   on  Socially   Shared Cognition, pp. 127-149. Washington      DC:  American
     Psychological Association.
Eklundh K. S. & Rodriguez, H. (2004). Coherence and interactivity in text-based group discussions around web
     documents. Proc. Of the 37th HICSS, 108-117.
Garcia, A., Jacobs, J. (1998). The Interactional Organization of Computer Mediated Communication in the
     College Classroom. Qualitative Sociology, Vol. 21, No. 3, 1998, 299-317.
Herring, S. C. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 4(4).
     URL: http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol4/issue4/herring.html
Herring, S. C. (2003). Symposium on New Research for New Media, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
     September 5. URL: http://ella.slis.indiana.edu/~herring/dta.html
Hobbs, J. R. (1985). On the Coherence and Structure of Discourse, Report No. CSLI-85-37, Center for the
     Study of Language and Information, Stanford University. URL: http://www.isi.edu/~hobbs/ocsd.pdf
Isaacs, E., Walendowski, A., Whittaker, S., Schiano, D. J. & Kamm, C. (2002). The character, functions, and
     styles of instant messaging in the workplace. In: Proceedings of the 2002 ACM conference on Computer
     supported cooperative work. New York: ACM, 11-20.
Koch, P. & Oesterreicher, W. (1994). Schriftlichkeit und Sprache. In H. Günther, O. Ludwig (Eds.): Schrift und
     Schriftlichkeit: ein interdisziplinäres Handbuch internationaler Forschung (= Handbücher zur Sprach-
     und Kommunikationswissenschaft 10/ 1). Berlin: de Gruyter. 587-604.
Leponiemi, J. (2003). Visualizing Discussion History. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction,
     2003, Vol. 15, No. 1, 121-134
McAlister, S., Ravenscroft, A., & Scanlon, E. (2004). Combining interaction and context design to support
     collaborative argumentation using a tool for synchronous CMC. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning:
     Special Issue: Developing dialogue for learning, Vol. 20, No 3, pp. 194-204.
McCarthy, J. C., Miles, V. C., Monk, A. F., Harrison, M. D., Dix, A. J., & Wright, P. C. (1993). Text-based on-
     line conferencing: a conceptual and empirical analysis using a minimal prototype. Human-Computer
     Interaction, 8 (2), 147-183.
Murray, D. E. (2000). Protean Communication: The language of computer-mediated communication. TESOL
     Quarterly, 34(3), 397-421.
O'Neill, J., Martin, D. (2003): Text Chat in Action. In M. Pendergast, K. Schmidt, C. Simone, & M. Tremaine
     (Eds.): GROUP'03. Proceedings of the Conference on Supporting Group Work. New York : ACM, 40-
     49.

                                                        
Pfister, H. R., & Mühlpfordt, M. (2002). Supporting discourse in a synchronous learning environment: The
     learning protocol approach. In G. Stahl (Ed.): Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported
     Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2002, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 581-582.
Pfister, H.  R., Mühlpfordt,  M.,  & Müller, W.  (2003): Lernprotokollunterstütztes  Lernen ­  ein  Vergleich
     zwischen     unstrukturiertem  und  systemkontrolliertem diskursivem   Lernen   im Netz. Zeitschrift für
     Psychologie, 211, 98-109.
Sherry,  L., Billig, S., & Tavalin, F. (2000). Good Online    Conversation: Building on  Research  To Inform
     Practice. Journal of Interactive Learning Research 11(1), 85-127. URL: http://dl.aace.org/6508
Smith, M., Cadiz, J. J., & Burkhalter, B. (2000): Conversation Trees and Threaded Chats. In: Proceedings of the
     Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 2000. New York: ACM, 97-105.
Suthers, D., Girardeau, L & Hundhausen, C. (2003) Deictic Roles of External Representations in Face-to-face
     and Online Collaboration. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Eds): Designing for Change in
     Networked Learning Environments, Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Support
     for Collaborative Learning 2003, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 173-182
Suthers, D. & Xu, J. (2002). Kükäkükä: An Online Environment for Artifact-Centered Discourse. Proc. Of
     WWW 2002, Honolulu, 472-480. URL: http://www2002.org/CDROM/alternate/252/index.html.

                                                        
