iTree: Does the Mobile Phone Encourage Learners
    to be More Involved in Collaborative Learning?

                 Jun Nakahara                                               Kazaru Yaegashi
      NIME/ The University of Tokyo                                 The graduate school of
              Jun[at]nakahara-lab.net                               The University of Tokyo
                                                                    kazaru[at]interlink.or.jp

              Shinichi Hisamatsu                                            Yuhei Yamauchi
              The graduate school of                                The University of Tokyo
                 Keio University                                 yamauchi[at]iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
              bm[at]sfc.wide.ad.jp

      Abstract. A web-based collaborative learning sites has the bulletin board system (BBS) and allow
      learners to interact, exchange information, engage in discussion, and collaborate on projects. This
      paper outlines the development and evaluation of iTree, a Java mobile phone application that
      encourages learners to participate in online BBS forums.   In essence, the application reminds the
      students of their level of participation in a class BBS forum via an image on the wallpaper on their
      mobile phones.   Postings to the forum are represented as a tree, the growth of which reflects the
      learner's degree of participation.  Our evaluation  has shown that     iTree encourages learners  to
      engaging in forum exchange in a positive light.    Many learners have come to regard iTree as a
      useful learning tool..

      Keywords: Mobile phone,      e-learning, discussion, collaborative learning

RESEARCH BACKGROUND

Collaborative learning and e-learning
In recent years, higher education institutions around the world have expressed a growing interest in e-learning,
or internet-based educational services (Tate 1997, Yoshida 2002, Kaneko 2002). The U.S has the highest ratio
of e-learning with 90.4%     of public universities and 55.9% of private    universities now offering   e-learning
courses (Yoshida 2003). In Japan, the School of the Internet (SOI) at Keio University has been streaming video
Web lessons since 1996 (Murai 2000). Since April 2002, a number of graduate schools have implemented e-
learning programs, including Shinshu University and Tohoku University.- Background to this trend has been a
progressive loosening of the accreditation criteria for distance education. This process was triggered by a 2000
University Council report that concluded "distance education, being of equal merit to face-to-face education,
may now be recognized for up to 60 credits of a degree program" (The University Council 2000).       The Central
Council for Education also recently proposed that university courses "be made available off campus" (The
Central Council for Education 2003). This trend toward looser university accreditation criteria is expected to
continue.  With it, university e-learning programs are also expected to spread.

iii online
Since April 2002 we have been developing and operating the e-learning site "iii online" for the Interfaculty
Initiative in Information Studies at the Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Information Studies, University of
Tokyo (Yamauchi, Nakahara 2002).       Graduate students in the initiative can earn course credits by (1) watching
on-demand lecture videos, (2) participating in BBS discussion, and (3) submitting final reports online.

                                                        
Collaborative learning on BBS in e-learning site
BBS forums such as "iii online" are interactive communications tools that play an important role in web-based e-
learning. Forums  encourage    collaborative-learning, information      exchange, and  discussion. However,  many
issues related to BBS use have yet to be addressed. One pressing concern the medium faces is learners need
encouragement to browse and respond to BBS postings. Effective collaborative learning will not occur unless
learners make an effort to read posts and respond to them. The situation is exacerbated when a learner does not
keep up with the forum, when it becomes extremely difficult to catch up with the backlog of information and
volumes of new posts .In order to address this issue, learners would benefit from a convenient system to inform
them of BBS postings in a timely manner. Up until now, course coordinators, mentors, and moderators have had
to take on this task (Salmon 2000; Collison, Elbaum, Haavind and Tinker 2000). Yet monitoring the board in
this fashion often entails a very heavy workload (Nakahara, Maesako, and Nagaoka 2002).
To address this challenge, we have developed iTree, a mobile-phone application which encourages learners to
participate in BBS forums. iTree displays wallpaper on a learners' mobile phone screens to keep them up to date
with their level of forum participation and encourage them browse and post. Learners can simply glance at the
screen in their pocket to check their level of participation and the level of board interest in their posts, saving a
trip to the PC. We hope the convenience of the application will encourage the learner to browse and respond to
BBS postings. iTree displays wallpaper images but has no posting or browsing function.       Mobile phones have
limited bandwidth, small screens, and often awkward text input functions and so we feel the PC remains more
suitable for browsing or posting.

Educational use of mobile phones
Japan has a high rate of mobile phone ownership.   As of May 2003, mobile phone penetration stood at 84.4 %
(Including people in their sixties: 79.2%).  Penetration rates among the young are especially high: 80.3% of
teenagers, 96.9% of those in their twenties, and 96.2% of those in their thirties own mobile phones (Nomura
Research Institute, Ltd. 2003). Because of this widespread penetration, many educators are optimistic about the
potential of mobile phones as a learning tool. Some educators have      even incorporated mobile  phone technology
into their course design. There are three categories of this kind of usage:    Firstly, students have been sending
course evaluations and comments via mobile phone. Otsuka and Yahiro have developed a class evaluation
system that uses the mobile phone (Otsuka & Yahiro 2002) with students evaluating lessons by clicking through
a checklist on their phones. One benefit is results can collected and tabulated instantly. The similar system was
developed by Nakayama, Morimoto, Akahori, and Shimizu in 2001.            Their system allows a lecturer to collect
real-time feedback on his distance course via mobile phone. Secondly, mobile phones can now run language
study materials such as drills and educational game applications (Seki, Shimizu, and Shigematsu 2001).
In addition, mobile phone subsidiaries now offer commercial education services geared in many fields, for
instance courses in Engligh grammar and listening. Learner using the mobile phone can take a short quiz of
English words, get the feedback when they make a mistake and memorize them(Fig.1 Copyright Marvelous
Liveware Inc.&Sansai Books/Team Project Moetan). They can memorize English words over the mobile phone
as they used CAI software on desktop computer.
Thirdly, schools now distribute to students official notices regarding class cancellations, scheduling changes, or
job seminars via mobile phone (Yamaoka 2000). The e-learning mobile phone application we developed differs
markedly from the above. We always have our mobiles with us, switched on        and ready to use.  When  we make a
call or check the time, the first think to catch our eye is the screen. We decided to take advantage of this prime
real estate to encourage learners to participate in BBS forums.
The concept of WILD, or Wireless Internet Learning Devices, was introduced by Roschelle and Pea and billed
as the future of collaborative-learning  media.  Roschelle  and   Pea    also gave  an overview    of potential uses
(Roschelle & Pea 2002).    Examples of WILD given include (1) a response analyzer, (2) a database for field
observations, (3) a sensor or measuring instrument, (4) an exhibition guide in a museum. Although the Internet-
connected mobile phones such as those used in Japan can indeed be classified as a variety of WILD, Rochelle
and Pea made no mention in their report of iTree-like applications for e-learning (Roschelle & Pea 2002).

                                                        
            Fig.1. Commercial web site over the mobile phone to memorize the English word
                                    (http://www.moetan.jp/online.html)

ITREE

System configuration
iTree renews the wallpaper display with enrollment data stored on the "iii online" web server(Figure 2).      "iii
online" is housed on a Windows 2000 server running Internet Information Services (IIS) 5.0.      The server uses
the processing environment Active Server Pages 3.0 to handle iTree requests and various other functions.     The
iTree application runs on the Java SDK 1.4 development environment in NTT DoCoMo 504 Series mobile
phones.  Figure 1 shows a mobile phone with iTree installed. When a learner flips open his phone, iTree
immediately retrieves updated data from the BBS     server via HTTP protocol (Figure 3).  First, iTree assigns each
learner a unique ID with which it performs database searches.        Results are sent to the learner's iTree via the
HTTP protocol in text format. iTree then interprets this text data as a wallpaper image.   It takes on average two
seconds to load image data after open the lid.

                                 The  image      is displayed   as   wallpaper  on  the  LCD  screen
                                 whenever the mobile phone is on.

                                 The  black     arrow  denotes   this  wallpaper.   Switching on the
                                 power of      the mobile automatically    runs the iTree application,
                                 which refreshes the wallpaper image.       The image begins to load
                                 as soon    as  the  learner   flips the mobile   phone open.  iTree
                                 immediately     sends for and   retrieves data from  the BBS  server
                                 via HTTP protocol.

                                                Figure 2: iTree

                                                        
VISUALIZING ON THE WALL PAPER
The choice of image needed to meet two requirements: (1) BBS forum information had to be available at a
glance, and (2) the image itself had to be appealing. A tree which grows and changes was chosen to fulfill these
requirements. The metaphor of a growing tree was chosen as (1) the tree itself comes to symbolize the learner
and (2) the growth of the tree expresses growth in forum participation.   The image of the tree is fixed in the
middle of the mobile phone screen. The growth of the tree is affected by four variables: (1) your number of
posts, (2) the number of times your posts are read, (3) the number of replies to your posts, and (4) your ratio of
total forum posts to replies.  These variable factors make up an individual user's BBS participation profile.
Table 1 shows the screen changes that these variables correspond to.

                                                      iii online
                                         OS : Windows 2000 Server
                                            Web server : IIS5.0
                     Server-Side Processing Environment:Active Server Pages 3.0

                                                             (3) Search database
                                                             and compile result

                (2) Send learner ID                        (4) Send compiled data result
                    (HTTP)                                            HTTP

                                                                 (5) Refresh image

                                                       (1) Learner flips open phone

                                                         iTree
                     Operation Confirmation Environment: NTT DoCoMo 504 Series
                                     Development Environment: Java SDK1.4

                                       Figure 3: System Configulation

                                                        
                                             Table 1: Screen Changes

                                 Participation
                                 Variable            Change on Screen
                                 Number of posts     Tree growth.  Posting
                                                     thickens the trunk of the tree
                                                     and grows branches on the
                                 Number of times     Number and color of leaves.
                                 posts are read      As posts are read, leaves
                                                     sprout and turn green. After a
                                                     certain period, leaves
                                                     eventually fall.
                                 Number of replies   Red nuts. A red nut denotes a
                                 to posts            reply to a post.

                                 Ratio of total      Color of sky. The more
                                 forum posts to      replies received vs. overall
                                 replies             posts, the darker the blue of
                                                     the sky.

When a learner opens his mobile phone, iTree refreshes the screen image according to these four participation
variables. In Figure 4, the number of posts is expressed as tree growth.       Each post causes the tree to grow
branches and   the trunk of the tree to thicken. There are sixty-four stages to tree growth. When   the final stage is
reached, the tree covers the whole screen and growth stops. Conversely, if the learner neglects to post for a time,
branches thin  out   and the trunk  withers. In   Figure 5, leaves indicate  the   number of  posts read  by   forum
members.  The more forum members read a learner's posts, the thicker and greener his iTree leaves become.         In
Figure 6, the number of red nuts indicates the number of replies a learner's posts have attracted.         One nut
indicates one reply. Red nuts disappear in time.
The higher the ratio of a learner's posts with replies to overall posts, the bluer the iTree sky becomes, as shown
in Figure 7.   The rationale for including this factor is that a narrowing of this ratio indicates the learner is
communicating interactively in the forum and therefore solving problems in a collaborative manner. Figure 8
indicates the screen changes that correspond to these four variables.   Ordinarily, learners will see their own tree
onscreen, yet with the touch of a button they can also view other learners' trees. Finally, of course there are other
methods of encouraging learner participation in BBS discussions.       The objective of this paper is not to explore
this variety of possibilities, but rather to focus on a specific educational use of the mobile phone and analyze its
effectiveness. The following section assesses the effectiveness of the iTree application when put to the test.

                                       Figure4. the growth of tree's    trunk

                                                          
                                    Figure5. the growth of tree's        leave

                                                                                  red nuts

                                            Figure6. red buts

                                                                             Blue sky

                                        Figure7. The color of sky

                                   Figure8. The change of whole image

EVALUATION

Overview
Our iTree experiment was conducted in cooperation with students of information policy at the Interfaculty
Initiative in Information Studies Graduate School at the University of Tokyo.    The experiment was conducted on
students in the course Information Policy, a winter term option of fifteen lectures given between Oct. 4, 2002
and Jan. 31, 2003. The first four lectures of the course summarized Japanese information policy at the national
and municipal levels. In his fifth lecture, the lecturer asked students to research an aspect of information policy
that took their interest and prepare a presentation on it for the class. The sixth to fifteenth lectures of the course
consisted of these student presentations, which covered a wide range of subjects.          Presentation titles included

                                                       
"Transportation Policy in an Information Society," "Remarks on Music and Money in TV Broadcasting," "The
Role of the Public Record Office in the Computerization of Public Administration," "The Current State of the
Contents Industry and Policy," "Progress of Singapore IT Policy," "Current Terrestrial Broadcasting and Public
Broadcasting," "Considerations on Mega-Disasters and Info-Communications".        Students were also asked to
conduct Q&A sessions and discuss the presentations in the course BBS forum. The ten information policy
students asked to volunteer as subjects of the experiment were asked to use iTree throughout the remainder of
the course.  At an early stage, one subject dropped out, leaving the experiment with nine subjects, four male and
five female.

Vantage points and methods of evaluation
We set the following three vantage points: (1) Have the subjects been browsing the forum?, (2) Have the
subjects been posting to the forum?, (3) How does the learner evaluate iTree?.
In order to answer these three questions, we analyzed the data in the following way: First, focusing on points (1)
and (2), we analyzed "iii online" log data and compared the iTree group and non-iTree group results. The latter
group numbered 53 students. To address point (3), the nine iTree group subjects filled out a questionnaire at the
end of the experiment. eliciting responses on a five level scale: "Very much agree," "Somewhat agree," "Hard to
say which," "Somewhat disagree," and "Very much disagree."

RESULTS

Effect of iTree on learner participation in a BBS forum
As previously mentioned, "participation" refers to browsing or posting messages in a BBS forum. Table 2
indicates the average numbers of times both iTree and non-iTree groups read and posted to the forum. On
average, iTree group subjects browsed the forum 421.7778 times each (total number of browses: 3796; S.D.=
348.6734).   On average, subjects in the non-iTree group browsed the forum 232.5849 times each (total number
of browses:  12  327; S.D.= 242.5107).    A    Mann-Whitney's   U Test of the    above result showed  it to be
statistically significant (p<0.05). On average, iTree group subjects posted 7.11111 times each to the board (total
posts: 64; S.D.= 5.2546).  Non-iTree group subjects on average posted 5.8235 times each (total posts: 313;
S.D.= 6.9360).  We did not obtain a statistically significant result for these figures. Consequently, our results
indicate that iTree does not encourage learners to post.  It does, however, encourage learners to read forum

Item (unit)                                     iTree Group (9)           Non-iTree Group (53)
Average number of reading sessions              421.7778(S.D.=348.6734 ) 232.5849(S.D.=242.5107) **
Average number of posts                         7.111111(S.D.=5.2546)     5.8235(S.D.=6.9360)
** p<0.05
postings.

                                        Table 2: Analysis of Log Data

Learners' subjective evaluations
The subjective evaluations of the iTree group regarding issues such as operation ease and appeal of images is
shown in Table 3. Responses to statements (1) "iTree easy to learn" and (3) "Useful BBS tool" were on the
whole positive. Subjects tended to disagree with statement (2) "Screen hard to read".  These responses suggest
subjects regarded iTree favorably in general. We also asked subjects how they responded to the changes in their
tree. We found subjects responded positively to statement (4) "Worried about growth of tree." This concern was
evident in the generally positive responses to both statement (5) "Change in color or number of leaves triggered
posting or forum browsing" and (6) "Change in number of red nuts triggered posting or forum browsing". This
concern suggests that iTree may act as a trigger for subject participation in a BBS forum. Leaves change color

                                                        
when others read your posts.   Red nuts appear when others post replies to you.      What is significant in both of
these cases is that the activities of others are changing your tree. It would seem that interest in the responses to
your posts is a factor which triggers a poster to browse the forum.

                                    Table 3: Learners' Subjective Evaluations

 Item                                      Very much      Somewhat       Hard to say  Somewhat      Very much
                                           agree          agree          which        disagree      disagree

 1. iTree easy to learn                    3              5              1            0             0
 2. Screen hard to read                    0              0              2            4             3
 3. Useful BBS tool                        3              4              2            0             0
 4. Cared about thegrowth of tree          4              3              2            0             0
 5. Change in color or number of           0              7              1            1             0
 leaves triggered posting or forum
 browsing
 6. Change in number of red nuts           4              5              0            0             0
 triggered posting or forum browsing
 7.Branch growth triggered posting or      0              5              2            2             0
 forum browsing
 8. Change in sky color triggered          0              0              4            4             1
 posting or forum browsing

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE ISSUES
iTree, the mobile phone application developed and evaluated in this research project, was designed to increase
student  participation in course-related BBS     forums.   The  application  aims to  accomplish   this by simply
displaying their state of BBS participation via mobile phone wallpaper. Our evaluation led us to the following
three conclusions:

(1) Learners who use iTree more actively browse.
(2) Overall, learners evaluate iTree positively.
(3) Among the iTree functions, those which represent others' evaluation of a learner's posts have the potential to
encourage learners to browse the forum.

iTree gives learners the information about who sent reply and when they should go to the forum. Some previous
research has showed     that learners need not   only to  share their  knowledge  but  also to get the  awareness
information  about  the status of interaction (Gutwin,   Stark  and  Greenber  1995). The   information that iTree
offered is a type of awareness information which triggered browsing.        When learner get the messages from
others, they feel  like checking it and feel confident that their messages are relevant and useful for others. By
this, iTree motivated learner to participate in online discussion.
Nonetheless, there are still some issues yet to address. Most significantly, due to iTree's limited specifications, it
does not sufficiently encourage students to post on forums. In the future, we may overhaul the iTree graphic
interface in an effort to address this limitation. The number of higher education institutions offering e-learning
classes grows every year.    Applications such as iTree have the potential to facilitate this growth. This research
marks the beginning of a mission to improve and refine iTree and related socially significant technologies.

REFERENCES
Central Council for Education in Japan (2003),    Modification of University Establishment Standards (Report)
    http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/chukyo/chukyo0/toushin/030202.htm

                                                         
Collison, G., Elbaum, B., Haavind, S. & Tinker, R.(2000) Facilitating Online-learning : Effective Strategy for
    Moderators, Atwood publishing, Madison, WI
Gutwin, C., Stark, G. and Greenberg, S.(1995) Support for workspace awareness in educational groupware.
    Proceedings of CSCL'95 (Bloomington, In, October, 1995) 147-156
University Council in Japan (2000) University Council Higher Education Required in the Age of Globalization
    (Report).
    http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/12/daigaku/toushin/001101.htm
Kaneko,  M.    (2002), How   E-learning  will  Change   Higher   Education,  IDE Modern  Higher    Education.    440,
    Institute for Democratic Education, Tokyo, 5-11
Murai,  J. (2000)  IT   and the   Teaching  Revolution.      IDE Modern    Higher   Education.    422, Institute  for
    Democratic Education, Tokyo, 12-18
Nakahara,   J, Maesako    T,.   .Nagaoka,   K. (2002)    CSCL    System   Design   Problems   Considered--Design,
    Experiments, and Cognitive Science, Japan Journal of Educational Technology. 25, 4, 259-267
Nakayama, M, Morimoto, Y, Akahori, K, Shimizu, Y (2001) Development of Mobile Phone Distance Education
    Support    Systems.   Proceedings     for  the  17th    Conference  of  the  Japan   Society  for  Educational
    Technology(Kagoshima, Japan November 2001), 49-50
Nomura   Research   Institute   (2003) Results  of  the  13th  Survey   Concerning  the  Use   of Information    and
    Communications, Nomura Research Institute, Tokyo
    http://www.nri.co.jp/news/2003/030501_1/030501_1.pdf
Otsuka, K,  Yahiro,    K (2002),  User  Interface  of a  Real-Time   Mobile  Phone   Teaching   Evaluation System,
    Proceedings for the 18th Conference of the Japan Society for Educational Technology(Nagaoka, Japan,
    November 2002), 695-696
Roschelle,  J. &  Pea,   R.(2002)  A   walk on  the   WILD    side: How   wireless  handhelds  may  change  CSCL,
    Proceedings of     CSCL 2002(Boulder, CO, January 2002 ) LEA, NJ, pp.51-60
Salomon, G.(2000),     E-moderating: The key to teaching and learning online Kogan Page, UK
Seki, T. Shimizu, T, Shigematsu, J (2001), Development of Java Language Education Materials for Mobile
    Terminals,    Proceedings      for  the    17th   Conference     of  the  Japan     Society   for  Educational
    Technology(Kagoshima, Japan November 2001), 255-256
Tate, A. (1997) Impact of a Virtual University (I). College Management. 93, Nov.-Dec., 46-50, Recruit, Tokyo
Yamaoka, T. (2000), School Information via Mobile Phone and the Development of a Mail Distribution System,
    Proceedings   for   the 6th National  Convention     of Association of  Educational Technology     Societies 2nd
    Fascicle(Naruto, Japan, October 2000), 31-32
Yamauchi,   Y,  Nakahara,   J.(2002),  e-learning   Site iii online  University  of Tokyo,  Japanese    Society   for
    Information and Systems in Education : Report of Research(Tokyo, Japan, October 2002) 2002, 1, 10-12
Yoshida, A. (2001) Online and Face-to-Face Education--A Comparison. College Management. 110, 58-62,
    Recruit, Tokyo
Yoshida,   A.(2002)    e-learning in   Higher  Education--the    Emergence    of Virtual University,    Information
    Processing. 23, 4, 407-413
Yoshida, A. (2003) e-learning in U.S. Higher Education. Publishing Bureau of Tokyo Denki University, 8-24

                                                         
