     From CSCL Classroom to Real-World Settings
                      through Project-Based Learning

                    Naoko Osada                                                  Naomi Miyake
         Graduate School of Literature                      School of Computer and Cognitive Sciences
          Aoyama Gakuin University                                              Chukyo University
          d1203001@cc.aoyama.ac.jp                                      nmiyake@sccs.chukyo-u.ac.jp

      Abstract. A number of studies indicate that project-based learning enhances a student's motivation
      and   in-depth  understanding,       while  the  CSCL   environment       promotes  collaboration   within the
      project.  However,      we   know   little about  how teachers     or  curriculum  designers should  design    a
      course   utilizing  the  project-based     learning  approach     according  to real-world  activities. In this
      study, we investigate an undergraduate cognitive science course that combines CSCL classroom
      activities with observational project activities in educational fields. As a result we identified three
      requirements    of    a project-based      learning  design    to  promote   integration  between   classroom
      knowledge and authentic field activities: 1) Parallel-structured course involving both disciplinary
      and project activities; 2) Reality of the project activities; and 3) accessibility of the project content.
      In the conclusion, we discuss how these findings should guide the development of CSCL-based,
      project-oriented courses.

      Keywords: Project-based learning, knowledge integration, teaching cognitive science

INTRODUCTION
Project-based  learning   (PBL)     is a popular   instructional  method     in classrooms  all over  the world.  It is now
generally accepted   that projects     play an   important role   in furthering  the  learning process. The   importance  of
project activities that developed for a real-world purpose was pointed out in the first quarter of the last century
(Kilpatrick, 1918). Many studies in the CSCL research field have discussed how to facilitate collaboration within
the project. To ensure the pragmatic value of the knowledge integrated in the CSCL environment, we should also
consider how to integrate classroom and real-world activities through PBL. Thus we seek to determine the design
of a PBL course and the kinds of project settings that are suitable for students. This study describes the design of
a concentrated elective course for undergraduates majoring in cognitive science. In this course, students engaged
in class observational projects in educational fields based on knowledge-integration activities in their classroom,
which were strongly supported by the CSCL environment.

DESIGNING PROJECTS
Although there have been many informative studies about PBL, most have been within the context of science
classrooms. These studies indicate that projects promote a higher degree of engagement and inquiry (e.g., Linn &
Hsi, 2000;  Kolodner,    et   al., 2003).   Because   the  fields of  cognitive  science  are  highly interdisciplinary  and
activity structures in the fields vary within their individual domains, we are attempting to identify a PBL design
that will be able to integrate classroom knowledge with authentic field activities.
  Three important elements of project design need to be considered. First is the timing of the project. In an
interdisciplinary field, it is not practical to wait until the end of the course to conduct a consequential project. It
would be more profitable for students to bring their questions from the field of the project back to the classroom,
determine  the disciplinary   problem,    and    then proceed to  the   inquiry  phase. Therefore,  we  propose  a parallel-
structured course composed of project and disciplinary activities. The second consideration is the project setting.
The students should be able to apply disciplinary knowledge to the field based on a relevant understanding of the
activity structure. Therefore,     we  are  particularly  concerned     with the reality of the  project. We   believe  facts
observed in the field are useful in linking parallel activities and promote collaborative learning. It is important to
observe the field carefully in the project activities. The third consideration is the content of the project, especially
from the  standpoint  of  its accessibility    by the  student.   It is important  that students be  allowed  to select  and
undertake projects based on their individual interests and ideas. We maintain that diverse, well-designed field
activities and an appropriate level of content are important factors in achieving accessibility of the project.

                                                              
     Finally, in  this study   we   decided  to develop     parallel-structured  course     that includes  a   variety   of class-
observation   projects.  We   investigated   whether    the project activities   in  a parallel-structured     course    with  high
reality and accessibility would promote knowledge integration between classroom learning and field activities.

RESEARCH CONTEXT

Course Overview
A three-day concentrated elective course based on the CSCL environment began in 1998 (Miyake, et al., 2001).
In a two-month course term, three classroom activity days are allocated between intervals. The course objective
for the 2004 program was to "Observe and evaluate the class from the cognitive science point of view and make
suggestions to improve the class." A total of twenty-five students attended the entire 2004 course. Every student
had studied the basic concepts and findings of cognitive science in prior courses. Three teaching assistants (TAs)
attended this course. The first author was a TA and the second author was a lecturer in this course.
  To equip the students with a basic knowledge of the project, this course exploited several CSCL methods and
tools. The students used video clippings and a commenting system called Commentable Movie Sheet (CMS).
Through the CMS, they could review the streaming of resources and clip the important points out with their
comments    (Miyake      &  Shirouzu,  2004).   They     used  a   reflective note-sharing       system  called  ReCoNote        to
summarize the essence of the resources for a jigsaw session. The jigsaw sessions, called complex jigsaw, were
structured to guide effective interdisciplinary knowledge integration (Miyake, et al., 2001).
  By    the end   of the   2003  program,   the objective   of  the project   activities  in  this course  was   to  design     and
propose a   class based    on  the  findings of cognitive    science.  Even   though    students   integrated    the findings    of
cognitive science for the projects using the CSCL environment, their outputs indicated that it was difficult for
them to connect class design elements and the findings of cognitive science (Masukawa, 2003). They tended to
rely on their  experience   in  the  CSCL   environment     or try to impose     their cognitive   science    knowledge     on  the
design. We recognized that students did not sufficiently understand the activity structure in the field and did not
have the opportunity to observe concrete facts to link the project with their classroom knowledge. Therefore, in
the 2004 program, we rearranged the project and disciplinary activities and set the class observation in the first
part of the parallel-structured course. In this way the students could bring their observed facts back from the field
before proceeding to the disciplinary activities in the classroom to analyze the problem.

        Table 1   Structured course activities (Activities are numbered from #1 to #21 in sequential order.)

                                 [ Disciplinary       Activities ]                                 [ Project     Activities ]
            Observe the class    +    Integrate cognitivescience findingsIntegrate class observationand cognitive science findings
            #2. Think about Japanese                                                             #1. Introduce the projects
            science classes
 Phase      #3. Analyze the activitystructure ofJapanese1science classes#4. Link the positivepointsof the class to evidence from#5. Kick off the projectscognitive science[A]
            #6. Think about  the                              #7. Clarify the evidence of        #8. Plan the field activities
            best practices                                     goodness of the class      [B]                              [C]
        Interval 1                                                                               #9. Observe the class

                                       #11. Integrate                                            #10. Interim session
                                       cognitive science      #12. Point out the important
 Phase2                                pieces of workabout humanlearning throughcognitive science findingsto evaluate the class[D]#13. Organize cognitive science#14. Reanalyze the observedclass[F]
                                       the complex jigsaw      findings to evaluate the class    #15. Reflect and reorganize
                                                                                          [E]     the project             [G]

        Interval 2                                                                               #16. Project activities
                                                              #17. Review the preliminary        #18. Prepare for the final
 Phase                                                         presentation                       presentation
     3                                                           Focus of analysis               #19. Final session
                                                                                                 #20. Reflect of the project
                                                                                                 #21. Plan the future work

                                                               
Course Design and Projects
Next we describe how we implemented our three design requirements: parallel-structured course, reality of the
project,  and project  accessibility.  We   allocated parallel   disciplinary   and  project  activities   in a three-phased
course structure, as shown in Table 1. We designated three substructures in disciplinary activities to undertake
the project. The first aspect was class observation; the second involved the findings of cognitive science about
human learning. In addition to these, we allocated a third to integrate the knowledge gained from both aspects.
The students engaged in a total of twenty-one activities within this parallel structure.
   The objectives of each phase were as follows. The objective of Phase 1 was to observe and evaluate the class.
At the   end of  the class activities  they made  a plan    of  observation  and  observed   the   class in   Interval 1. The
objective of Phase 2 was to evaluate the class using evidence from the cognitive science point of view after the
interim project report session. The objective of Phase 3 was to make suggestions to improve the class design. In
the final session, students presented project reports that included class analysis, evaluations, and suggestions.
   Each student participated with the disciplinary activities in the group other than the project group. After every
activity, each  student wrote  personal    ideas on the    activity   worksheet with brief  prompts     as scaffoldings.  We
supposed that the items on each sheet represented the student's knowledge-integration levels of disciplinary and
project activities. We selected seven worksheets designated as A to G in Table 1, as well as the project reports in
the interim and final sessions, to focus of our investigation of students' knowledge-integration activities.
   As for the projects, diverse, well-designed educational settings were selected from lectures in school, classes
in the Nagoya City Science Museum (NCSM), and exhibitions also in the NCSM. On the first day of the course,
each student selected one project from eight alternatives, based on their interests. The kinds of field activities
selected were up to each student, to respect their individual motivation and ideas. Finally seven projects were
formed.   In this study we    focused  on  the following    four projects  that observed    the   class or exhibition  in  the
NCSM. The Advanced Science Workshop (ASW) was an organized class of the NCSM for students at the high-
school level and above. The aim of this workshop was to obtain a thorough understanding of physics through
experiments and discussion. The Manufacturing Lab (ML) was a class for elementary and junior high school
students  at the  laboratory  corner  in the NCSM.    The    students   of the  lab crafted a toy  that  was    a paper   plate
attached to a motor. The vibration of the motor is transferred to the plate, and the miniatures on the plate begin to
swing and turn. "Life on the Earth (LIFE)" is a regular exhibit in the NCSM. This corner shows how people
adapt  to the  local climate.  There   are  two  adjacent   glass-sided  rooms   called "heat     room"  and    "cold  room."
Visitors  can enter  each  room    and experience   the   climate.  "Let's touch a  Tornado      (TOR)"    is another  regular
NCSM exhibit. Visitors can watch and experience the sensation of a tornado produced by a generator positioned
in the center of the exhibit.

RESULTS
According to our "focus of analysis" depicted in Table 1, we analyzed 421 items on 140 worksheets. We selected
42 items from the reports of the interim session and 85 items from the final session. To evaluate the level of
items, we used a single scale shown in Table 2, in accordance with the course objective. To address the transition
of the level, we calculated the weighted average level of items using the points in Table 2. Inter-coder agreement
rates between three independent coders were 85% to 90%. We were able to negotiate all discrepancies.

Transition of Item Level
Transition of the weighted average level of the worksheets demonstrated that the knowledge-integration level
became higher in Phase 2 (A: 1.88, B: 2.20, C: 1.67, D: 2.71, E: 2.29, F: 2.34, and G: 2.26) . The weighted
average   levels  of both  sessions   (interim session    2.19,  final  session 3.01)  demonstrated      that  the preceding
activities in the parallel-structured course were relevant to these sessions. In the final session, there were 31 items
at point level 4: 21 items were at L4, and 10 at S4 in the entire class.

                                           Table 2  Integration level of items

     Level                                                Description                                              Point
       L0         Irrelevant words                                                                                   0
       L1         Keywords or phrases only                                                                           1
       L2         Explanations of the class or exhibition                                                            2
       L3         Explanations from the cognitive science point of view                                              3
       L4         Evaluations of the class or exhibition supported by cognitive science findings                     4
       S2         Ideas for improvement                                                                              2
       S3         Preliminary suggestions for the class or exhibition                                                3
       S4         Suggestions for the class or exhibition supported by cognitive science findings                    4

                                                             
Activity Process
We analyzed all worksheets to find in each project the first mention of the concepts that were clearly related to
the final items. By the end of the interim session, 43 of the final 85 items (50.59%) were mentioned in a student's
worksheet or project  output   in all  levels. As for  the     level 4  items, 19 of    the final 31  items (61.29%)     were
mentioned by the end of the interim session. These results indicate that level 4 items in the final session were
raised in the early stage of each project, and the group improved on those items through parallel activities.
  To investigate the activity process in detail, we organized all the items on the worksheets in relation to the
final 85 items. Table 3 is one of the ML project activities. In this process, four members thought about the uses
of a motor. In the ML class, the children made a toy using the vibration of a motor. However, project members
wondered if that application of a motor was for turning rather than for vibrating. Table 3 shows that members
wrote about the motor instruction with a variety of expressions, and they reconstructed their ideas. They also
linked their observed facts to the findings of cognitive science that they had integrated in disciplinary activities. It
is notable that Worksheets D and E were the disciplinary activity sheets, and each member of the ML project
engaged in these disciplinary activities in a group other than the project group. In the final session they offered
suggestions about instruction   focusing  on   a motor,      as the  S4 item.  Observed     facts effectively promoted    the
students' collaborative learning process. Accordingly, two of our design requirements, parallel-structured course
and reality of the project, successfully contributed to effective knowledge integration.

Class Design vs. Class Observation
In the equivalent three-phased 2003 course, students engaged in a class design project. It was a kind of imaginary
project at the end of the course; that is, they hadn't conducted any field observations. Each project had a poster
session in Phase 3; in this session each project group presented a detailed lecture plan and its advantages. It was
expected that by presenting the advantages during the poster session, students would be able to demonstrate how
they integrated the findings of cognitive science into their design. However, 16 of 30 advantage items (53.33%)
were based on their existing classroom experiences (e.g., to utilize jigsaw session, group activity, or discussion
board). These results from the 2003 study told us that a class design project did not provide concrete observable
facts. For this reason, students tended to rely on their existing experiences in the CSCL classroom.

Characteristics of Projects
There were seven projects in this course. Each project group improved their output toward the final session, but
there were differences among the project groups. To clarify the differences, we summarized the characteristics of
the four NCSM projects in Table 4. As shown in Table 4, the starting levels of the project at the interim session
and the number of the project members aren't directly related to the final levels. These differences come from
two sources, the level of content and the profile of the field activities.
  The final levels and the improvement of the ML and LIFE projects are high. It could be that the contents of
the ML class and LIFE exhibition were at the appropriate level for each project. The improvement in these two
projects suggests that students could have gained concrete facts through their observations and they had exploited
the facts to promote their activities. Comparing the difference between the two projects of the NCSM exhibitions,

                      Table 3     Items on each worksheet about a motor in the ML project

Sheet         Student U                    Student  O                         Student   S                  Student    N
  D     Did the teacher teach          Teach the relation between
        how can they use it            this craft and subjects
        in another context?            like math or science.
  E     Can they apply this to                                       Integrating knowledge that
        a more general problem?                                      can be used in a broader area.
  F     The rule of vibration          It was better to begin        Make the principle clear. That    Did they understand
        can be generalized later.      with thinking about           class was for lower grade         the principle?
                                       the principle of a motor      of elementary school, so there    Perhaps not.
                                       or making a motor.            wasn't a  detailed  explanation   Did  the teacher   give
                                                                     of  the   motor.   Applying  the  enough information?
                                                                     motor to another context.
  G                                                                  When we teach the principles
                                                                     to kids, what is the appropriate
                                                                     instruction level?
Final More general applications   of a motor should be taught in the   class. In that class, students engaged in crafts using a
      motor, but they knew little about how to use a motor. It is better to show how we can use a motor as a tool to do
      things. For example, it would be better to introduce another toy that uses a motor, so that they can see how it is used.

                                                               
                                 Table 4   Comparison of the projects in the NCSM

 Project   Interim     Final     Improve     Number ofmembersClass type Contentlevel          Field activities
 ASW        2.00       2.75        0.75          4         Lecture       High      Observation with a video camera andinterview with students and staff.
  ML        2.17       3.75        1.58          4         Lecture      Medium     Observation with voice recorders andinterview with volunteers.
 LIFE       2.00       3.54        1.54          2       Exhibition       All      Observation   of    the   corner   andinterview with various visitors.
 TOR        2.17       2.53        0.37          4       Exhibition       All      Observation of the unit.

the profiles of their field activities were different from each other. The LIFE project engaged in a greater variety
of activities than the TOR project. The output level of the TOR project improved, but to a lesser degree. This
might indicate that the variability of the field activities of the LIFE project was one of the effective frameworks
to evaluate the class. As for the ASW project, the members repeatedly mentioned the same concepts on their
worksheets, but reconstruction and refinement of the idea were insufficient. The level of the content of the ASW
classes was high; therefore project members may not have a sufficient understanding of the contents to apply the
findings of cognitive science. In high-level content projects, there were many worksheet items that did not show
up in the final session. It is possible that the students were unable to finish their evaluations.
  From the comparison of the four projects, while it appears that the accessibility of the project primarily stems
from the level of the content, it is also enhanced by the variety of activities undertaken by the students.

DISCUSSION
We investigated the connection between the CSCL classroom and real-world settings through PBL. The results
positively indicate the parallel-structured PBL course, reality of the project, and accessibility of the content of the
project are important to promote a successful linkage between classroom knowledge and real-world settings. The
disciplinary activities of students in this study were strongly supported by the CSCL environment. Multimedia
resources, technology for knowledge integration, and structured collaborative learning activities were the key
factors in the students' progress. In addition to these, we pointed out three important design conditions to transfer
classroom  knowledge    to the   real world. Our   three design   requirements  should    be the key    principles  in the
development of CSCL-based, project-oriented courses. It is particularly important to implement project activities
that provide concrete observable facts in the CSCL environment.
  Finally, we would like to address the question-and-answer sessions in the interim and final sessions. There
were  seven  project groups   in the  classroom, and   each group   had  its  own  field  activities. The   varied  project
settings corresponded   to distributed  expertise  in  the CSCL    classroom.   Discussions    during  the  two  sessions
allowed the project groups to interact. Especially in the final session they brought up additional questions based
on their own project and thoughts about future work through the interaction among the projects. Varied project
settings may well be another design requirements in the CSCL environment to promote sustained inquiry.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The  authors  would  like  to thank   the curators and   staff of the  Nagoya   City   Science Museum       for their kind
cooperation. Critical comments from Hiroyuki Masukawa contributed to the improvement of the manuscript.

REFERENCES
Kilpatrick, W.H. (1918) The project method. Teachers College Record, 19, 4, 319-335.
Kolodner,  J.L., Camp,  P.J.,  Crismond,   D.,  Fasse, B., Gray,   J., Holbrook,   J., Puntambekar,    S.,  and Ryan,   M.
      (2003)  Problem-based      learning  meets   case-based   reasoning  in  the middle-school      science   classroom:
      putting Learning by Design TM into practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 4, 495-547.
Linn, M.  C., and  Hsi, S.   (2000)   Computer,  Teacher,   Peers:  Science    Learning   Partners.   Lawrence   Erlbaum
      Associates, Inc, Mahwah, NJ.
Miyake,  N.,  Masukawa,    H., and    Shirouzu, H.  (2001)  The   complex     jigsaw   as an enhancer   of  collaborative
      knowledge building in undergraduate introductory cognitive science courses. Euro-CSCL, 454-461.
Miyake, N., and Shirouzu, H. (2004) Learning from lectures for comprehension. International Conference of the
      Learning Sciences 2004.
Masukawa, H. (2003) Reforming university curriculum through design experiment approach. The 20th Annual
      Meeting of the Japanese Cognitive Science Society 2003 , 368-369. (in Japanese)

                                                           
