 MatrixDesks: Interactive Computing Desks toward
One-on-Two Educational Computing Environments
            Hercy N.H. Cheng                                            Ben Chang
 Department of Computer Science and                       Research Center for Science and
          Information Engineering                              Technology of Learning
  National Central University, Taiwan                   National Central University, Taiwan
           hercy@cl.ncu.edu.tw                                     ben@cl.ncu.edu.tw

                Yi-Chan Deng                                          Tak-Wai Chan
 Department of Computer Science and                   Graduate Institute of Network Learning
          Information Engineering                                       Technology
  National Central University, Taiwan                   National Central University, Taiwan
           ycdeng@cl.ncu.edu.tw                                    chan@cl.ncu.edu.tw

     Abstract. The era of 1:1 educational computing environment where each student has one mobile
     computing device is not far away. When such technology designed for individuals is applied to
     group learning, several student grouping problems could be encountered. In this paper, three issues
     are identified to illustrate the vision of the 1:2 educational computing environments. In a 1:2
     classroom,    besides   the mobile   devices, students   also have   their own  computing    desks, i.e.
     MatrixDesks, to solve the potential student grouping problems. By putting MatrixDesks together, a
     small group can form a shared working space with the combined desktops immediately and they
     can use their own digital pens as the input devices to work on and talk over it. Meanwhile, the
     students   use  their   mobile devices  to  handle the   related individual  tasks.  MatrixDesks    is a
     coordination of applying the mobile computing and invisible computing to collaborative learning,
     which will lead to the accomplishment of 1:2 educational computing environments.

     Keywords:       student  grouping, interactive  computing     desks, ubiquitous  computing,    invisible
     computing, 1:1 educational computing, 1:2 educational computing

BACKGROUND
Computing Desks
A classroom desk provides a working space for learning in the classroom. Students are used to have their own
desks in class, and they are familiar with the interaction on the desk, such as reading, writing, painting, talking
over the desk, sharing objects on the desk, etc. In the field of human interface interactions, there are several
systems using the metaphor of desks, such as DigitalDesk (Wellner, 1993), meatDESK (Ishii & Ullmer, 1997;
Ullmer & Ishii, 1997), Sensetable (Patten et al., 2001), InteracTable (Streitz et al., 1999), ConnecTable (Tandler
et al, 2001) etc. Ishii and Ullmer (1997) also argue that the graphical user interface (GUI) approach falls short in
embracing  the  rich interface   modalities between   people  and   the physical  environments,    and the  desktop
metaphor should be pushed back into the real world.

One-on-Two educational Computing
Many researchers have envisioned in a future not too far, a personal computing device for every student in a
classroom  will be   as indispensable  as a  pencil. These    devices could be   products evolved   from    what we
commonly   see  today   like notebook,  tablet PC,   personal digital assistant  (PDA),  cellular phone, electronic
dictionary, visual graphical calculator, gameboy, and so forth. This vision of 1 student 1 computing device
classroom is termed as one-on-one (1:1) educational computing environment (www.G1On1.org).
    Now, assuming 1:1 educational computing is already practicing in significant percentages of classrooms in
the world, and given that the prices of large panel displays are dropping rapidly, 1:2 educational computing, that
is, 1 student 2 computing devices, will bound to happen. We envision one possible 1:2 classroom scenario is that
every student will have a personal handy and light device that the student brings along with her everywhere, and
in the classroom, her own desk is also a computer, that is, the desktop of her desk is a large computer screen.
Such computer desks, which we call MatrixDesks, can facilitate nicely many small group learning activities in a
classroom.

                                                         
THREE STUDENT GROUPING PROBLEMS
Scott et al. (2003) found that sharing a physical display positively influenced the students' collaboration, rather
than separate displays (whether in the same room or not). In the shared workspace, it is easy for students to reach
a mutual understanding and to collaborate with each other. However, in a 1:1 classroom, it is not easy to
construct shared workspaces, because students may bring their personal computing devices which could be
different sizes or types. As one may imagine, in a classroom equipped with several computing desks, small
groups of students will stand or sit around the desk with their eyes looking at their desks while talking with their
neighboring students. Since one student will have her own computing desk in the classroom, the best way is that
all students will put their own desks together to form a large desk so that they can sit around the large desk
focusing their attention on the desktop, that is to say, the large computer screen composed of individual desktop
screen of a computing desk. This student grouping problem we termed as sharing screen problem.
     Since   there could  be plenty different small group   activities with  various  ways   of grouping  students,
combining desks to construct larger working spaces is a natural and reasonable thought for a small group of
students. Now, their desks, suppose they can be moved easily around in the classroom, are arranged in different
configuration for supporting these activities. For example, in Jigsaw collaboration, at first students split into
several focus groups, which focus on different aspects of a common topic, and then they return to their home
group to share their "expertise" learned from focus groups to produce a presentation about the topic. When
students come back to their home group, their desks should change the grouping automatically. And when a
teacher wants to conduct a group learning activity, he has to consider not only how to group the students but also
how to make their desks understand the grouping configurations. There are several ways of grouping students
with their devices. Typically, teachers have to make a list manually to tell the desks which ones are grouped
together. However, this is a time consuming work for teachers, especially when some learning activities need to
group students again. To solve this problem, a computing desk should be "aware" which desk is belonged to
whom and which desk is currently attached to it and on which side. This is another student grouping problem
and we term it is the desk configuration problem.
     On the other hand, pen-based interfaces are one of the natural input devices for students on the computing
desks. Generally speaking, such input devices are designed for a single user and dedicated to one computing
desk only. When several computing desks are grouped, the students likely use their digital pens not only on their
own  desks  but also on  the entire shared workspace.    In other words,  the computing      desks should have the
capability to distinguish the group members' pens without ambiguity. In educational applications, it is crucial to
track each student's actions. Such problem is termed as input identification problem.
     This paper focuses on these three student grouping problems in 1:2 classrooms and intends to discuss
possible solution for them. Actually, student grouping is a fundamental issue of collaborative learning, not only
for 1:2 classrooms, but for 1:1 classrooms too. In the following sections, after discussion of related works, we
present the design of MatrixDesks to support student grouping with tablet PCs or notebooks.

RELATED WORKS
Our original project of using tablet PCs in the classroom is called Digital
Classroom Environment (DCE). Under the environment, there are several
wireless access points put at different place in the classroom, and also a
common display for projecting the screen of the teacher's tablet PC or
notebook. Each student has a wireless-enabled tablet PC on which the
student can make annotations on their content. DCE also provides both
teachers  and students  to manage   devices   including  broadcasting  the
materials, sharing annotations, etc. The Puzzle View (Deng et al., 2004)
is a prototype  that constructs a   group display by combining     several            Figure 1: Puzzle View
screens  of tablet PCs  (Figure 1).  It provides  shared working   spaces
among several computing devices and was designed for enhancing group interaction experience. However, it is
noticed that Puzzle View is not facile for teachers or students to change grouping immediately. Furthermore,
students also have to figure out the proper order of screens when they are grouped. The Puzzle View provides
not only a solution to the sharing screen problem but a foothold to explore the other problems.
      For the purpose  of  building a meeting  room, several  roomware®     (Streitz et al., 2001) components  are
developed in the first generation of i-LAND project, such as DynaWall, InteracTable (Streitz et al., 1999). The
InteracTable allows a single user at a time using the pens or his finger for gesture-based interaction with virtual
objects, while the DynaWall integrates tightly three interactive touch screens into a wall for a larger presentation
area or parallel presentation areas. To enhance the fluidity of the interaction, ConnecTables (Tandler et al., 2001)

                                                        
are designed to dynamically form a homogenous display area. When two ConnecTables are moved close to each
other, the workspaces  are  connected  so that  their users  can   work  individually in parallel and exchange
information. ConnecTable    solves the sharing screen  problem     and, to some extent,  the desk  configuration
problem.

SOLUTIONS OF THE STUDENT GROUPING PROBLEMS BY MATRIXDESKS
The design   of MatrixDesks is to  solve the sharing  screen problem,    desk configuration  problem, and input
identification problem so that students' experience can be improved in group learning activities. MatrixDesks
have wheels to assist students to move their desks easily. Each MatrixDesk is designed for one student with the
desktop being a sensing display, which is a large screen of an embedded computer (Figure 2). For writing and
painting on the sensing display, every student has a digital pen with its unique electromagnetic identification
which can be sensed by the sensing display. Such technique is used to solve the input identification problem.
       Let us assume a MatrixDesk is a square desk. The desk configuration problem can be simplified by calling
a function of MatrixDesk for detecting the neighboring desks automatically. This detecting function take the
value of an electronic identification (such as RFID, Radio Frequency Identification) labeled on each side of the
desk as an input and activate a sensor when the two desks are attached (Figure 3). Similarly, when another
MatrixDesk is put together, they can detect each other and tell the computers with whom they are put together
and in what shape, such as rectangle, square, or other irregular shapes such as L, T, or U shape. Figure 5 shows
an example of the desk configuration if the desktop is a square.

           Figure 2: The sketch of a MatrixDesk             Figure 3: The neighbors detecting function

       Figure 4 shows the system architecture of MatrixDesks, which are client/server architecture. MatrixDesks
are equipped with wireless communication capabilities so that these desks can transmit data through wireless
networks to the server which is either a centralized class server or one of the desks. Neighbors detecting
module receives the signals of the four desk identification sensors. After detecting the neighboring desks, the
module sends the data of the identifications and orientations of neighbor desks to the server. According to the
data, shared workspace analyzer of the server groups the corresponding desk identifications, and analyzes the
layout of shared workspace for the best viewing experience. Then display generator dispatches the workspaces
to the respective desks, which are to present the workspaces on their screens. The whole process is used to solve
the sharing screen problem.

                                           Figure 4: system architecture

                                                        
     Input detecting module receives the identification and position of the digital pen, and then these data are
transferred to input tracking module which can identify and track which pen is sensed on the desktop. In this
version, MatrixDesks are simply designed to allow students writing, drawing, painting and making annotations,
so the students' handwriting can be output directly without being processed through the server. In other cases,
such as exchanging or connecting virtual objects, the module needs to send the data to the server, so that the
actions can be performed correctly. Finally, display module presents the adequate workspace as the background
and the handwriting as the foreground on the screen. At the same time, both data are logged in databases for
future analysis.
     To  construct  a shared  workspace,   the server allocates  a working   space  and,  according to the desk
configuration, maintains the relations between desks. When students change the configuration, computers only
need  to change    these relations rather than  to create a new    shared display  again. After putting  several
MatrixDesks together, students can sit or stand around the desks to share the workspaces with their digital pens.
Figure 6 shows several possible ways to use MatrixDesks when two desks are attached, including facing each
other or side by side, which depend on the learning activities and materials. For example, if the students try to
compare two diagrams shown on MatrixDesks separately, they can share the workspace side by side.

   Figure 5: Possible combinations of MatrixDesks           Figure 6: Possible ways of sharing working spaces

     When comparing to students using the screens of MatrixDesks for individual works, how frequent a small
group of students would need such a large shared screen in a class is not known. Therefore, it is important to be
able to  switch    between  individual work  spaces  and  shared   work space. Note  that  when  students  work
individually, they can still exchange data or communicate through verbal or online chatting. Also, we do not plan
to ask computer manufacturers to produce machines with screens as complete desktops. Instead, we embed tablet
computers with their screens large enough into usual desktops. RFID is used to attach to the desks to identify the
mutual locations and orientations of the sides of the simulated MatrixDesks.
     Another design challenge is how to support learning activities with the mobile devices and the computing
desks in 1:2 classroom scenarios. Remember that 1:2 classroom is an enrichment of 1:1 classroom where every
student has already had her own device of which we anticipate that its size will be about that of a handheld or an
electronic English dictionary. In 1:2 classroom scenarios, a learning activity ought to be divided into two parts,
the individual tasks and group tasks. The individual tasks are performed on the mobile devices, while the group
tasks are supposed to be done on the computing desks. For example, when students work as groups with the
shared workspace, their individually owned devices may serve as interactive books for reading and taking notes
which can be transferred to the shared workspace if needed. When students work individually, these mobile
devices will become communication tools with their desks.

SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORKS
In a classroom of future, besides having a personally owned portable small-size screen handheld, every student is
provided  with   a personal computing   desk.  Furthermore, while  researchers talk about  wireless  and mobile
technologies in CSCL today, the genuine mobile learning is merely about the use of the portable computing
device that the student brings along with her all the time, at home, at school, as well as outside classroom. But at
home and in classroom, she may largely works on a computing desk, one at home and one in every classroom
she goes in, complemented with her portable computing device. This is the most feasible and practical scenario
we envision in the era of ubiquitous computing (Weiser, 1998), that is, seamless computing, or simply everyday
life computing. In a word, the 1:2 educational computing links the research areas of mobile computing (Gay et
al., 2001) and invisible computing (Norman, 1998) applied to teaching and learning.

                                                         
    If desks are regarded as bridges between individual and group learning in classrooms, then MatrixDesks
provide personal computing working spaces as well as a cooperative working space for a small group and are
able to switch from individual to group environments and vice versa at ease. This project is currently a work in
progress and  our next   step of MatrixDesks  is to finish   the implementation of  our prototype. At  present,
MatrixDesks is only a frame in which learning activities and materials should and will be placed. Hence, there
will be further experiments and investigations that can support the improvements of our design. For example, we
would like to know how the students interact with the desks, including the positions of students, the handwriting
they make, the ways to share the displays, to talk over the desks, to walk around the desks, and to move the
desks, and so forth. Furthermore, this paper also raises a few design issues, in particular, three student grouping
problems, of such a future 1:2 classroom to initiate the exploration of the related issues. The researches of
collaborative learning with mobile devices and with invisible computers are somehow divergent and need to be
accommodated. If we continue studying the 1:2 educational computing environments, more CSCL issues hidden
between the two researches will be discovered in the future.

REFERENCES
Deng, Y. C., Do, M. Z., Chang, L. J., and Chan T. W. (2004) PuzzleView: Enhanced Workspace Displaying for
     Group Interaction with Tablet PCs. Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and
     Mobile Technologies in Education WMTE'04 (Jhong-li, Taiwan, 2004), IEEE Computer Society Press,
     205-206.
Gay, G., Stefanone, M., Grace-Martin, M., and Hembrook, H. (2001) The Effects of Wireless Computing in
     Collaborative   Learning   Environments. International   Journal of Human-Computer     Interaction, 13, 2,
     257-276.
Ishii, H., and Ullmer, B. (1997) Tangible Bits: Towards Seamless Interfaces between People, Bits and Atoms.
     Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing systems CHI '97 (Atlanta, Georgia, USA,
     March 1997), ACM Press, 234-241.
Norman, D. (1998) The Invisible Computers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Patten, J., Ishii, H., Hines, J., and Pangaro, G. (2001) Sensetable: A Wireless Object Tracking Platform for
     Tangible User Interfaces. Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI '01
     (Seattle, Washington, USA, March 31 - April 5, 2001), ACM Press, 253-260
Scott, S.D., Mandryk, R. L., and Inkpen, K. M. (2003) Understanding Children's Collaborative Interactions in
     Shared Environments. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19, 2, 220-228.
Streitz, N.A., Geißler, J., Holmer, T., Konomi, S., Müller-Tomfelde, C., Reischl, W., Rexroth, P., Seitz, P., and
     Steinmetz,   R. (1999)    i-LAND:    An  Interactive  Landscape   for Creativitiy  and Innovation.  ACM
     Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI '99 (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., May
     15-20, 1999), ACM Press, 120-127.
Streitz, N.A., Tandler, P., Müller-Tomfelde, C., and Konomi, S. (2001) Roomware: Toward the Next Generation
     of Human-Computer Interaction Based on an Integrated Design of Real and Virtual Worlds. In Carnoll,
     J.M. (Ed.), Human Computer Interaction in the New Millennium, Addison-Wesley, US, 553-578.
Tandler, P., Prante, Th., Müller-Tomfelde, C., Streitz, N.A., and Steinmetz, R. (2001) ConnecTables: Dynamic
     Coupling of Displays for the Flexible Creation of Shared Workspaces. Proceedings of the 14. Annual
     ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology UIST'01, ACM Press, 11-20.
Ullmer,  B., and  Ishii, H.   (1997) The metaDESK:    Models     and Prototypes for Tangible  User  Interfaces.
     Proceedings of Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology UIST'97 (Banff, Alberta, Canada,
     October 1997), ACM Press, 223-232.
Weiser, M. (1998) The future of ubiquitous computing on campus. Communications of the ACM, 41, 1, 42-43.
Wellner, P. (1993) Interacting with Paper on the DigitalDesk. Communications of the ACM, 36, 7, 87-96.

                                                        
