             Collaborative Scaffolding in Synchronous
          Environment: Congruity and Antagonism of
                      Tutor/Student Facilitation Acts

                      Kai Pata                                                Tago Sarapuu
        Science Didactics Department,                               Science Didactics Department,
               University of Tartu                                           University of Tartu
                     kpata@ut.ee                                                  tago@ut.ee
                                               Raymond Archee
                             School of Communication, Design and Media,
                                       University of Western Sydney
                                           r.archee@uws.edu.au

       Abstract. This paper focuses on the theoretical framework for investigating facilitation acts of the
       tutor and  the  students  in problem-solving   groups  as  reciprocally   congruent.  We    propose  to
       broaden  the  scaffolding  debate   in collaborative teams   towards   the areas of  students'    shared
       metacognitive and cognitive grounding acts. Similar tutor-supported and untutored science-related
       dilemma-solving activities in network-based synchronous mode were categorically analyzed and
       compared with respect to their scaffolding acts. We asked the question, whether there emerges the
       collaborative scaffolding situation in teams and how does tutor influence the peer scaffolding.
       Results indicated the presence of several scaffolding actors in collaborative teams. The nature of
       activity (tutored or untutored) had an influence on the practice of specific supportive acts by the
       tutor and the students. The various interrelations between student and tutor scaffolding acts must
       be considered when preparing the tutor support during problem solving.

       Keywords: collaborative scaffolding, synchronous learning, supporting dilemma solving

INTRODUCTION
In this paper we explore the functioning of a variety of support systems, which occur during collaborative
problem-solving activities in synchronous network-based settings. As a result of interpreting specific discourse
acts in the frames of dialogue act theory (see Clark & Schaefer, 1989; Traum & Allen, 1994; Traum 2000), we
suggest broadening the scaffolding metaphor in collaborative teams by conceptualizing student grounding and
tutor facilitating acts as being reciprocally congruent. This new framework highlights collaborative scaffolding
issues and enables the study of inter-relations of different-level scaffolding actors in teams.

Collaborative scaffolding situation
Two parallel approaches have been developed for understanding the support processes in teams ­ one has
focused on students in symmetrical collaborative learning situation, whilst the other has concentrated on the
tutor in asymmetrical groups. There are few studies, however, which combine these two approaches while
interpreting the interactions in tutored collaborative learning situations.
  The   research  in  untutored  problem-solving    groups  relates to  peer   support  in both    metacognitive  and
cognitive domains.   These   support-acts  are seldom  interpreted  as scaffolding.   Support   in the metacognitive
domain  is   usually viewed   from   three perspectives. The  first is  `self-regulation', where    students  support
themselves in teams (Lipponen, 2001); the second is `team-level metacognition', which focuses on team-level
metacognitive  reasoning    related to the  task  and interaction   (Jermann,  2002);   and  the   third is `socially-
mediated/socially    shared metacognition',    a reciprocal process    of   exploring each  other's    reasoning  and
viewpoints in order to create a shared understanding of the task (Goos, et al., 2002; Iiskala, et al., 2004). The
support in cognitive domain is viewed as `shared cognition' ­ the cognitive level grounding in order to construct
shared knowledge     (Dillenbourg   &  Traum,  1999). Rasmussen     (2001)   and  Fernandez   et al. (2001)  assume,
however, that whole communication can be viewed as the mutual and partly unconscious `scaffolding', which
invites participants to follow the implicit ground rules and develop and test their own constructions of meaning
with others.

                                                         
  The    research   about promoting     collaborative   learning   considers    the  influence   of the  more     skilful and
knowledgeable tutor or trained peer-tutor on students learning. In terms of facilitation there is a general trend to
view the tutor as the coordinator and the students as the performers of the task-directed learning process. This
conception of scaffolding has its roots in research about the relationships between the teacher and the learner in
dyadic well-defined problem-solving situations. According the scaffolding metaphor defined by Wood et al.,
(1976), an adult has to `control those elements of the task that are initially beyond the child's capacity, thus
permitting him to concentrate upon and complete only those elements that are within his range of competence'.
Vygotsky (1978) has assumed that teacher creates the conditions for certain students' cognitive processes to
develop, without    directly  implanting  them   in the    child. He   defined  the  idea   about   the Zone  of   Proximal
Development    (ZPD),   which    is  `the distance  between       the actual   developmental     level  as  determined     by
independent problem-solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem-solving
under  adult  guidance    or  in collaboration   with   more  capable      peers'   (Vygotsky,   1978,     p.86). The   more
knowledgeable person was believed to influence students' cognitive processes in the range of their ZPD.
  Transferred to the collaborative learning situations, the initial theory about the ZPD and the scaffolding
metaphor could be developed further in order to explain the phenomena at the group level. Wells (1999) argued
that ZPD    applies potentially  to  all  participants  not  simply    to  the  less skilful  or  knowledgeable     ones. In
accordance with this, the ZPD concept was explained as the bi-directional teacher-learner and learner-learner
ZPD (Forman, 1989; Goos et al., 2002). Goos et al. (2002) describe the ZPD as the learning potential in small
groups where students have incomplete but relatively equal expertise and where each partner who possesses
some   knowledge    and  skills  requires the   others' contribution     in order    to make   progress.   At the   level  of
understanding  thematic   information     in relation   to certain    task  and learning    goals,  continuous    grounding
processes between the team members must take place (Veerman, 2000). These interpretations of mutual ZPD
and scaffolding diminish the role of more knowledgeable tutor and open the possibility of viewing all the
members in learning group as possible scaffolding actors.
  We    also  posit a   similar  origin  for the  tutor's  regulatory     phenomena     and  the   cognitive/metacognitive
grounding acts, which take place between students in teams. If confirmed we can begin to think of a combined
collaborative multi-actor scaffolding situation between the students themselves or the students and the tutor in
teams.

Congruity of peer grounding and tutor scaffolding acts
The utterances of all the team-members are delivered as `dialogue acts' during communication (Traum, 2000),
regardless if there are only students or if a tutor is involved. Clark and Schaefer (1989) distinguish two types of
individual acts: `autonomous acts' are those that an agent performs on his or her own and `participatory acts' are
performed as parts of collective acts. The latter type of acts can be related not only to shared metacognition and
cognition, but also to scaffolding.
  Most of participatory acts begin with an action by A, the contributor. The process of contribution divides
conceptually  into  two  phases:  i) `presentation  phase'   when     A   presents  utterance  for  B   to consider  and   ii)
`acceptance phase' when B accepts utterance by giving evidence that he believes or understands what A means.
In collaborative teams tutor and students can perform both phases of the participatory act. It is also clear that
several actors may respond to any presentation phase act, and acceptance phase acts can serve as new initiators
of participatory acts.
  Luhmann (1992) distinguishes three concepts related to communication: information (something that is in
the head of the actor), utterance (something what the actor spells out/writes) and understanding the difference
between information and utterance (how the other actor interprets the information in utterance). The latter is
dependent on the other actor's state of mind i.e. their intentions. Thus, effective communication in team depends
on mutual understanding and grounding of each other's intentions during participatory acts.
  As much of one's behavior arises from sense of obligation to behave within the limits set by the society that
the agent is part of, Traum and Allen (1994), and Traum (2000) have proposed the communication model that is
based on obligations and goals. Obligations represent what an agent should do, according to some sets of norms.
When planning, an agent A considers both its goals and obligations in order to determine an action; when
deciding what  to   do  next, the obligations   are considered     first  and  the  agent  B  decides   how   to  update   the
intentional structure  (add  new  goals   or intentions)   based   on  these   obligations.  Obligations   might   also   lead
directly to immediate action. If there are no obligations, then the agent B will consider its' intentions and
perform any actions which can satisfy these intentions. If there are no intended conversational acts, the next
thing the actor B considers is grounding. Generally, grounding is considered less urgent than acting, based on
communicative intentions, although some grounding acts will be performed on the basis of obligations, which
arise while interpreting prior utterances (Traum, 2000). According to these discourse rules, it is possible to
propose  that the   hierarchical structure   of participatory  acts   starts  from   actor  B  considering    the  perceived

                                                            
obligations and intentions proposed by actor A. The next step occurs when the clear intentions of actor B govern
his discourse acts. Grounding is an option to negotiate the intentions and obligations between two actors.
   Clark and Schaefer (1989) and Traum and Allen (1994) have listed several acceptance phase types between
two actors: accept, take action, partial accept, adopt, request for, clarifying obligation/intention, displacement
with another   obligation/intention,  reject, and         repair  obligation/intention.         Applying       the hierarchical    order of
discourse acts, these can be viewed as more or less dominating in the discourse, depending on the actor B
understanding of his intentions during the activity. This general model can be used in explaining participatory
acts between the students in team, as well as, between tutor and the students.

                 INTENTION                 INTENTION OF ACTOR B
                 OF ACTOR A

                                      I agree.. Let's do!            But, tell me..             Have we..? Are we..?
                                        We will do!                  Why? How?                  So, this is.. It means..
                                                                       What?                       We are doing...
                                                  acce pt              partial accept                 adopt

            Information, action
               or regulative act:                                         Gr ounding acts
                                                                          serve as scaffol ds
         You should do!Do..!
                We should..!
                We must..!obligation              reject             request for                      repl aceIsn't it..? Shouldn't it..?What if we..What about...?How about..?
                                         I disagree!             Can we..? May we..?               Rhetoric question.
                                       We will not do!               Who will do?

                                                          INTERPRETATION
      Figure 1. The flow diagram of discourse acts between the actors in non-tutored collaborative team.

  Figure 1 presents a model of different level dialogue acts in collaborative team without tutor. The actor A
has an intention to share some information or change something in the team by regulative act. It formulates an
utterance that will be interpreted by any team-members (actor B) according to their intentions. Information can
be agreed or rejected by actor B if it does/does not coincide with their intentions or if they do not have intentions
of their own. This type of reply often terminates the discussion about this topic. Information or instruction can
cause the teammates to initiate grounding if the intentions of actor A are not clear to them or if their intentions
are different. These grounding acts may be of accepting type, when actor B agrees to actor A in general, but
needs some more information (partial accept). Actor B may also reformulate the information/supposed-action-
he-has-started-to-perform/instruction with its own words in order to control the coherence with the intentions of
actor A (adopt). Grounding acts may also be of rejecting type if actor B feels that there is a confrontation with
the intentions of actor A or if there is not enough information to perform any action (request for). Second type of
rejecting act can be replacement of proposed information or instruction with its own (replace) that indicates to
the difference between the intentions of actors A and B. Both the accepting and rejecting type of grounding acts
can, in turn, initiate negotiation between the team-members. Thus, grounding acts in team serve like internal
scaffolds, which help to establish common ground in cognitive and metacognitive domains and the collaborative
scaffolding  situation    emerges. This interpretation         is in coherence        with     the ideas       about bi-directional  ZPD
(Forman, 1989; Goos et al., 2002) and scaffolding as the form of communication (Rasmussen, 2001; Fernandez
et al., 2001).
  The  participatory      acts in the discussion          can be  related with        the     scaffolding      function (e.g. scaffolding
interactions   introduced   by Graesser et al., 1995;          Chi et al.,       2001).   Participatory        support  acts  that involve
instructional scaffolding serve as discourse `oligations' with the purpose of setting rules, setting conditions,
setting restrictions, terminating, accepting or rejecting students' action or information. Participatory support acts
that do not involve obligations, but favor some type of activity can be interpreted as `intentions'. These may be
practiced to scaffold the students in cognitive, metacognitive, affective and functional areas in order to help
them to finish the task. Many `intentions' and `obligations' serve as grounding acts.

                                                                  
                         INTENTION OF THE           INTENTION OF THE TUTOR
                         STUDENT

                                                                              What else?                    Is it?It means..?
                                                        Correct!Positive feedbackPumping        Clarifying, summarizing

                                   Information,
                                                                               Scaffolding acts
                                     action or                                 enable groundi ng
                                   regulative act
                                                       Negati ve feedback    Prompting for    Splicing correct c ontent
                                                      Wrong!                 specific info, hinting     What if?
                                                                              Isn't it..?             How about..
                                                                            Shouldn't it?
                                                                            What about..
                        STUDENT'S
                        INTERPRETATION                  TUTOR'S INTERPRETATION
                  Figure 2. The flow diagram of scaffolding acts between the tutor and the student.
               The scaffolding dialogue move categories by Graesser et al. (1995) have been adopted.

    Figure 2 presents a model of dialogue acts in the collaborative team scaffolded by the tutor. In this model the
tutor dialogue move categories, proposed by Graesser et al. (1995), have been used. If the student gives some
information    to the tutor or   performs  an action,  the  tutor         interprets it  in   accordance       with     its own    previous
teaching intentions and the anticipated behavior of the student. The tutor scaffolding in response to student act
can   be direct   accepting or   rejecting (e.g. positive  or negative         feedback),           partial accepting       (e.g. pumping,
clarifying, summarizing) or partial rejecting the information/action (e.g. prompting for specific information,
hinting, splicing correct content). Student information or action may be agreed or rejected by the tutor if it
does/does not coincide with its' teaching intentions. This type of support may be more common in coaching
dialogues in which the tutor's aim is to support the student to reach the certain result.
    In contrast to accepting/rejecting behavior, the tutor's task on scaffolding is not to coach the completion of
the task but the student understanding how to conceptualize the task through the proper steps of action (Stone,
1998).   In order  to  make  scaffolding   successful,  the student's         partial    `comprehension            of the   solution  must
precede production' (Wood et al., 1976) and the learner must have the `ownership of the activity to be learned'
(Langer & Applebee, 1986; Järvelä, 1996). The student must be enforced to participate in active turn taking with
the tutor (Palinscar & Brown, 1984; Järvelä, 1995) to evoke the internalization of new knowledge and skills.
Elbers et al. (1992) support the idea that the basis for internalization is not the adult's situation definition, but
the jointly elaborated situation definition of two actors. Thus, the tutor should use scaffolding acts that trigger
students' grounding acts in metacognitive and cognitive domains. The partial accept type of scaffolds represent
the tutor's  intention  to  find coherence    with students'  intentions.       When        using     the    partial    rejecting  type of
scaffolds the tutor is clinging to his own intentions that might decrease the students' active participation in joint
elaboration of the task situation.
    The comparison of certain types of student grounding and tutor scaffolding acts in teams indicate their
similar purpose that can be related to the construction of the cognitive and metacognitive team coherence. The
tutor has   to identify the  student understanding     of the  situation       and    the     task,   their    perception    of   the tutor
intentions, and their perception of themselves in the task framework. Besides the tutor, each student has to
understand how their peers perceive the situation and the task, how they see themselves and the tutor in this
situation, and what the intentions of the others might be. We may conclude that in the collaborative situations
scaffolded by the tutor several scaffolding agents may exist simultaneously. The student grounding acts in teams
can   be theoretically  interpreted as scaffolding    acts, while         the tutor   scaffolding       acts    can     be  interpreted as
grounding acts.

The inter-relations of student and tutor scaffolding acts
When     planning  the  learning activities  in  synchronous   environment            it   is   important      to  know     what   type of
facilitation patterns might be prevailing during the discourse between students in symmetrical learning situation
and in the discourse where the tutor is involved. If we can show that scaffolding phenomena are part of common
discussion   practices  among    students  working   in   team alone,         the    interpretation         of the    influence    of tutor
scaffolding in facilitated learning situations must be re-conceptualized. In order to assess the effectiveness of

                                                            
scaffolding in such situations it must be taken into account how the students might have performed on their own
with self-scaffolding, how they performed with the tutor's support, and how the tutor's support might have
influenced the usage of students' scaffolding acts.
    Much more knowledge is needed in order to understand the influence of multi-actor scaffolding on team
performance. It is open to question whether students and tutor are acting coherently in teams, considering the
scaffolds applied by others (e.g. modeling or co-scaffolding), or does there emerge antagonism between two
types of  facilitating agents.   The effectiveness  of   elaborating coherence   between  the tutor  and the student
scaffolding intentions in teams on students' problem solving and decision-making has been described in dyadic
situation (Elbers et al., 1992) and in collaborative teams (Pata et al., in press). For effective regulating the group
problem solving by tutor, it is of importance to investigate what types of tutor scaffolding acts can potentially
inhibit or decrease the usage of specific student scaffolding acts common to untutored collaborative situations.
    This paper aims to compare two similar cases of solving dilemma problems collaboratively in synchronous
network-based environment in respect of the practice of specific types of scaffolding acts common to the tutor
and  the students. Firstly,   in order  to clarify, whether  there   is a reciprocal congruency   between  students'
cognitive and metacognitive grounding and the tutor's scaffolding acts, we wish to discover, which types of
scaffolding acts are common in untutored and tutored learning situations. The findings about the similarity of
students' grounding and tutor's scaffolding acts should, in turn, enable us to consider the existence of multi-
actor scaffolding situation in tutored learning teams. Secondly, in this paper we do not intend to compare the
influence of these different level scaffolding actors' support acts on the team decision-making but to investigate
whether the presence of the tutor might have influenced the usage of scaffolding acts by students. Thus three
research questions were formulated:
i)  Which  support  acts   characterize the untutored    and tutored  collaborative  dilemma-solving  discussions in
synchronous chat-rooms and is there a congruity of students' regulative grounding and tutor's scaffolding acts?
ii) Does  there occur     the collaborative scaffolding   situation  in tutored  teams where  several actors  (tutor,
students) perform mutual scaffolding?
iii) Is there a significant difference between the usage of students' scaffolding acts in collaborative untutored
and  tutored dilemma-solving     activity  which  might  suggest the    emergence   of concurrency   and antagonism
phenomena between the students' and tutor's scaffolding acts in the tutored situation?

METHODS
The data for this paper were collected from two separately designed experiments investigating decision-making
in synchronous environments (Archee, 2004; Pata & Sarapuu, 2003; Pata, et al., in press). During both studies
students in synchronous network-based chat-room carried out the similar dilemma-solving discussions. In this
paper we have reanalyzed the collected discussion transcripts from these two studies in respect of the practice of
scaffolding acts. The activities were the following:
    ACTIVITY 1. Dilemma solving without tutor in text-based mode (Archee, 2004).
Participants of the Activity 1 were 40 BA students of Communication aged 17-19. The task was to discuss in
chat-room and to reach consensus upon the dilemma issue "Should it be law that HIV-AIDS positive carriers
must disclose their medical condition to would-be employers, doctors, dentists, or even going for a driver's
license?" Students were divided randomly into groups of 5-13 members who logged in to the network-based
chat-room  of Internet    Relay  Chat. They  were   not  anonymous.     Five decision-making  discussions with total
number of 1614 discourse acts were conducted with different students. The activity started with attributing the
printed handout of the problem statement to the students. The activity lasted about 1 h and ended when the
consensus was established from the viewpoint of the participants.
    ACTIVITY 2. Dilemma solving with tutor in text-based mode (Pata & Sarapuu, 2003; Pata, et al., in press).
Participants of the Activity 2 were 62 secondary level students aged 15-17, and 2 trained tutors. The task was to
discuss in chat-room and to reach consensus upon the issue "What must be done with neglected dogs in cities?"
The activity was designed as a role-play with jigsaw movement starting from making decisions in role-groups
(Dog-owners, Dog-protectors, Citizens and Dog-asylum workers) and then negotiating these decisions in groups
of experts (Councils of Town A and Town B) where the members from each role-group were at present. Five
decision-making discussions with total number of 2077 discourse acts were conducted. In each role-play the
students were   initially divided  randomly  into   four role-groups    with the membership   of 2-5 and  during the
activity they were redirected to the expert-groups with the membership of 4-7. In the beginning of the activity
the students logged in to the certain virtual rooms of the network-based chat-room of Collaborative Virtual
Workplace (CVW). The participants were anonymous, identifying themselves with certain names from the role-
play (e.g. citizen1, citizen2). The activity started with attributing the web page with problem statement to the
students. Verbal tutor support (instructions and prompts) and the web-based information about some important
aspects of the problem for certain role-group (e.g. legislation about dogs, ethical considerations, economic
calculations for dog-asylums) were also available in each virtual room. The role-play activity lasted about 1 h

                                                          
and ended when consensus was established by the expert-groups and they had composed the short decision
document of the team.
  The               discourse    in teams   was     recorded     by  the  system     and transcribed.      On      the basis  of  the  theoretical
framework introduced in this paper (see Fig. 1 and 2) the category-system was developed for investigating the
scaffolding acts of the tutor and students. The seven types of scaffolds ­ obligation, accept, partial accept,
adopt,              reject, request   for, and  replace       ­ were distinguished     both in     cognitive       and metacognitive    domains.
Although possible, we did not categorize agreeing and disagreeing types of content-related responses under
accept and reject categories of scaffolds because the intentions of these acts could be interpreted ambiguously.
The examples of student and tutor scaffolding acts are presented in the Results part.
  The frequency of different types of scaffolding acts was found both for students and tutor. The percentages
of different scaffolding acts served as the basis of characterization of two activities. The Cross tabulation and the
Chi square analysis were performed with student scaffolding acts in order to compare the usage of support acts
in untutored and tutored situations.

RESULTS
We aimed to investigate, which types of scaffolding acts are used in cognitive and metacognitive domains by the
students             and    the tutor in   two  activities.     The category      system was      theoretically     sustained by   the  idea        that
scaffolding and grounding acts in teams are used for similar purposes. The categories were developed according
to the general intention types of dialogue acts. We considered all these discourse acts that were used to regulate
the establishing of common ground between the intentions of the students and the tutor as scaffolding acts.
  The               following    examples    in    Table  1   characterize   different   types    of   students'     and tutor's  scaffolds.        The
findings indicated that the student and tutor scaffolding acts were similar and differed from each other mainly in
terms of the targets of the acts. The students directed the scaffolds most often towards themselves in teams, but
also            to  some    teammates    or they    left the    responder  open.     The tutor    was   mainly      directing the  orders     to    the
unspecified or to the concrete student, positioning himself outside the team. Moreover, in some cases tutor
practiced scaffolding as an equal member of the team by using similar self-directed discourse acts like students.

Table 1. Examples of different types of tutor's and students' cognitive (C) and metacognitive (MC) scaffolds.

  Discourse     actcategories       Peer's regulatory and grounding acts,which serve as scaffoldsTutor's scaffolding acts that initiate grounding
                  C      We need to look at past cases to understand the implication    You, as animal protectors, must decide what to do to
                         involved in this topical discussion!                           enhance the situation of neglected dogs.
                  MC     We must find a better method to solve this problem!            We should pay attention to the problem!
                         We must add corrections and make it better!
                         We should make this picture better!                            Stay in your discussion room, you will meet other groups
                         To protector 6: Somebody should make the decision now!         later on!
                         Choose the color! To protector 4: send us something to         Make the decision-document visible to everybody!
                         read, we want to discuss.
                  C         Let's discuss why people take themselves dogs without       You can now discuss what the animal protectors think of
                         responsibility!                                                this decision.
                  MC     Let's just come to a decision and be finished with this!       After you have read it, let's start discussing in the chat-
                         Ok Kathy, let's lead the discussion!                           room how to solve the problem.
                         To protector 4: we will decide!                                You can copy all the separate decisions into one to
                         We will add the ideas in a minute.                             compound the decision of the animal protectors.
                         I will draw some line on the picture!                          If the leader has made the decision document we will make
                                                                                        it visible to evaluate it.
                  C      What kind of laws??                                            What bothers you the most in concerns of neglected dogs?
                         How can you infect others, when hospitals and other            How to control it?
                         places are supposed to be clean?
                         Why disclosed?
                  MC     Fine guys, what do you have to recommend then?                 After reading the text the discussion will start ­ what must
                         What must we do with this model?                               you do to solve the problem of neglected dogs?
                  C      Okay, so have we agreed that aids should be disclosed in       We have decided that dogs must be taken care of?
                         some circumstances i.e. medical and blood transfusions?        Owner, do you agree that the dog owners are guilty in
                         So, is that our decision?                                      causing the problem and must take the responsibility?
                  MC     Are we done then? Is our work ready?                           Do you have consensus?
                         Do we have a consensus?                                        Have you in principal agreed with the decision?
                         Have we reached a consensus?
                         We have reached a consensus.

                                                                             
 ObligationAcceptPartial acceptAdopt
 RejectRequest forReplace
               C       Hey, better if we will not start lecturing there.
               MC      Don't' hurry!                                                  Don't write dotted letters!
                       There is nobody from Tartu!                                    You are wasting time, citizen7!
                       The owner disagrees to be the leader!
               C       Are we going to talk about AIDS or what?                       What do you think, are you satisfied with your decision
                       But isn't it important in cases where there is a blood         from the point of view of animal protectors?
                       transfusion taking place?                                      Why the dogs are fierce ­ isn't it the fault of their owners?
                       Janine, what about car accidents, the ambulance                Should the neighbors take a look if the other people's dogs
                       attendants need to know?                                       ok?
                       Maybe not a badge, but how about some info on your             Can all people take dogs?
                       license?
                       Does anyone disagree, that such info should not be
                       disclosed?
               MC      Did you read the supplementary material?                       Are there any ideas how to make the decision draft better?
                       Have you read the supplementary material?                      Protector 6, is your decision getting ready?
                       Can we reach an agreement?                                     Could you write new ideas to your decision?

               C       To protector 6: What if to organize the neighbors'
                       guarding service?
               MC      Protector 4, don't sleep, be active!                           Owner1 is in wrong room, he must be in another room!
                       Excuse me, Allison you should be concentrating on solving
                       this problem, not talking to some guy in Kingswood!

  It          appeared   that     during  both     activities    the      students and    the   tutor practiced       various   cognitive     and
metacognitive           scaffolding    acts. Thus,    it     can be      assumed   that   in teams    we must      talk about      collaborative
scaffolding situation and consider the inter-relations of the student and the tutor scaffolds. Table 2 presents the
frequency of different types of student and tutor facilitation acts in two activities. The usage of scaffolding turns
among other types of discourse acts appeared to be more frequent (43 %) in tutored Activity 2 than it was in
untutored         Activity 1      (23 %).  The    significant    difference      (2(3)=447.19,    p<0.001)        between   the    activities was
found in the usage of scaffolding act types. In untutored Activity 1 the usage of grounding type of scaffolds was
noticeably higher and the cognitive scaffolds prevailed, whereas in tutored Activity 2 the `obligation' was the
most          frequent  scaffolding    act type    and      the majority      of scaffolds   were  metacognitive.       The   higher   level        of
instructional support in Activity 2 was partly explainable by the jigsaw design ­ the students worked in role- and
expert-groups and had to move between different virtual rooms of the learning environment. Therefore some
additional coordination of the activity was necessary by the tutor.

Table 2. The distribution of scaffolding acts in untutored and tutored dilemma-solving activities.

                                                                          Usage of scaffolding acts
  Scaffoldingact types          Dilemma solving withouttutor in chat-roomstudents  Dilemma solving with tutor in chat-roomstudentstutorstudentstutor
                           Metacognitive           Cognitive                     Metacognitive                          Cognitive
 Obligation                       34 (9%)           7 (2%)                 87 (10%)          238 (26%)             2 (<1%)           9 (1%)
 Accept                           31 (8%)          1 (<1%)                 68 (8%)            21 (2%)              1 (<1%)          6 (<1%)
 Partial accept                   10 (3%)          102 (27%)               53 (6%)            7 (<1%)              43 (5%)          31 (3%)
 Adopt                            11 (3%)           25 (7%)                26 (3%)            10 (1%)              4 (<1%)          31 (3%)
 Reject                           0 (0%)            10 (3%)                 9 (1%)            1 (<1%)              2 (<1%)          3 (<1%)
 Request for                    42 (11%)           79 (21%)                94 (10%)           52 (6%)              56 (6%)          39 (4%)
 Replace                          5 (<1%)           17 (5%)                1 (<1%)            2 (<1%)              7 (<1%)           0 (0%)
 Total                                374 (100 %)                                                 903 (100 %)

             In this paper we were concerned, which types of regulative acts characterize the students who discuss
dilemma without tutor. This type of activity could serve as an example of natural regulation processes in teams.
We found that the most common metacognitive scaffolding acts used by students were `requests for' prompting
specific         information or action (Can we      reach agreement?             Who will make   the decision?), directive and accepting
type of orders (We must...! We should...! Let's discuss..!) from the `obligations' category. The most frequent
cognitive scaffolds were pumping for info, which comprised `partial acceptance' of earlier info (But how can
you infect others if hospitals are supposed to be clean?), `request for' additional info, which included the partial
rejecting of earlier info (Maybe not badge, but how about some info on the license?) and `adopt' type of
facilitation       acts  for    clarifying or    summarizing      the      situation (Ok,    so we have   agreed       that AIDS     should    be
disclosed in some circumstances? So is that our decision?). In the tutored situation the students' metacognitive

                                                                             
scaffolding was persistent with same frequency, besides which the tutor practiced frequently the `obligation'
(Leader, you must make corrections in the note according to your team-members' decisions!), `accept' (You can
copy all the separate decisions into one to compound the decision of the animal protectors!) and `request for'
(To  protector4:  send   us something   to read,  we  want   to  discuss!) type  of scaffolds, increasing  the  level of
metacognitive   scaffolding  in teams.   The  practicing  of  cognitive  type   of scaffolds did  not   follow the  same
pattern. In tutored activity both the students and the tutor practiced less cognitive scaffolds compared with the
untutored situation.
    In order   to investigate  how   tutor may    influence  the   natural team    performance    the usage  of  student
scaffolding acts during solving dilemma problems in untutored and tutored activity was compared by Chi square
analysis (see Table 3). It was clear, that the design of the study did not enable us to make direct inferences about
the tutor's influence on the usage of students' scaffolding acts in Activity 2. Yet, the similar nature of Activities
1 and 2 enabled of making predictions about the difference of the collaborative process of solving the dilemmas
with or without the presence of several scaffolding actors. It was found that, in the tutored activity the student
metacognitive   scaffolds   (partial accept) were   used  with    significantly  higher frequency     (p<0.001) than  in
untutored situation. The opposite trend was common in untutored activity where students' cognitive scaffolding
acts (adopt, request for) occurred with significantly higher frequency (p<0.001) than in tutored activity. It
cannot be assumed, however, that if there was no tutor in Activity 2, the dilemma-discussions were performed
more effectively. Among the investigated cases very different patterns of practicing the scaffolding acts were
observed. Some tutored groups might not have been working effectively if there was no scaffolding by the tutor
(see Pata et al., in press). In some untutored teams, on the other hand, the problems occurred with focusing on
the task, and the students might have needed additional external support (see Archee, 2004).

Table 3. The results of the Cross tabulation and the Chi square analysis of student scaffolding acts in untutored
and tutored dilemma solving activities.

                         Count of students' scaffolding acts (Std. Residual)
  Scaffolding         Untutored         Tutored       Untutored          Tutored        Chi squareact typessituationsituationsituationsituation(df)p
                            Metacognitive                       Cognitive
 Obligation           34 (-0.7)         87(0.5)          7 (2.5)         2 (-1.7)        9.57 (1)             0.002
 Accept               31 (0.1)           68 (0)          1 (0.5)         1 (-0.3)        0.316 (1)             0.57
 Partial accept       10 (-4.1)         53 (4.4)        102 (2.7)     43 (-2.9)          52.43 (1)            0.001
 Adopt                11 (-2.0)         26 (2.2)        25 (2.3)         4 (-2.5)        20.91 (1)            0.001
 Reject                0 (-2.1)         9 (2.0)         10 (1.8)         2 (-1.7)        14.31 (1)            0.001
 Request for          42 (-2.4)         94 (2.2)        79 (2.4)      56 (-2.2)          20.93 (1)            0.001
 Replace               5 (0.3)          1 (-0.5)        17 (-0.1)        7 (0.2)         0.38 (1)              0.53

    The significant differences in the usage of peer's scaffolding acts in the tutored situation compared with the
untutored one, as well as, the tutor's high practicing of metacognitive and low usage of cognitive scaffolding
acts enabled to question, whether there occurred concurrency or antagonism phenomena between student and
tutor scaffolding acts in Activity 2. The tutor's most common scaffolding act type was metacognitive instruction
(obligation). It was not clear, however, how effective the extended usage of `obligation' acts by the tutor was
during  the Activity  2, because    the students  performed   this type  of  scaffolding same     often as in  untutored
Activity 1. We propose that the concurrency processes like i) tutor's modeling of the instructional behavior for
students, and i) tutor's self-elaboration of his own scaffolding intentions in order to meet better the students
intentions  in team,  as well   as, antagonistic  trends like iii) tutor's reformulation    of students' metacognitive
scaffolds according to his own intentions, or iv) tutor's acting regardless of students' scaffolding could take
place.
    Theoretically, in Activity 2 tutor's main aim should have been facilitating the student cognitive scaffolding
acts what might have favored students to establish common ground on the dilemma solutions. In accordance
with these suppositions, it was found that the student cognitive types of scaffolds were more frequent than those
of the tutor in Activity 2. So we can think of some cognitive modeling processes taking place in the area of this
type of scaffolds and assume that the tutor might have been considering flexibly the scaffolding acts performed
by the students. On the other hand, in Activity 2 the student cognitive type scaffolds were used less frequently
than in  Activity  1. The   cognitive   type of   adopt  function  (e.g. You    have now  decided...)   was    performed
extensively  mainly   by  the  tutor in  Activity  2, which   might  have    inhibited  the  students   from  attempting
clarification or summarizing of their discussion results that was common in untutored Activity 1. It may be that
the presence of certain tutor scaffolds might have decreased the student responsibility for scaffolding their own
cognitive functions and that antagonism between scaffolding actors played a significant role.

                                                          
DISCUSSION
Supported by the dialogue act theories (Clark & Scheafer, 1989; Traum & Allen, 1994; Traum, 2000), in this
paper we developed a theoretical framework for interpreting student grounding and tutor scaffolding acts in
groups as reciprocally congruent. We focused on some scaffolding-related phenomena that influence learning in
collaborative dilemma-solving teams. These were: i) The congruity of student grounding acts and the tutor
scaffolding acts; ii) The    emergence of   collaborative  scaffolding situation in teams  due   to several actors
performing mutual scaffolding; and the necessity to re-conceptualize the interpretation of tutor's influence on
peer scaffolding; and iii) The inter-relations of student and tutor scaffolding acts in teams and the possible
concurrency and antagonism between them.
  In our study two similar science-related dilemma-solving learning activities in synchronous network-based
environments were investigated in order to illustrate the closeness of tutor and student facilitation acts with
concrete examples. We did not design these learning activities as parts of one study, thus the learning situations
are not comparable in all characteristics. Our aim was not to evaluate the direct effects of the tutor's presence on
student performance, but to investigate if the untutored situation is comparable to the tutored context with
respect to the usage of scaffolding acts. We could find a close resemblance of facilitation acts of the students
and the tutor and suggest that grounding acts serve as scaffolds and vice-versa that scaffolding acts can be
interpreted as grounding acts. Nevertheless, the data from these two cases did not allow us to generalize about
the congruity of grounding and scaffolding acts in other types of collaborative learning situations. It is possible
that the proposed framework need to be elaborated and concretized in order to describe all the scaffold types that
are used in well-structured problem-solving situations and in teams, which deal with cognitive tools used in the
construction of learning artifacts. We assume that some new types of scaffolds may also be found as a result of
different cultural and community practices.
  It is necessary to develop a new understanding of multi-actor scaffolding for collaborative situations. We
assume that for predicting and influencing the regulation and grounding processes of different types of problem-
solving teams, our theoretical framework of categorizing tutor's and students' scaffolding acts might serve as a
useful protocol. In order to explain the learning and scaffolding situation in teams, three types of roles should be
considered: the tutor as scaffolding actor, the student as scaffolding actor, and the student as task performer.
They differ from each other in the consciousness of their intentions related to the performance of the task. When
interpreting the teacher-supported collaborative learning activity, we should not focus only on the teacher's
intentions and scaffolding aims. Moreover, from the perspective of constructivist theory, the role of the teacher
as a scaffolding agent should be to favor the learners and move them towards the elaboration of task-regulation
in this learning situation.
  The   comparison    of tutored  dilemma-solving  situation with "natural" untutored  activity  indicated  that in
addition to thinking about tutor modeling and scaffolding processes, we should consider that some acts of
student scaffolding   might   not originate from  external tutor intervention  but  rather belong   to the general
communication phenomena like grounding. The lower frequency of student cognitive scaffolds in tutored teams
compared with untutored situation might indicate that even the presence of the teacher can decrease or inhibit
learners' natural facilitation processes. The frequency analysis, performed with two similar dilemma-solving
cases, left open many questions about how to explain the different distribution of scaffolding acts. Could the
tutor trigger some student scaffolding acts by modeling? Did the tutor scaffolds help students to elaborate tutor
instructions and prompts according to their own intentions and thus enabled them to leadership roles? Were the
tutor and the students using scaffolds regardless of each other? In further studies of collaborative scaffolding
phenomena   in both   synchronous   network-based  and    face-to-face contexts, sequencing  analysis  approaches
might provide a better alternative, since the various tutor and student scaffolding interaction types can be more
easily related to student learning variables. Secondly, the findings of the usage of specific scaffolding acts for
different learning cases (e.g. well- or ill-structured problems, or use of verbal or visual artifacts) might enable
the prediction of which inter-relations the tutor should emphasize in order to enhance learning.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research  was  supported   by  grant No. 5996  from   the Estonian  Science   Foundation and   MER    funding
0182542s03.

REFERENCES
Archee,  R. (2004)  Analyzing     mediated  group interaction: an interpretive   approach. World    Conference   on
      Educational     Multimedia,   Hypermedia    and Telecommunications, Vol. 2004, Issue. 1, 2004, pp. 4107-
      4114

                                                         
Chi, M. T. H, Siler, S. A., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., and Hausmann, R. (2001) Learning from human tutoring.
        Cognitive Science, 25, 471-533.
Clark, H. H., and Schaefer, E. F. (1989) Contributing to discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259-294.
Dillenbourg, P., and Traum, T. (1999) Does shared screen make a shared solution. In C.Hoadley & J. Roschelle
        (Eds.), Proceedings of the Third Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 127-
        135). California: Stanford University.
Elbers,  E., Maier, R.,  Hoekstra, T., and   Hoogsteder, M.  (1992) Internalization   and  adult-child interaction.
        Learning and Instruction, 2, 101-118.
Fernandez, M., Wegerif, R., Mercer, N. and Rojas-Drummond, S. (2001) Re-conceptualizing "Scaffolding" and
        the Zone of Proximal Development in the context of symmetrical collaborative learning. Journal of
        Classroom Interaction, 36(2), 40-54.
Forman,   E.  (1989) The  role  of  peer interaction  in the social  construction    of mathematical   knowledge.
        International Journal of Educational Research, 13, 55-70.
Goos, M., Galbraith, P., and Renshaw, P. (2002) Socially mediated metacognition: creating collaborative zones
        of proximal development in small group problem-solving. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 49, 193-
        223.
Graesser, A. C., Person, N. K., and Magliano, J. P. (1995) Collaborative dialogue patterns in naturalistic one-to-
        one tutoring. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 495-522.
Iiskala, T., Vauras, M., and Lehtinen, E. (2004). Socially-shared metacognition in peer-learning. The Journal of
        The Hellenic Psychological Society, 1(2), 147-178.
Järvelä, S.  (1995)  The  cognitive   apprenticeship model   in  a technologically    rich learning environment:
        Interpreting the learning interaction. Learning and Instruction, 5, 237-259.
Järvelä, S. (1996) New models of teacher-student interaction. European Journal of Psychology of Education,
        11(3), 249-268.
Jermann, P. (2002) Task and interaction regulation in controlling a traffic simulation. In Proceedings of CSCL'
        2002 Conference, January 7­11 2002, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
Langer, J., and Applebee, A. (1986) Reading and writing instruction: Toward a theory of teaching and learning.
        In E. Rothkopf (Ed.), Review of Research in Education, (Vol. 13, pp.171-194). Washington, DC: AERA.
Lipponen, L. (2001) Computer-supported collaborative learning: from promises to reality. PhD Dissertation.
        Turku: Turun yliopisto.
Luhmann, N. (1992) What is communication? Communications Theory, 2-3, 251-259.
Palinscar, A. S., and Brown, D. A. (1984) The reciprocal teaching of comprehension monitoring activities.
        Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.
Pata, K., and Sarapuu, T. (2003) Developing students' mental models of environmental problems by decision-
        making role-play in synchronous network-based environment. In J. Lewis, A. Magro, L. Simonneaux
        (Eds.) Biology education for the real world. Proceedings of the IVth ERIDOB Conference (pp.335-348).
        Paragraphic/ Groupe Lienhart.
Pata, K., Sarapuu, T., and Lehtinen, E. (in press) Tutor-scaffolding styles of dilemma solving in network-based
        role-play. Learning and Instruction.
Rasmussen,    J. (2001)  The importance   of   communication  in   teaching: a systems-theory   approach   to the
        scaffolding metaphor. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 33(5), 569-582.
Stone, C. A. (1998) The metaphor of scaffolding: Its' utility for the field of learning disabilities. Journal of
        Learning Disabilities, 31(4), 344-364.
Traum, D. R. (2000) 20 Questions for Dialogue Act Taxonomies. Journal of Semantics, 17(1), 7-30.
Traum, D. R., and Allen, J. F. (1994) Discourse obligations in dialogue processing. In Proceedings of the 32nd
        Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-94), 1-8.
Veerman,     A.   (2000)  Computer-supported      collaborative  learning    through     argumentation.  Utrecht:
        Interuniversity Center for Educational Research.
Vygotsky, L. (1978) Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press (original material published in 1930, 1933, 1935).
Wells, G. (1999) Dialogic    inquiry: Towards a socio-cultural practice and theory      of education.  New York:
        Cambridge University Press.
Wood, D. J., Bruner, J. S., and Ross, G. (1976) The role of tutoring in problem-solving. Journal of Child
        Psychology and Psychiatry, 17, 89­100.

                                                        
