      Assessment of Collaboration in Online Courses

 Mariano Pimentel, Marco Aurélio Gerosa, Hugo Fuks, Carlos José Pereira de Lucena
                                      Computer Science Department
                                  Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro
                           {mariano, gerosa, hugo, lucena}@inf.puc-rio.br

      Abstract.  New    educational   dynamics    require new   assessment strategies. In this   article, three
      strategies for evaluating the collaboration of learners are presented and discussed: assessment of
      participation in  conferences,  assessment    of competence    and   collaborative  assessment.     These
      strategies have been investigated in a course taught entirely at distance by the AulaNet, which
      supplies some mechanisms for the application of these new assessment strategies.

      Keywords:     Assessment, Collaboration, Distance Education

1. INTRODUCTION
Many  online  courses  use the   Internet in  the instructionism  approach: some     content  is made     available for
subsequent checking, through tests; of how much the learners have assimilated. Most Learning Management
System (LMS) make available mechanisms for preparing tests; if all of the questions are multiple choices, then
the environment itself can issue a grade the moment a learner finishes an exam. However, this assessment
strategy is insufficient for an online course that makes use of a collaborative learning approach, representing a
pseudo-innovation that optimizes the traditional practices.
   In collaborative learning, each learner is responsible for his or her own learning and the learning of the other
members of the group. If the learner and the group are responsible for the learning, then grading must also be
carried out in a collaborative manner and no longer only by the teacher. In this article, the assessment strategies
that have been investigated during an online course with a collaborative learning approach are discussed. The
AulaNet and the course are presented in Section 2. Then, in Sections 3, 4 and 5 the strategies investigated in the
course are presented: assessment of participation, assessment of competence and collaborative assessment. The
conclusion is presented in Section 6.

2. COLLABORATIVE LEARNING AND ASSESSMENT IN AULANET
AulaNet is a Learning Management System based upon a groupware approach for teaching-learning in the Web
that has been under development since June 1997 by the Software Engineering Laboratory (LES) of the Catholic
University of  Rio  de Janeiro  (PUC-Rio).    The  AulaNet   is a freeware  available  in Portuguese,     English   and
Spanish versions at http://groupware.les.inf.puc-rio.br and http://www.eduweb.com.br. Regarding assessment,
AulaNet  offers the   Exams service   through   which  the  teacher  prepares  tests for  the  learners.  For  a more
innovative assessment, the AulaNet offers services for Participation Follow-up and Competence Management,
discussed in the next sections.
   The  AulaNet    development   team  also   develops and   maintains  the Information     Technology    Applied    to
Education  course,  ITAE   (Fuks,  Gerosa    & Lucena,    2002),  a discipline offered   by  the  Computer    Science
Department which has been taught entirely online since 1998.2 (second semester of 1998.) The course offers a
real environment for conducting investigations and experiments related to the development of AulaNet. The
ITAE course is organized into two stages. In the first stage, learners study and discuss the course's subjects
through seminars   and  debates,  and the  participation  of learners in these  discussion    activities  is evaluated
(Section 3). In the second stage learners are organized into small groups based upon their competences (Section
4) in order to  build  new content  for   the course.  Collaborative  assessment is  used   to appraise   the  content
developed by the group (Section 5). The final grade of a learner enrolled in the ITAE course is calculated as
being the weighted average of the grades received for his or her participation in the seminars and debates and
the grade given to the final version of the content developed by the group.

                                                          
                                                                                    Setting up learner groups        Setting groups of learners using
                                                                                    using Matchmaking agents         Competence Evaluation

                                                                                    Collaborative Evaluation
                                                                                    of the content developed
                                                                                    by learner groups

                Non-systematic assessmentof online activitiesEvaluation of participation inSeminar and Debate

       1998.1   1998.2   1999.1    1999.2       2000.1   2000.2       2001.1   2001.2    2002.1    2002.2        2003.1   2003.2   2004.1   2004.2

                                                           ITAE editions

                           Figure 1. Assessment strategies tried out in different ITAE editions
    The assessment strategies discussed in this article are the result of 7 years of experiments in the ITAE
course. Figure 1 presents the chronological sequence of experiments involving these strategies in the course. In
the following sections, we will discuss how these strategies were applied in the most recent edition of the course
(ITAE 2004.2) and present the conclusions.

3. PARTICIPATION ASSESSMENT
One course subject is studied and discussed each week during the first phase of the ITAE course. Learners
participate in an asynchronous seminar conducted through the Conferences service where specific questions are
discussed about the topic being studied. They also participate in a synchronous one-hour-long debate through
the Debate service. In this Section, we present the strategy developed for evaluating the participation of the
learners in these discussion activities that take place in the ITAE course.
    In a fruitful discussion, everybody is supposed to make significant contributions and send a similar amount
of messages     (Koyle    &     Aakhus,       2002).     Anybody        who        participates       without     being    prepared       is        cheating  and
disappointing the group. Anyone who merely reads the messages in a conference is not participating, only
attending.    When     one person           participates         much  more        actively     than        the others,   s/he    is   monopolizing            the
discussion. Thus, in order to evaluate the participation of learners in a conference, it is appropriate to take into
account both the quality of their messages and the frequency of their participation (Fuks, Cunha, Gerosa &
Lucena, 2003).
    The strategy developed to evaluate the participation in the ITAE course is by multiplying the quality-grade
by the quantity-weight of the messages sent by each learner during each seminar or debate session. The mediator
evaluates the quality of the message by analyzing the text. The mediator gives each message a grade and, then,
the average of the grades of the messages sent by a learner in a session is multiplied by the quantity-weight of
messages s/he sent. Figure 3 shows some weighting models based upon the quantity of messages.
    a) Irrelevant Quantity                     b) Minimum Quantity                      c) Maximum Quantity                      d) Moderated Quantity
 we ight                                  we ight                                   we ight                                   we ight
       1                                        1                                         1                                         1

                      messages                                 M   messages                               M   messages                            N     M messages

                                 Figure 2. Models for weighing quality based upon quantity
    The purpose of this assessment strategy is to get learners to try to achieve balance between the quality and
the number of the messages they sent during the course's discussion activities. The next subsections show how
this assessment strategy has been applied during the ITAE course seminars and debates.

3.1   Assessment of Seminar Participation
In each ITAE course seminar, one learner is selected to play the role of the seminar leader. This learner prepares
the seminar text and three questions for group discussion. Learners then discuss the questions, arguing and
counter-arguing based upon the messages that are sent by the learners. Mediators evaluate the messages as they
are sent in over the course of the seminar, assigning a grade and writing a comment on each message. To
evaluate the quality of a message sent during a seminar, the mediator analyzes the message based upon some
pre-defined criteria. For each message, the mediator lists the main problems identified for each criterion. Based
upon the quantity and the type of problems found, the mediator scores each criterion and gives the message a
final grade.   The     average   of       the grades     of       each learner's      messages        is     weighed     based    upon     the        number    of
messages s/he has sent during the seminar. The weighing function follows the Moderated Quantity model and
was established that a learner must send from four to six messages per seminar (in this specific case of ITAE).

                                                                             
     AveraQgueanqtiudaandtietyméofdiamdeessmaegnessagseennst enviadaspperorlaeparennerdiiznneoascshe smienmáirinoasrMain Influences
    The seminar dynamics and the strategy for evaluating learner participation have been developed and tested
over the ITAE editions. Figure 4 shows the average number of messages sent per learner per seminar, indicating
the influences of the dynamics and of the assessment procedures that caused learner participation to improve and
become more frequent.

                                                                                                                      4.0                                                                                                                                           3.8

                                                                                                                      3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                             3.2
                                                                                                                      3.0                                                                         3.0                   3.0                   2.8       2.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.6
                                                                                                                                                                                       2.4
                                                                                                                      2.5

                                                                                                                      2.0

                                                                                                                      1.5
                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                      1.0

                                                                                                                      0.5                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                          0.10.0                                                                                          Edições dIToAcEuersdoitiToInAsE
                                                                                                                            1998.1   1998.2       1999.1     1999.2     2000.1     2000.2      2001.1     2001.2     2002.1     2002.2     2003.1     2003.2     2004.1

                                                                                                                                                                                    Edições do curso TIAE
                                                                                                                            Non-systematic evaluation

                                                                                                                                                    Concept grade
                                                                                                                                       Message categorization
                                                                                                                                   Seminar held on Conference service
                                                                                                                             Discussion structure based on IBIS model
                                                                                                                                                                                              3 questions per seminar

                                                                                                                                                                      Quality weighted by moderated quantity (4 to 6 messages per seminar)

                                                                                                                                    Figure 3. Average quantity of messages sent by learners per seminar
    The                                                      1998.1                                                         ITAE    edition       was      conducted          in a `face-to-face'         classroom,          and       there     is no     data regarding
learners' participation. Participation was sporadic in the 1998.2 to 1999.2 editions: on average, each learner sent
only one message every four seminars. This fact mainly was a result of the lack of systematic assessment of
participation. On the other hand, in the 2000.1 edition, seminar participation became more regular: on average,
each learner sent one message per seminar. This regularity was due mainly to the messages being graded. In the
following edition, 2000.2, the average quantity per learner increased, mainly as a result of the transfer of the
seminars to the Conferences service (they previously had been conducted through the Discussion List service),
where messages could be threaded. The discussion structure was based on the IBIS model (Gerosa, Fuks &
Lucena, 2001). In the subsequent editions, from 2001.1 through 2003.2, the average increased mainly because it
was defined                                                                                                               that three  questions           would       be      discussed       during    each      seminar.      In      the 2004.1          edition,    it was
established that each learner had to send between four to six messages per seminar (weighting quality by
quantity), leading the learners to suppose that it was necessary and sufficient to send the lower limit of this
target: they sent approximately four messages per seminar.
    The                                                      main                                                         lesson   learned      from      these      experiments           is that     evaluating    learners'          messages,      even      simply     by
grading them, fosters participation and increases message quality. But it is not sufficient to simply grade the
messages in order to properly provide learners with guidance. Commenting on the assessment is also necessary:
it is desirable to follow a set of criteria to guide the assessment, but it is not feasible to present very detailed
analyses about each criterion. Another important lesson is that multiplying quality by quantity of messages
encourages submission of more messages without a concomitant decline in quality and makes the number of
messages sent by learners more homogeneous.

3.2 Assessment of Debate Participation
    In the ITAE course debates, a previously selected learner plays the role of moderator, being responsible for
the coordination of the debate session. First the moderator returns to each question previously discussed in the
seminar. Next each learner sends in a comment about the question. Then learners elect one of the comments for
further                                                      discussion.                                                           After      the discussion,          participants           summarize          what       was discussed            and     present       their
conclusions. After discussing the third question, mediators declare the end of the debate and subsequently
evaluate the participation of the learners.
    To evaluate a debate session, mediators score the messages that have been sent: 10 is given to a message
whose content is related to the debate subject; 5 is given to a message whose content misses the debate subject;
and 0 (zero) is given to a message that interrupts the debate dynamics (for example, messages that are sent after

                                                                                                                                                                                    
the moderator     requests  "silence"    or "attention,"  since  they    hinder debate   coordination    and   disrespect
moderator's authority). For a message to be given the top mark it only needs to be related to the subject being
discussed and appropriate to the dynamics--for example, it does not take into account grammatical errors. The
emphasis   of the  debate  is on  the  exchange     of messages, being   established   that each   learner  must send  a
minimum of 20 messages per debate (Minimum Quantity model).
    As a result of the debates held during the running of the ITAE course, it has been identified that the use of
chat makes it possible to constitute a space to explore new educational methods where there is an absence of
expositive content, there is a high level of dialogue and the teacher no longer is considered to be a repository of
knowledge and conveyor of the truth.        It has been identified that informal conversation allows learners to be
more aware of others and to be more aware of themselves as part of the group, offering space for showing their
emotions, reducing this way the sensation of impersonality and isolation. The continuous and integrated use of
chat tools in educational activities is a way of keeping learners motivated and engaged in order to ensure the
success   and continuity   of the distance   learning   course. The   assessment  of   participation  is an  appropriate
instrument for equating chat activities with other course activities.

4. ASSESSMENT OF COMPETENCE
In  AulaNet,    a learner's   competence     is characterized   by   three dimensions:    Qualification,    Interest and
Performance (Fuks, Mitchell, Gerosa & Lucena, 2003). Interest and Qualification are indicated by the learners
themselves. Performance is calculated by the AulaNet environment according to the results obtained in the
courses. For example, in each ITAE course seminar, the average grade of the learners' messages influences their
performance in the subjects taken up in the seminar.
    In order to visualize learners' competence, the AulaNet offers a Competence Report. The assessment of
competences is still underway in the AulaNet. This study was initiated out of the necessity to form groups of
learners  based   upon  their interests, qualifications  and  performance    with regard    to course topics.  The   first
solution investigated was for the AulaNet environment itself to assemble groups using software agents (Cunha,
Fuks & Lucena, 2003). The automatic grouping was not satisfactory, generating groups of learners that the
mediators considered inadequate. Then, the strategy of supplying reports as described in this paper to enable the
mediators themselves to form the groups was adopted.

5.  COLLABORATIVE ASSESSMENT
    Collaborative  learning   requires collaborative   assessment.   When  learners   share  assessment   responsibility,
there is an increase in assessment comprehension and utility (O'Sullivan, 2004; McConnell, 2002). For those
being  evaluated,  multiple   assessments   of  their  work  generate greater   trust of the   assessment  results.  With
practice, learners  who   make   the  assessment    come  to  better  understand  the  process   and  objectives of   the
assessment procedure, enhance their critical senses and are more capable of appraising their own work.

5.1  Collaborative Assessment of the Seminar Messages
As of the 2000.1 edition, when the ITAE seminar messages were first graded, learners in almost all of the
editions have suggested collaborative assessment of the seminar messages. The use of this assessment strategy is
being planned. In each seminar, some learners will be selected to evaluate messages. Mediators will continue
making their assessment; however, their grades and comments will only be published after the seminar is over so
as not to influence the appraisal of the evaluator-learners. Concluding this assessment process, the author of the
message conducts a self-assessment, taking into account all the grades and comments the message has received.
The final grade of the message will be the average of all assessments. The Conference service must be modified
in order to make this collaborative assessment of seminar messages method feasible. New mechanisms are
already   being developed   to  support  collaborative   assessment   in the AulaNet     environment   and  the  method
planned will be tested during the next editions of the course.

5.2 Collaborative Assessment of the Content Developed by Learner Groups
    In the second   stage  of the ITAE      course, learners develop  new   contents   about   the subjects studied  and
discussed during the course. This stage of the course begins with learners being organized into small groups
(Section 4). Next, each group submits a prototype of the content. Learners themselves evaluate this prototype.
Based upon the assessments, each group modifies the prototype. The final version then is evaluated by the
mediators.
    The   collaborative assessment   of  the prototype   is carried  out through  the  Conferences    service. For   each
prototype, a conference is created where learners analyze the prototype, based upon some criteria that have been
established. Then, the developers must initiate a discussion of the problems identified in the prototype.

                                                            
  The   adoption   of this assessment  strategy has   shown   that  mediators and  learners are  not  familiar with
collaborative evaluation. Learners fear criticizing other learners' work and cheating such as "assess me well and
I'll do the same for you" are prone to happen. Learners also react to other learners' criticism. Self-assessment,
an essential part of collaborative assessment, has an additional obstacle in the sense that it is very difficult for
one to be   impartial about oneself. Future  research    must be conducted  in  ITAE  course  to investigate   these
problems.

6. CONCLUSION
  The assessment strategies normally employed in traditional classrooms are not sufficient for the collaborative
learning conducted in online education environments. In this article, there was a discussion of the assessment
strategies that have  been  developed  and   tested   in an online  course: participation  follow-up,  competence
management and collaborative assessment. While these strategies still need to be improved, and the AulaNet
environment is being modified to provide more support for them, it can be concluded that these strategies have
made it possible to more adequately evaluate the learners.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The AulaNet project is partially financed by the Fundação Padre Leonel Franca and by the Ministry of Science
and Technology through its Multi-Agent Systems for Software Engineering Project Program (ESSMA) grant nº
552068/2002-0. It is also financed by individual grants awarded by the National Research Council to: Carlos
José Pereira de Lucena nº 300031/92-0, Hugo Fuks nº 303055/02-2 and Marco Aurélio Gerosa nº 140103/02-3.
Mariano    Gomes  Pimentel  received  an   individual grant   from  the Council  for  the Improvement    of Higher
Teaching of the Ministry of Education.

REFERENCES

Cunha, L.M.,    Fuks, H.,  Lucena,  C.J.P. Setting  Groups    of Learners  using Matchmaking     Agents. IASTED
       International Conference on Computers and Advanced Technology in Education - CATE 2003, June 30 -
       July 2, Rhodes - Greece, 2003, pp. 321-326
Fuks, H., Gerosa, M.A., Lucena, C.J.P. The Development and Application of Distance Learning on the Internet.
       Open Learning - The Journal of Open and Distance Learning, v 17, n 1, 2002, pp. 23-38.
Fuks,  H.,  Cunha,   L.M.,  Gerosa,  M.A.,  Lucena,   C.J.P.  Analyzing   and  Assessing   Collaborative Learning
       Activities in  a Web-Based    Environment.   Electronic   Proceedings  of  the ICEE   2003   - International
       Conference on Engineering Education, Valencia, Spain, July 2003, pp.21-25.
Fuks, H., Mitchell, L.H.R.G., Gerosa, M.A., Lucena, C.J.P. Competency Management for Group Formation in
       the  AulaNet   Learning  Environment.    9th   International Workshop    on   Groupware   - CRIWG     2003,
       Springer-Verlag, 28 September - 02 October 2003, Grenoble, France, 2003, pp. 183-190.
Gerosa, M.A., Fuks, H., Lucena, C.J.P. Use of Categorization and Structuring of Messages in order to Organize
       the Discussion and Reduce Information Overload in Asynchronous Textual Communication Tools. 7th
       International Workshop on Groupware - CRIWG 2001, IEEE, 6-8 September, Darmstadt - Germany, pp
       136-141, 2001.
Koyle, S.B.,    Aakhus, M. Presuppositions about `good communication:' An assessment of online discourse.
       CSCL 2002. Boulder, Colorado USA, 2002.
McConnell,   D.   Collaborative Assessment   as a   Learning   Event  in E-learning   Environments.   CSCL     2002.
       Boulder, Colorado USA, 2002.
O'Sullivan, R.G. Practicing evaluation: a collaborative approach. California: SAGE, 2004.

                                                         
