                Mediated Chat Development Process:
 Avoiding Chat Confusion on Educational Debates

                 Mariano Pimentel, Hugo Fuks, Carlos José Pereira de Lucena
                                    Computer Science Department
                                 Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro
                            {mariano, gerosa, hugo, lucena}@inf.puc-rio.br

     Abstract. The objective of this research is to reduce confusion in chat conversation, which is the
     main problem regarding the use of chat tools for holding online course debates. This problem is
     investigated using a Groupware Engineering approach. A number of successive versions of the
     Mediated Chat tool have been developed as part of this research. This research aims at producing
     an enhanced chat tool designed for educational debates through which a chat conversation could
     be followed more easily.

     Keywords: Chat Confusion, Education Debates, Online Education

1. INTRODUCTION
Textual chat tools have achieved widespread popularity and, increasingly, people want to use these tools in
activities that go beyond    socialization and recreation.  In  this research project, a chat tool for running
synchronous debates as part of online courses is investigated.
  Among the potential educational uses of chats is the establishment of a space to explore new educational
models where there is an absence of expositive content, a high level of dialogue and the de-characterization of
the teacher as a repository of knowledge. It has been identified that informal conversation, which is typical of
this tool, makes it possible for learners to better perceive others and to better see themselves as part of the group.
This provides a space for emotions that reduce the feeling of something impersonal and isolated. The continued
and integrated use of chat tools for educational activities is a way of keeping learners motivated and engaged in
order to guarantee the success and continuity of distance learning courses.
  However, conversational confusion has been identified as the main limitation of the educational use of chat
tools. The participants of the synchronous debates being researched, although usually excited about the activity,
frequently complain about the chat confusion: "It is not easy to communicate through such a chaotic tool"; "I
liked this debate...however, I couldn't follow what was being discussed very well". In a chat with a number of
participants talking at the same time, the result is a tangle of messages where it is sometimes difficult to identify
who is talking to whom about what. This problem has been called Chat Confusion (Pimentel, Fuks & Lucena,
2003; Thirunarayanan, 2000).
  The objective of this research is to discover which problems cause the participants to consider the chat
conversation    confusing. Using a Groupware     Engineering    approach,   problems have  been identified and
mechanisms for chat tools that can avoid chat confusion have been developed--this research methodology is
presented in section 2. For each problem identified, a new version of the Mediated Chat tool is developed and
then experimented within an online course--the versions and their evaluations are presented in section 3. The
conclusion of this research is presented in section 4.

2. GROUPWARE ENGINEERING TO DEVELOP THE MEDIATED CHAT TOOL
The AulaNet environment is a Learning Management System based on a groupware approach that has been
under development since June 1997 by the Software Engineering Laboratory of the Catholic University of Rio
(PUC-Rio). The AulaNet is a freeware application available in Portuguese, English and Spanish versions at
http://groupware.les.inf.puc-rio.br and http://www.eduweb.com.br. The group that is developing the AulaNet
learningware also teaches the Information Technology Applied to Education course, ITAE (Fuks, Gerosa &
Lucena, 2002), in the Computer Science Department at PUC-Rio. This course has been taught entirely online
through AulaNet since 1998.2 (the second semester of 1998). This course provides a real environment where the
experiments related to AulaNet are carried out. Among the ITAE course's activities are synchronous debates
held through the AulaNet Debate service, which runs the Mediated Chat, the chat tool being researched.

                                                         
                                                                               Revision
  To guide the research of problems related to chat confusion and to systematize the development of Mediated
Chat versions, a Groupware Engineering approach has been used (Fuks, Raposo, Gerosa & Lucena, 2004). It is
based on a collaboration 3C model: Communication, Coordination and Cooperation. These concepts are used to
analyze the  ITAE       debate sessions in a search  for problems           related   to     chat confusion. For      each     problem
identified, a new Mediated Chat version is developed, as in the process shown in Figure 1.a.

           typical chat tool                        COMMUNICATION                                  Mediated Chat x.x

                                                                                                       Improved
                                           Groupware Engineering                                    Mediated Chat
                                                                                                     version to run
                                                                                                  education debates

                                          COOPERATION              COORDINATION

              (a) Groupware Engineering applied to the development of the Mediated Chat tool

                                          2001.1

                                                  Version: HyperDialog
                                                   3C-Aspect: Communication
                                                     Problem: Co-text Loss
                                                  Mechanism: Message Thread

                                          2002.2

                                                Version: Mediated Chat 2.0
     2000.1                                       3C-Aspect: Coordination
                                                    Problem: Dynamics Interruption
                                                 Mechanism: Conversation Techniques

        Version: Mediated Chat 1.0
      3C-Aspect: CommunicationProblem: no one2004.1                           Revision
     Mechanism: Communication Channel                                                   2005.1
                  Framework

                                                Version: Mediated Chat 3.0                        Version: Mediated Chat 5.0
                                                  3C-Aspect: Coordination                      3C-Aspect: Cooperation
                                                    Problem: Message Overflow                    Problem: De-contextualization
                                                 Mechanism: Message Queue                     Mechanism: Session Register

                                           2004.2

                                                  Version: Mediated Chat 4.0
                                                    3C-Aspect: Cooperation
                                                      Problem: Reading and Writing Interface
                                                   Mechanism: Interface improvements
                                             (b) Mediated Chat versions
                                   Figure 1. Mediated Chat Development Process
  Each new Mediated Chat version implements a mechanism to solve a problem related to chat confusion that
has been identified. The development process is presented in Figure 1 and described on the next section.

3. MEDIATED CHAT VERSIONS
This section describes      each  Mediated   Chat  version developed               focusing   on   the problem        identified,  the
mechanism implemented, the data collected from its use on an ITAE edition, and its evaluations.

                                                         
                                                                              Revision
3.1 - Mediated Chat 1.0: the typical chat tool
Despite few features, Mediated Chat 1.0 is a typical chat tool. The development of this version had not been
driven by an effort to solve a chat confusion problem. The main objective was to support the synchronous
textual message interchange between the participants of an AulaNet course.
  When the Mediated Chat 1.0 was first used to run the debates on ITAE 2000.1 edition (first semester of
2001),  the participants   considered the chat  conversation  too  confusing.  This  research   project  started to
investigate the causes of chat conversation confusion aiming at developing a Mediated Chat tool through which
debates would be better understood.

3.2 - HyperDialog: Co-text Loss and the Threaded Messages
Among the symptoms of conversation confusion, the occurrence of Co-text Loss was identified; a problem that
occurs when one participant is not capable of establishing the structure of the discourse--that is, s/he cannot
identify which message (prior to the given message) is being answered. Analysis of the linguistic aspects of the
ITAE2000.1 debates led to the hypothesis that one of the causes of chat confusion was the non-linearity of the
chat session messages (Pimentel, Fuks & Lucena, 2003). The HyperDialog tool, where messages are threaded,
was developed in order to deal with the Co-text Loss problem. Besides presenting messages chronologically
ordered, the tool also presents the tree message associations. In this organization, the text sequences--the way in
which the dialogues are linked together--are evident. In an isolated thread, the conversation remains linear:
each message is associated with the message that comes immediately before it. The thread mechanism would
reduce the occurrence of co-text loss because it organizes the non-linearity of the chat.
  Contrary to what was expected, the experiment held in 2001.1 showed that the Co-text Loss problem was not
reduced using the HyperDialog. It was noted that co-text losses through the use of the HyperDialog tool were
accused  regarding   the messages  where  the sender had  not specified   the association  with  the   message  s/he
referred to. When the messages are not adequately associated (7.5% of messages were not correctly linked), the
threads become useless and can make it even more difficult to identify the co-text. While the message thread
mechanism has the potential to prevent the Co-text Loss problem, it nevertheless introduces other problems. The
conversation became inappropriately more formal. The message tree structure dispersed the participants who
were focused on different branches, making coordination of the debate more difficult. Compared to typical chat
tools, HyperDialog used a much more complex interface that introduced a number of problems regarding the use
of the shared space.
  The thread mechanism implemented in the HyperDialog tool is similar to that implemented in Threaded Chat
(Burkhalter, Cadiz & Smith, 2000), and the users who experimented the Threaded Chat tool also indicated that it
was significantly worse than a typical chat tool. In future works, a simplified version of the thread mechanism
will be researched.

3.3 - Mediated Chat 2.0: Dynamics Interruption and Conversation Techniques
  To systematize and facilitate coordination, a better defined sequence of steps for the ITAE debates was
established. The dynamics, applied as of the ITAE 2002.2 edition, prescribes a set of activities and expected
messages for each debate step. Using this better structured conversation dynamics, the debate session becomes
easier to follow. Compared to the preceding editions, there was a reduction of Co-text Loss by half in the ITAE
2002.2 edition--an indication that better conversation flow implies in less chat confusion.
  The application of these new dynamics made it clear that some of the messages were not appropriate for the
ongoing step, being identified as Interruptions (Pimentel, Fuks & Lucena, 2004). Nevertheless, the Mediated
Chat 1.0 tool, as well as the majority of typical chat tools, does not have specific mechanisms to support
coordination (Pfister &    Mühlpfordt, 2002).  For that  purpose,  the Mediated  Chat     2.0 tool implements    the
following set of conversation techniques:  Free Contribution, where participants can send messages at any time;
Circular Contribution, where participants are organized in a circular queue and, one by one, the first one in the
queue can send a message; and Unique Contribution, where each participant must send a single message at any
time. It is also possible to Block-Unblock the sending of messages by the learners.
  The number of Interruptions characterizes the difficulties in coordinating the debate session (the perfectly
coordinated stage is one in which no Interruptions take place). It was expected that the use of the conversation
techniques implemented in Mediated Chat 2.0 would reduce the occurrence of Interruptions resulting in a better
debate coordination and, thus, in less chat confusion. However, the experiment conducted in the ITAE2002.2
edition showed that the number of Interruptions remained unchanged when the Mediated Chat 2.0 was used. A
further analysis of  these  sessions  pointed out  that the interruptions took  place  because     the conversation
techniques  are too  rigid to deal with unexpected   situations. Improvements   on  the   mechanisms    tested were
proposed (Pimentel, Fuks & Lucena, 2004) and then implemented on the Mediated Chat 5.0 version (subsection
3.6).

                                                        
3.4 - Mediated Chat 3.0: Message Overload and Message Queue
Another problem related to chat confusion frequently mentioned by learners is the difficulty in reading all the
messages  during  the debate session.        This problem is aggravated  when a    large number  of messages  are
exchanged within a short period of time, making it impossible for participants to read all of them. In this
research this phenomenon  is termed   Message       Overload. A  similar problem   is known  as Flood in the IRC
literature (Oikarinen, 1993). However, Flood is the high rate of messages sent by a single participant, whereas
Message Overload is the high rate of messages sent in the session by all participants.
  Mediated Chat 3.0 tool was developed to deal with the Message Overload problem. In typical chat systems,
each message that the server receives is immediately dispatched to the clients. In the Mediated Chat 3.0 tool, the
server waits after publishing a message and before publishing the next one, allowing the participants to read all
the published messages successfully. This mechanism was based on the Chat Circles tool (Viegas & Donath,
1999), where the message remains visible for a limited period of time. However, in the Chat Circles tool there is
nothing that prevents other messages from being simultaneously presented, thus Message Overload may still
occur. In addition, in both tools there is the indication of a typing-participant represented by a pulsating circle.
  The Mediated Chat 3.0 tool was used in the ITAE 2004.1 edition. The interviews that were conducted with
the participants demonstrate that nobody complained about message overload. However, a lot of the participants
did not become aware of the message queuing mechanism. Some of them thought that the chat tool was too slow
because some of their messages had their publication delayed (their message was in the queue but they did not
notice it) and were unsatisfied with the new version. To deal with this collateral problem, the Mediated Chat 5.0
version (subsection 3.6) implements the queuing representation in the Participant List in such a way that it is
more visible and easier to understand, similar to the one implemented in the PalTalk tool. The typing indication
was quickly and well understood by the participants and aided the chat coordination. This mechanism also
reduces the occurrence of a specific type of interruption caused by the lack of visibility of turn in progress
(Vronay, Smith & Drucker, 1999).
  Although not conclusive yet, the results show that the queuing mechanism used in this version prevents
Message Overload, and the typing indication prevents the interruption caused by lack of turn in progress. Both
mechanisms help chat coordination reducing chat confusion.

3.5 - Mediated Chat 4.0: Interface to a better Reading and Writing process
Some problems concerning the reading and writing process causing chat confusion have been identified. Then,
Mediated Chat 4.0 was developed. To improve the reading process, the debate session text is formatted to
increase the visual distinction between different types of information: date published, sender and the content of
her/his message; messages of participants and messages automatically sent by the system (to inform who entered
or left the debate session). Only the nickname of the participant is presented, not his/her full name, to decrease
the amount of text identifying the sender. The scrollbar stops scrolling automatically when the reader scrolls it
up to read the messages no longer visible on the screen, and resumes scrolling automatically when the reader
scrolls it down to the last published message. To improve the writing process, the typing area increased to 3
visible lines of text (instead of just one).
  The versions Mediated Chat 1.0 and 4.0 were used to hold the ITAE 2004.2 debates. The participants were
interviewed and they all stated that the new interface helps reading the published messages and to writing new
ones. New interface improvements were suggested by the participants during the debate sessions and interviews.
They were analyzed and then implemented on Mediated Chat 5.0.

3.6 - Mediated Chat 5.0: Session Register to avoid De-contextualization
All mechanisms tested in previous Mediated Chat versions were revised and implemented in Mediated Chat 5.0.
The latest version is going to be experimented in the ITAE 2005.1 debates. The objective is to find out the
degree of chat confusion that occurs when using all these mechanisms together.
  A new mechanism developed to avoid the de-contextualization problem (Hedestig & Kaptelinin, 2002) will
also be investigated. This problem happens when a participant enters an ongoing debate session. The other
participants will be already engaged in the discussion and the new participant will find herself de-contextualized
having difficulty to follow what is being discussed and delaying her participation in the session. Sometimes, the
debate dynamics is interrupted to contextualize the participant that just entered.
  To avoid the de-contextualization problem, the session control mechanism was implemented in Mediated
Chat 5.0. The mediator is the one responsible to start and finish a chat session. All messages sent during a
session are archived by the chat server. All messages produced during the ongoing session are presented to the
incoming participant, enabling her to find out the context of the ongoing discussion.

                                                          
4. CONCLUSION
This paper addresses chat confusion. This phenomenon is investigated within the educational debates setting.
Evidence comes in the form of: co-text loss, dynamics interruption, reading and writing interface features, and
de-contextualization. Using a Groupware Engineering approach, a chat tool has being developed seeking to
prevent this phenomenon. The newest Mediated Chat version derives from the systematic investigation of the
influences  of communication,     coordination  and   cooperation aspects   of educational  debates  through    chat
sessions. Although the experiment with this latest version has not been conducted yet, the results obtained with
the use of intermediate versions indicate that debate sessions will be less confusing and more understandable.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The AulaNet project is partially financed by the Fundação Padre Leonel Franca and by the Ministry of Science
and Technology through its Program Multi-Agent Systems for Software Engineering Project (ESSMA) grant nº
552068/2002-0. It is also financed by individual grants awarded by the National Research Council to: Carlos
José Pereira   de  Lucena  nº  300031/92-0  and   Hugo   Fuks  nº 303055/02-2.     Mariano Pimentel  received   and
individual grant from the Council for the Improvement of Higher Teaching of the Ministry of Education.

REFERENCES
Burkhalter,   B., Cadiz, J.J., Smith, M.  Conversation   Trees and    Threaded  Chats. In: CSCW'00    - Computer
      Supported Cooperative Work Conference. Philadelphia, PA, 2000. p. 97-105.
Chat Circles. http://chatcircles.media.mit.edu
Fuks, H., Gerosa, M.A., Lucena, C.J.P. The Development and Application of Distance Learning on the Internet.
      Open Learning - The Journal of Open and Distance Learning, v 17, n 1, 2002, pp. 23-38.
Fuks, H., Raposo, A.B., Gerosa, M.A., Lucena, C.J.P. Applying the 3C Model to Groupware Engineering.
      Technical Report MCC nº 01/04, Computer Science Department of the Catholic University of Rio de
      Janeiro, Brazil, 2004.
Hedestig,U.,   Kaptelinin, V.    Re-contextualization   of Teaching    and  Learning   in  Videoconference-based
      Environments: An Empirical Study. CSCL2002. Boulder, Colorado USA, 2002.
IRC. http://www.irc.org
Oikarinen, J. Request for Comments: 1459, Network Working Group, D. Reed. May 1993.
PalTalk. http://www.paltalk.com
Pfister,H. Mühlpfordt,   M.    Supporting Discourse   in a  Synchronous    Learning   Environment:  The  Learning
      Protocol Approach. CSCL2002. Boulder, Colorado USA, 2002.
Pimentel,  M.G.,   Fuks,  H.,  Lucena,   C.J.P. Co-text  Loss  in Textual   Chat   Tools.  In: CONTEXT'03:       4th
      International and Interdisciplinary Conference on Modeling and Using Context. Stanford, California,
      EUA, 2003. p. 483-490.
Pimentel, M.G., Fuks, H., Lucena, C.J.P. Mediated Chat 2.0: Embbeding Coordination into Chat Tools. In:
      COOP'04 - 6th International Conference on the Design of Cooperative Systems. French Riviera, France,
      2004.
Thirunarayanan,    M.O.  Cutting  down   on chat confusion:  a proposal  for   managing   instructor-controlled chat
      systems. In: Ubiquity, v. 1, issue 38, 2000.
Viegas, F.B., Donath, J.S. Chat Circles. In: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Pittsburgh,
      Pennsylvania, United States, 1999.
Vronay,   D.,  Smith, M.,  Drucker,   S.  Alternative Interfaces  for Chat.    In: UIST'99  -  12th Annual ACM
      Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, 1999.

                                                         
