Computer-Supported Collaboration in a Scripted 3-D
                                         Game Environment
Hämäläinen Raija, Researcher                         Järvelä Sanna,                Manninen Tony, Assistant
   Häkkinen Päivi, Professor                              Professor                             Professor
University of Jyväskylä Finland                      University of Oulu             University of Oulu Finland
      Institute for Educational Research                  Finland                    tony.manninen@oulu.fi
   PL 35, FIN-40014, University of Jyväskylä
   raija.hamalainen@ktl.jyu.fi                    sanna.jarvela@oulu.fi

     Abstract. The particular focus of this paper is on scripting collaboration in a 3-D virtual game
     environment intended to make learning more effective, but also take into account the risk of over-
     scripting learning. The empirical experiment eScape, which encourages learners to solve problems
     collaboratively, is also presented. This study attempts to find out whether the features of 3-D
     games can be used to create meaningful scripted collaborative learning environments. The results
     indicated    that scripting persuaded        student teams   to enter  into collaboration,  but  the   actual
     processes varied.

     Keywords: CSCL, scripting, 3-D virtual game

INTRODUCTION
To respond    to learning demands,        CSCL   (Computer-Supported   Collaborative    Learning)  (Koschmann,     1996)
needs instructional support. Structuring the interactions taking place during the virtual learning period is one
specific way to make collaborative activity more efficient. Structures that construct collaborative processes are
called collaboration scripts (Dillenbourg, 2002). A part of current research on structuring CSCL is derived from
earlier work on the approach based on scripted cooperation (O'Donnell, 1999). Scripts are intended to facilitate
collaborative learning processes and guide learners' activities. Scripts make it possible to specify and sequence
activities and roles and assign them among the members of the team engaged in collaborative work. (O'Donnell,
1999; Weinberger, 2003). Scripts may help learners to enhance the quality of their learning processes. However,
designers of scripts must also take into account the risk of over-scripting learning, which may hamper natural
interaction and   problem-solving         processes, increase   the  participants' cognitive    load or   harness   their
collaborative load to serve didactic purposes and purposeless interactions (Dillenbourg, 2002). Accordingly, it
may be said that scripting CSCL is about balancing between helpful and excessive guidance.
   Last few years have witnessed an increase in interactive gaming, though this growth has taken place mainly
in the field of entertainment games. Recently, has aroused a discussion about whether collaborative virtual
gaming could also promote learning. Game worlds have the potential to draw on the feeling of presence and
immersion   which   virtual worlds       can  arouse  at its best (Mc  Lellan,   1996). More    sophisticated technical
applications will make avatars increasingly capable of supporting non-verbal communication between students,
which may make interaction between players more efficient (Cassell & Vilhjálmsson, 1999). At their best, well-
designed multiplayer games may enable engaged communication and collaboration between players during the
gameplay.
   Adopting games as a resource is often justified on the basis of motivational factors. However, even though
games may motivate learners, there are critical issues involved in gaming. One of the major ones is that in
learning, games must be put to pedagogically reasonable uses and playing must go beyond aimless enjoyment,
become a purposeful activity that requires mental effort. Scripting interactions is a natural idea in game design
because games are often based on different levels of activities. One possible way in which games can motivate
players is the provision of higher game levels that may be reached by solving problems set in the game. For
example, the higher level may offer new scope for action or give access to more tools which help the player to
survive in the game. The aim of future learning games is to use scripts and different game levels in a way which
supports high-level learning and pedagogically reasonable aims (Hämäläinen & Häkkinen, 2004).

RESEARCH AIMS
   The study is a part of the ECOL (Ecology of Collaboration) research project, whose purpose is to examine
collaborative learning  as  a motivated       and co-ordinated  activity. The eScape    virtual game  is  a pedagogical

                                                             
innovation involving the development of a technological tool intended to create settings for collaboration and
increase participants' awareness of the social processes going on during collaboration. The study designed and
tested game players' activities in an eScape virtual environment with the aim of finding out whether the features
of 3-D games can be used to construct meaningful virtual learning environments. As regards to eScape, the aim
is to answer the following questions: 1) What kind of scripting promoted collaboration in the eScape game
environment? 2) What kind of interaction emerged during the game?

THE ESCAPE GAME
In eScape    (Electronically Shared     Collaborative   and Pedagogical  Experiment),    the main   focus   was  on
constructing a game environment that would promote collaboration between team members and support the
process  of  becoming   a team.    The  game   includes puzzles that can be   solved only  through  the effort   and
commitment of every participant. To encourage collaborative activities, the game world consists of a small-scale
thematic setting that channels and constrains the players' activities. Shared workspace collaboration revolves
around  certain core   activities that need   to be supported: 1) communication    and negotiation  between   group
members, 2) keeping track of other group members' work, and 3) stimulated physical activities such as moving
tools and objects (Pinelle, Gutwin & Greenberg, 2002).
   eScape is a collaborative game for four players which can be characterised as social-action adventure. The
game concept involves an escape story where the group must solve a set of problems in order to flee from an
ancient prison colony. It was decided to design, or script, significant key points at which collaboration was
expected to take place. The scripting was hidden from the players behind the game's escape story. Due to the
limited duration of the experiment, the content of the game enables approximately 60 minutes of goal-oriented
activities. The players   interact and  experience   their surroundings by  using  their modifiable   avatars in an
atmospherically captivating virtual world. Role play and player-to-player communication are supported through
versatile non-verbal communication (expressions, gestures, etc) and a voice-over IP speech system which allows
free spoken dialogue between the players. The main challenge in design was the scripting of motivationally
guided logical and challenging problems that would require true collaboration.

RESEARCH DESIGN
This study is a design experiment, involving both the process of designing a game environment and an empirical
study, where    data is collected   using multiple   methods   and then  analysed, after  which   the findings   and
conclusions serve as a basis for further design work (Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer & Schauble, 2003). The
data was aggregated and analysed at the group level. The qualitative analysis was partly theory-driven (Webb,
1989) and partly data-driven. A special laboratory environment was constructed so as to capture all the required
data during the experimental game sessions. The multiplayer aspect of eScape meant that all the actions of every
player must be recorded. The eScape empirical experiment was organised in 2003 with the participation of
university students chosen from the non-gaming community. Six groups of four students (N=24), four of them
composed of Finnish students, two of foreign students, took part in the experiment. On the first day the students
were given an hour's training session in the game environment. On the second day they played the game,
immediately followed by a stimulated recall interview. Data were gathered using several methods: background
information questionnaires, video feed from each of the players (over-the-shoulder view), combined views from
all the four players (over-the-shoulder views), video feed from a virtual camera (inside the game world, used by
one of the game operators), audio recording of spoken dialogue, demo recording within the game platform
(enables free  camera   movements      during playback), observation notes, stimulated   recall interviews, and  the
students' personal notes.

DATA ANALYSIS
After the game experiment, all the data were verified, interviews and conversations conducted during game
sessions were transcribed and observation notes were sorted into categories. A qualitative analysis was carried
out using data classifications. In the first stage of classification the data were categorised according to the
problems scripted (key collaboration points) into the game environment. The second stage of the classification
focused on the significant situations identified on the basis of the script. There were two stages. The first stage
pinpointed the interactions that were the central facilitators of game progress. After this, the situations identified
in the first stage were analysed to find out, on the basis of observations, what were the (individual and group)
interactions  that the players used,   followed   by an  examination of their contribution   to collaborative group
activity (Table1).
After the building: Peter asks the other players: "So we have to look for more?". The other players answer yes,
and

                                                           
Peter starts to move quickly around in the game environment, carrying the box.
other players: rule-making
After the building: Peter wants to know which of the players is talking. All the same, he is operating well on
his own in the game environment, carrying the box along.
identifying a target (personal)
After the building: Peter tries, alone, to use the boxes to build a platform from where he would jump over the
wall and fence surrounding the castle. He does not tell any of the other players about this target.
No negotiation
After the building: Peter listens as the other players tell each other about the biting bees. Instead of going to
help he continues on his own to build the platform for clearing the wall and fence around the castle.
identifying a target (personal)
Table1: An example of observations on individual and group activity
    Cross-comparisons of sets of research materials collected using several methods were intended to improve
the reliability of the research results.

RESULTS
According to the findings, scripting enhanced collaboration during the game. Despite the scripted environment,
group and individual actions varied a great deal. The groups differed in the time spent on the game, the degree
of collaboration shown, the roles assumed and the attitudes displayed by their members. Scripting guided team
members towards collaboration and shared problem-solving. Despite the scripting, the time spent on the game
varied from about 45 minutes to 1 hour and 20 minutes. According to the accompanying data analysis, five of
the six groups  had achieved    good     collaboration  at  least some    points of the game,    while even   the non-
collaborative group had managed some teamwork. The five collaborative groups followed the predefined order
of scripted game tasks (Table 2).
Phase 1   Encouraging the group members to communicate
Phase 2   Planning the activities and getting to know the 3-D environment (requires planning, goal-setting
          and -seeking, negotiation, co-ordination and rule-making)
Phase 3   1st problem: getting a box from a high scaffold (requires a working plan)
Phase 4   2nd problem: getting nests from a colony of bees (requires forming dyads)
Phase 5   3rd problem: helping a blind man (requires forming groups of three or four members)
Phase 6   4th  problem: firing  a  rocket     pattern into the sky  (requires    goal-setting and -seeking,  planning,
          negotiation, co-ordination and rule-making)
Phase 7   5th problem: constructing a hot-air balloon (requires contribution by all four members).
Phase 8   Stimulated recall and reflection (30 minutes)
Table 2: Scripted key points of the game
    The game problems encouraged teams to work together. These five groups attained at least some degree of
collaboration during the game although the quality of their collaboration varied a great deal even in groups
immersed  in game   situations. For      the purposes of   collaboration, it was  essential that the first problem the
members of a team encountered in the virtual environment encouraged them to communicate with each other.
Interestingly, even the non-collaborative group, reflecting on the game after its completion, felt that they had
been collaborating. Collaboration emerged mostly in the problem-solving situations, and more often on the level
of practical activities than on the cognitive level. The results indicate that in order to obtain collaboration it was
crucial to construct tasks that compelled players to work together. In eScape, most of the problems were set in a
way which made it impossible to solve them alone. However, most of the players first attempt to solve the tasks
on their own, joining forces with the other players only when they realise that they are stuck. With many of the
players, perceptions of collaboration clashed with observation notes: students felt that they had mostly tried to
solve the problems as a team, but observations indicate that most of the players called for other players only
when they actually needed their help. Only one of the six groups made, in the early stage of the game, a joint
decision that they would work as a team to get through the game.
    The scripted game environment enhanced the value of distributed teamwork. The players felt that they had
been in the same world operating as a team, and observation notes confirmed this subjective finding. None of
the teams had sensations of being alone or engaged in aimless interaction. The experiment integrated distributed
CSCL and face-to-face interaction. The students met before the game, and afterwards, during the stimulated
recall interview, they were shown extracts from the game video and asked to watch and comment on them. After
the game the students were very eager to talk with each other about the game and find out about those aspects of
the game environment that they had not understood during the game. This showed that reflection after the game
was important.

                                                           
  During    the  game, the   groups used  different  interaction processes to  solve the game     problems. These
processes were applied mostly in problem situations and in situations where the team members were about to
collaborate on the solution of a problem. All the groups set themselves goals, but the actual decision-making
process ranged from group decisions to leader-oriented ones. The group decisions affected the game and the
process of becoming a team in different ways at different stages of the game session. The players had roles
although many of them were clearly not themselves aware of these, as was revealed in the interview after the
game. For example, in some groups the game was dominated by one or two players who worked out the plans
and told the others what to do, but in some situations leadership shifted according to the players' level of
expertise. It is interesting to note that all groups felt that they had collaborated as reasonably equal partners even
when the group had actually had a leader without their being aware of it. Croups formulated low-level action
plans, but no group used much time to devise their plans. All the groups negotiated among themselves and co-
ordinated their work to advance the game. In the following excerpt, there is one low-level action plan during
the game.
    Leila: Look, there are several places over there. How about going there all together and guiding him away
    from there.
    Tuija: I expect we'll need everyone here. Here in this place. I'll go and stand in the doorway over there.
    Leila: Hi there, who's there, come here.
    Mira: Where are you?
  Throughout the game, group members shared information and followed the example of each other's
avatars to further the gameplay. They shared information and learned from each other in a great variety of
situations, such as when   working  out  how certain  tools   functioned, how  to use the  avatars, what kind  of
individual knowledge the different players had and so on. See the following excerpt about sharing information
how to use mouse.
 Mira: How can I take these tools to my hand?             9:02:46 The nest: Mira asks Leila how one uses the
 Leila: Roll your mouse and then it will choose           tools and Leila shows her how one uses the mouse to
                                                          a turn.
                                                          XXXX
 Game situation                                           Observation note
  During the game the groups also made rules on how to act in certain situations. Few of the rules were
intended to limit the actions of the avatars during the game, and those made for this purpose related mostly to
the last problem, which required group members to use certain tools simultaneously. All the teams also gave
feedback and encouraged their members. There was no negative feedback in the form of personally disparaging
remarks in any of the groups. The negative feedback that was given focused on the environment in situations
where it  did not work  in   the way  the players   expected. Feedback    was  most  frequent  in problem-solving
situations and after a problem had been solved. See the following excerpt about feedback situation.
 Mikko : Really close (3) Now we should be close by       Players encourage each other
 Juuso: Now? Yes
 Mika: Do you see it
 13.24 (trumpets)
 Mikko: Splendid Juuso ( ) you are our hero
 Game situation                                           Observation note of  all players
  In all groups, there were situations in which players found it difficult to give up their own ideas even
when their proposed solution did not make sense in the game environment. In many such cases the players kept
on advising each other or tried to solve the problems on their own. The most collaborative group was also the
one most open to mistaken ideas. Conflict situations during the game were rare. When conflicts did arise it was
because players did not understand or find each other. Thus, the game environment failed to create significant
cognitive conflicts. However, there were occasions during the collaboration that involved tacit conflicts. For
example, records show occurrences of seemingly increased levels of frustration on behalf of a player when
nobody paid any attention to his or her suggestions.
  All the groups used humour to establish relations between players even though it was not necessary for
solving the  game   puzzles. Humour   was  employed    to make    contact with other  players, survive surprising
situations and liven up the atmosphere. Humour was most in evidence in those groups which had some history
of being together, least in evidence in one of the foreign student groups. How much and what kind of humour
there was varied both between the groups and within every group. For example, during the game the players
tried to work out the similarities and differences between the game world and real world: will avatars break
when they jump from a height. Some ethical issues also arose, such as whether one can open the church door
using a rocket.

                                                        
DISCUSSION
Our study supports some of the previous findings about essential interaction processes of collaboration, such as
joint goal orientation, negotiation, co-ordination of different perspectives and information sharing (Baker, 2002;
Pinelle, Gutwin & Greenberg 2002), but in game environment new forms of collaboration may also arise. In this
study the 3-D game world affected collaboration, for example information sharing, because players were able to
use the example of the avatars to share information. In this study, students' perceptions of a scripted game
environment were very positive. Scripting persuaded student teams to enter into collaboration, but the actual
processes varied. Collaboration depended crucially on team members' need for each other, because they often
tried to solve the game tasks alone first. According this study scripting social modes of interaction seems to be
an effective way to promote collaboration in the virtual gaming. Despite of positive influence of the scripts,
there are also some critical issues such as the relationship between players' internal scripts and external scripts
of the environment (Kollar, Fischer & Hesse, 2004).
   The   study produced   encouraging  results  on  the possibilities of edugames,   but some dangers   were also
identified. The study indicated that it is easy to obtain collaboration on practical problems but that higher levels
of collaboration are difficult to reach in a game environment. One explanation for this result is the design of
relatively simplistic and secure problems, which enabled safe trial-and-error procedures. The findings show that
a virtual game environment offers a setting that can, at its best, trigger several interaction modes of collaborative
learning. At the same time, attention must be paid also to the variation across the groups in the quality of
collaborative activity. Technology alone, does very little to aid learning. Learning crucially depends on the exact
character of the activities that learners engage in with technology, the kinds of tasks they try to accomplish, and
the kinds of intellectual and social activities they become involved in, in interaction with that which technology
affords. Furthermore, more edugames are needed to determine the potentials and limitations of games.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the Life as Learning research programme (LEARN) of the Academy of Finland
(2002-2006) and Kaleidoscope (Network of Excellence).

REFERENCES
Baker, M. (2002). Forms of cooperation in dyadic problem solving. In P. Salambier, & H. Benchekroun (Eds.).
   Cooperation and complexity (pp. 1-38). Paris: Hermes
Cassell, J. &   Vilhjámsson,  H.   (1999).   Fully embodied   conversational    Avatars:  Making   communicative
   behaviour autonomous. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 2: 45-64.
Cobb, P.,   Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer,   R. &  Schauble,  L.   (2003). Design Experiments   in Educational
   Research. Web version of Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-14.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
   design.   In P. A. Kirschner (Ed), Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL (pp. 61-91). Heerlen, Open
   Universiteit Nederland..
Hämäläinen, R. & Häkkinen, P. (2004) Scripting Computer supported collaboration in a 3-D game environment.
   Paper presented in CSCL sig 2004, Lausanne.
Koschmann, T. (1996). CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F. & Hesse, F. (2004). Computer-supported cooperation scripts - a conceptual analysis.
   Journal of the Learning Sciences. (submitted).
Mc Lellan,  H.  (1996).  Virtual  Realities. In D.  H.  Jonassen (Eds.)   Handbook   of  research for Educational
   Communications and Technology. New York, USA: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.
O'Donnell, A. M. (1999). Structuring dyadic interaction through scripted cooperation. In A. M. O'Donnell & A.
   King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 179-196). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pfister, H-R. & Mühlpfordt M. (2002). Supporting Discourse in a Synchronous Learning Environment: The
   Learning Protocol Approach. Url: http://newmedia.colorado.edu/cscl/178.pdf
Pinelle, D. Gutwin,  C.   & Greenberg,  S.   (2002). "The  Task  Analysis   for Groupware   Usability Evaluation:
   Modeling Shared-Workspace Tasks with the Mechanics of Collaboration." Human Computer Interaction.
   Url: http://www.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/grouplab/papers/2002/02-Task-Analysis.Report/task-analysis-report.pdf
Webb, N. (1989) Peer interaction and learning in small groups. International Journal of Educational Research, 13
   (1), 21-39.
Weinberger, A. (2003). Scripts for Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning Effects of social and epistemic
   cooperation scripts on collaborative knowledge construction Dissertation an der Fakultät für Psychologie und
   Pädagogik der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München.

                                                        
