 Mining Learning Groups' Activities in Forum-type
                                                  Tools

                 Pablo Reyes                                             Pierre Tchounikine
            LIUM-CNRS FRE 2730                                          LIUM-CNRS FRE 2730
         Université du Maine, France                                  Université du Maine, France
      Pablo.Reyes@lium.univ-lemans.fr                        Pierre.Tchounikine@lium.univ-lemans.fr

      Abstract. Mining data produced by students involved in communication through forum-like tools
      can help revealing aspects of their communication. In this paper we propose an approach to the
      construction of models to highlight structural properties of learning groups based on a relational
      perspective (analysis of chains of references) and the use of Social Network Analysis techniques.
      These models can be useful both for the tutor and the participants. We begin by introducing the
      overall approach, then  we  describe   how   the    models  are constructed and   finally  we present
      preliminary results from the integration of these ideas in a forum-type tool.

      Keywords: Link analysis, peer-to-peer support, social network analysis.

INTRODUCTION
Network technologies have enabled web-learning activities such as learning groups and e-communities that can
take place in e-learning platforms. Traditionally, collective activities of these groups take place in what we call a
forum-type tool (FTT). The FTT describes a mainly text-based and asynchronous electronic conferencing system
that makes use of a hierarchical data structure of enchained messages, called threads.
  In this paper we are interested on supporting collective activities that take place in learning groups based on
a relational model of messages exchanged among participants in a FTT.
  We model the message exchanges as a graph where the vertices are the participants of a group and the links
are the exchanges among them. This is a basic model broadly used for modeling relationships among users from
a social networks analysis point of view. We exploit the group's link structure to contribute to a comprehensive
understanding of the group activities.
  In this article we propose the use of two models to gather information about group activity from a relational
perspective. Each of these models corresponds to a different granularity of the analysis. The first model denotes
properties of the group as a whole; the second denotes properties of the individuals in relation with the group to
which they  belong. Our algorithms     construct indicators  that allow characterizing  the collaboration  process,
which can be useful for both tutors and students.
  The article is organized as follows. First, we describe the idea of mining group activities and their use in a
CAL context. Then, we propose and describe two models to gather different characteristics of a group. Finally,
we present preliminary results from an empirical study that illustrates the use of our models.

MINING GROUP ACTIVITIES

Mining group activities in a learning context
Mining group activities is an active line of research. Current research is mainly focused on the construction of
indicators of collaborative group's activities aiming at a theoretical or ethnographic analysis of the group (e.g.,
(Reffay &  Chanier,  2002), (Martínez    et al.,  2002)   or (Butts,  2001)) and  other social   networks  works).
Nevertheless, these analyses are rarely used to support online collective learning activities.
  The use of mining strategies can be an important element in educational contexts. Mining group activities in
a learning context provides quantifiable profiles of the groups, which allows to (1) evaluate the collaborative
activity that the participants carry out, (2) analyze the link structure of the group, (3) compare the collaborative
performance among   different groups    and (4)   predict behaviors,  discover link patterns    (Getoor, 2003) and
collaboration trends. This knowledge can be used and applied directly to support the collaborative activities. In
this sense, link models can be an element that helps (1) the tutor on his tasks of collaboration management and
that scaffolds the collaborative learning among the participants without needing an extensive review of each
group's interactions. (2) the participants of the group (the students), who use link analysis to discover the
                                                        
structural features or activities of their group (what has been termed structural awareness (Gutwin, Greenberg, &
Roseman, 1996)).
   Link analysis provides a new role for tutors in collaborative environments. Instead of their traditional role in
the "transfer of information", the role of tutors is shifted to that of establishing the appropriate conditions to
allow the students to get connected to the group (the set of relations) through participation (e.g., as part of a
community of practice) in the service of an intention (Barab et al., 1999). The structural models that we propose
make salient certain profiles of the groups and their participants which can help to be aware of the group
activities and can help orienting the pedagogical strategies. Structural models can help participants of a group to
create macro-micro links and facilitate peer-to-peer learning. The macro-micro link is a sociological concept that
establishes  the theoretical foundations   for  the  influence of  interaction structure  of   a community     (macro   level)
with the local interactions among the participants (micro level) (e.g., (Bourdieu, 1988)). The concept of macro-
micro link allows us to focus on the interdependency of the structural regularities of the group with the activities
of the participants. Indeed, several     learning theories    emphasize    the influence    of   social interactions   on the
individual learning. In the perspective of the communities of practice, for example, learning changes "(...) from
the individual as learner to learning as participation in the social world" (Lave & Wenger, 1991).
   Moreover, the social constructivist point of view highlights also that knowledge is socially constructed by
interactions among individuals (McCarthey, 1992). Indeed, the theory of learning of Piaget (Piaget, 1926) states
as a fundamental assumption that the interaction among peers while performing tasks facilitates the learning of
concepts. By making salient the structure of interactions in a group we allow the participants to be aware of an
important element of learning.

Techniques       for mining       group    activities     in  a relational     perspective
The  mathematical   tools  we   use  for mining    group  activities come    from  the Social    Network   Analysis    (SNA)
models. Many methods have been proposed in this field to obtain knowledge about the group from its relational
ties. The SNA uses as data the connections among units, which relates them in a system.
   We use a graph theory to mining group activities by analyzing the sociograms associated to a given group.
In FTT  a  sociogram    is a graph  where  the  participants  are  represented  as vertices  and    the messages   that   they
exchange are represented as the links of the graph. Sociograms can be handled as sociomatrices which are the
matricial representation of the graph (more information on the construction of sociograms and sociomatrix can
be found in (Wasserman & Faust, 1997)).

PROPOSED            MODELS           FOR      SOCIAL         INTERACTIONS
We model two characteristics of social interactions: the status of participants and group cohesion. These models
gather information about     the  group activity at different granularity    levels. The  status    belongs to   a family  of
models that reveal the role of a given participant in the group. The cohesion belongs to a family of models that
reveal structural properties of groups: it provides information about the group and not about the participants of
the group.

Status

Status definition
In a community,     the  concept  of  status represents   the  "prestige"  of  a   specific participant.  The    status of  a
participant  is related to his  participation   in a community    as well  as  the status of   the  participants  which   s/he
communicates with (Wasserman & Faust, 1997). This concept is not a simple account of the number of user
interventions, because it also considers the prestige of his entire neighborhood.
   Starting  from   the  participant's   status we   can find  the each   participant  position   in relation  to  the whole
community, and the social structure of this community. Moreover, this indicator can be related to a concept of
learning  in the communities      of practice   (Lave  &  Wenger,    1991),  where   learning    is conceived  in   terms  of
participation. In the context of the communities of practice, learning can be interpreted as an evolution of the
status of a  participant from   a peripheral  participation  (low  status) towards   a central   participation (high   status)
within its  community.     Through   the  status   indicator,  we  can measure     these  evolutions.    This  model    gives
participants and tutors an element for comparison among their position in the group and a quantitative measure
of their evolution.
Status model
There are several  models    to  obtain  the  status  of participants  in  a  group:  Betweenness-centrality,      Closeness-
centrality, Degree-centrality and Eigenvector-centrality (Wasserman & Faust, 1997). Here, we will concentrate
on the Eigenvector-centrality model because it is the only status model that establishes the value of a participant
status taking into account the other participant's status. Consequently, "an actor's status is increased more by
nominations from those who themselves have received many nominations" (Bonacich & Lloyd, 2001).
   In spite of the precision of this method to obtain the status values of participants in a group, it makes sense
only for the symmetrical sociomatrices ( A           B   B     A , for example, somebody's brother is a symmetrical

                                                             
relation). In our case, the matrices of interactions in the FTT are asymmetrical ( A                           B   B     A , answering a
message is an asymmetric relation). The             alpha-centrality model         introduced    by   Bonacich     (Bonacich  &   Lloyd,
2001)  presents    a generalization        of the eigenvectors'       model    for asymmetrical       matrices.    Bonacich   makes   the
assumption that the status of a participant depends on two parameters: the external initial status of a participant
and the status that is formed starting from the interactions among the participants. By adding the external idea
of status to the traditional concept of eigenvectors we obtain equation (1). The complete description of this
method is found in (Bonacich & Lloyd, 2001).

    c=     AT c + e                                                                                                                   (1)

    In this equation     A   is a sociomatrix.     At is the transposed matrix of         A.     c is   a vector of participant's status
for the asymmetrical         relations.    Each   component       of  this   eigenvector     c   corresponds to      the status   of each
participant.  That   is, if  c  = (c(v1 ), c(v2 ),...., c(vn )), the status  of participant    i   is c(vi ).      is a parameter which
reflects the relative importance of the external status versus the internal status to determine the final status. We
can also interpret       as the status degree of transference from one person to another.
    Among the outstanding characteristics of this indicator we emphasize                           that  the   status is  not related   to
participation (e.g., in the star graph (see figure 1), the most central participant has the greatest value of status
and s/he has never participated), the status is associated with the impact of the interventions of a specific
participant on the activity of the group (participant's visibility).

Cohesion

Cohesion definition
Cohesion   is a   concept    related    to the diffusion  of      information     in  a group    (Wasserman      &   Faust,  1997).  In  a
cohesive group the information is extremely likely to be distributed for the entire group. This fact improves the
communication, the coordination and the influence within the group. Cohesion gives a measure of how strong
the social relations are in order to maintain the group together (Moody & White, 2000).
    From this indicator, users can perceive the ability of the group to hold their members. A group with a high
value of cohesion is a group that holds social relations among almost all participants. Consequently, the group
could face the departure of some of its participants without destroying it.
Cohesion model
There  are several   models       to obtain   the degree  of     cohesion    of a  group (Wasserman         &  Faust, 1997).  Bock    and
Husain propose to iteratively build sub-groups so that the proportion between the number of links in the sub-
group and links between the sub-groups does not decrease with the addition of new members. Reffay and
Chanier (Reffay & Chanier, 2002) obtain the group cohesion by measuring the degree of reciprocal relations that
take place in a forum among participants. James Moody and White (Moody & White, 2000) introduce another
concept of cohesion, which is defined as the minimal number of participants who, if removed from the group,
would disconnect it. This approach led to obtain hierarchically nested groups, where highly cohesive groups are
built over less cohesive ones. We seek to make salient this notion, which corresponds to the definition of k-
connectivity (a graph is k-connected if there are at least k independent paths connecting every pair of participants
in the graph) in the graph theory. This indicator expresses the property of certain groups to hold their members.
Yet, this model of cohesion is very sensitive to participants slightly connected in the group. For example, a
group with a complete network configuration (see figure 1) with 6 participants have k-connectivity value equal
to 5. Nevertheless,      if  we   add another participant        to  this group    with  only    one    link,  the k-connectivity    value
decreases to 1, i.e., a very low cohesion degree for a group that is still highly connected. So, the real group
cohesion   is hidden.    Thus,    we    modify  the original      cohesion    model     (the minimal     number    of participants   who,
when  removed     from      the group,   disconnect   it) in      favor   of a  concept  of    cohesion     as the minimal    number    of
participants who when removed from the group, disconnect it completely. This model provides a more robust
measure of cohesion, even for groups with weakly connected participants.
    To  calculate    cohesion,       we apply   the original      algorithm     in an   iterative  way      to the   groups  that remain
connected. The summa of the values of the k-connectivity of each iteration will give the final measurement of
cohesion.  In order   to     compare    the cohesion  values      for   groups  of   different sizes    and   structures of  participants,
these values   are   normalized.      Two     normalization       methods    are   necessary:    first,  in relation  to the  number    of
iterations    (j) executed        in the   algorithm   (i.e.,     the   number     of iterations      to obtain    a  group  completely
disconnected).    Second,       a normalization     regarding       the number     of   participants     (n).  Equation  (2)  shows   the
normalized cohesion value:

    C (Gn )= C(Gn ) (n 1)* j                                                                                                         (2)

                                                                      
Hypothetical social networks
Figure 1 illustrates four hypothetical social networks with six participants each, with strength of each link equals
to 1. The associated status values for each participant ( c        cva , cvb ,....,cv f  ),  where cvi  is the   status    of
participant i . For simplicity, participants in all these social networks, have the same initial status, that is, e is a
vector of `1'.
  In the star network we can observe the central position of participant "6" in it. This fact is reflected by
his/her high status value (3.5). The same result is obtained in the hierarchical network. Nevertheless, the low
value of cohesion of the star graph structure allows us to suppose that it is fragile, given that all interactions pass
through participant "6". In the circular network, all participants have the same status values because each of
them has the same link number and structure. The highest cohesion value is obtained for a complete graph. This
fact represents a group highly robust, with multiple channels of communication among participants. We note
that status indicator is sensitive to strength of links, but the cohesion indicator does not, because of the nature of
the algorithm to obtain the cohesion.

      Star network                    Circular network                Hierarchical network                 Complete network
  Status = (1,1,1,1,1,3.5)         Status = (2,2,2,2,2,2)          Status = (1,1,1,2,1.5,2.75)           Status = (5,5,5,5,5,5)
     Cohesion  = 0.2                   Cohesion = 0.3                   Cohesion = 0.2                       Cohesion = 1

                                             Figure 1.    Hypothetical social networks

INTEGRATION OF COHESION AND STATUS IN A FTT
The results of the proposed structural models are integrated in a FTT called "Mailgroup". In this environment,
the participants can maintain a discussion by exchanging messages. Mailgroup has been designed according to
the objective of supporting learning conversations taking place in forums (Reyes & Tchounikine, 2003). The
support provided by such a FTT tool is enhanced by allowing the participants and the tutor to access at any time,
through a menu item, to the values of status and cohesion. Mailgroup shows a single bar representing the group
cohesion   value   (group-level   indicator),   and    individual bars representing        the  each participant   status value
(participant-level indicator).

EMPIRICAL STUDY AND RESULTS
An empirical study was designed in order to collect feedback on the actual characteristics of the group models
from the user's perspective. In this study, 15 participants were recruited. The participants were teachers who,
during one and a half months, carried out a distance collaborative activity as part of training course on ICT.
During the study, they used Mailgroup as medium of communication and discussion (Reyes & Tchounikine,
2003). The goal of the activity was to carry out a collaborative analysis of the integration and utilization of ICTs
in education.
  In a first stage of experimentation, indicators are showed only to the monitor of this activity in order to test
out the validity of SNA models used in these indicators. Yet, the tutor was able to use these indicators to gather
information about the groups' activities. Table 1 shows values of cohesion and status obtained in some real
conversations (each conversation equals to different threads) that took place in the carried out experience in
Mailgroup. The Cohesion is a single value (in percentage) that represents this property of the whole group. The
status is a vector where each component represents the status of a single participant. Consequently the vector has
many components as participants in a specific conversation.
  For example, from the analyses of indicators of conversation number 3, the tutor saw as an outstanding fact
the low value of the cohesion indicator. Analyzing the status of participants we can deduce that there is an
unbalanced participation since two users carry out almost the whole conversation. Their participation and central
position (high status value) indicate that they lead the conversation. A potential absence of these participants can
imply the ending of this conversation or a radical change of interaction structures. This way, both indicators
indicate to a tutor (or to users) that it is necessary to change their current social structure: based on the indicators

                                                                
provided by Mailgroup, the tutor might introduce different strategies in order to orient the group towards a more
reliable structure, with a more important and balanced implication of the participants in the common task.

                            Conversations         Cohesion                      Status
                                 1                   9%          (12, 1, 13, 9, 1, 11, 14, 1)
                                 2                 56%                   (17, 12, 6, 3, 8)
                                 3                 13%             (5, 11, 1, 4, 4, 17, 8)
                                      Table 1.    Values of cohesion and status.

CONCLUSIONS
The use of models for mining group activities is an active line of research. In this paper we have presented how
we have   adapted  them    for their use   for  pedagogical  purposes:   The    tutor  management       and  orientation   of
participant exchanges that take place in a learning group through the tracking of its structural properties.
   The pedagogical use of these models         is inspired   by  learning   theories   and   models   that   emphasize   the
importance of peer-to-peer interactions and the social structure that they generate. These models can facilitate and
even automate the work of tutors in tracking the group activities, helping in focus the attention of the tutor in
groups with low levels of cohesion or unbalanced structures of participation.
   In this article we have presented two methods for mining group activities based on models for status and
cohesion  inside a group.   The  new    cohesion  model    that we have   introduced      takes into account   the   general
structure of a group, thus overcoming the problem of sensitivity to groups with weakly connected participants.
We consider these  models     as complementary     given   that they focus  on  different    levels  of granularity  in  the
analysis: the group-level  in  the case of cohesion    and the  participant-level in   the   case of status, allowing    the
analysis of groups in a complementary way.
   We showed the results of a test that aimed to corroborate the proposed link models. We obtained that these
models describe certain structural   properties   of a group.   Moreover,   for the    tutor this information    can be  an
element that improves the effectiveness of its pedagogical.
   Finally, the  models    presented in   this work  are implemented     as a part     of a  peer-to-peer support  system:
"Structural awareness". The objective of structural awareness is      to make   salient     the structural  properties  of a
group to its participants in order to promote collaborative interactions and allowing tutors the management of
learning interactions and tracking collaborative processes.

REFERENCES
Barab, S. A., Cherkes-Julkowski, M., Swenson, R., Garrett, S., Shaw, R. E., & Young, M. (1999). Principles
      of  Self Organization:   Learning   as   Participation in  Autocatakinetic  Systems.      Journal   of the Learning
      Sciences, 8(3 & 4).
Bonacich,  P., &   Lloyd,  P.  (2001).    Eigenvector-like measures   of  centrality   for  asymmetric    relations. Social
      Networks, 23(3).
Bourdieu, P. (1988). La distinción. Madrid: Taurus.
Butts, C. T. (2001). The complexity of social networks: theoretical and empirical findings. Social Networks,
      23(1), 31­71.
Getoor, L. (2003). Link mining: A new data mining challenge. ACM SIGKDD Newsletter, 5(1), 84-89.
Gutwin,   C.,  Greenberg, S.,    &    Roseman,    M.    (1996).  Workspace    Awareness       in  Real-Time    Distributed
      Groupware: Framework, Widgets and Evaluation. HCI 1996.
Lave, J., &   Wenger,   E. (1991).  Situated   Learning:   Legitimate  Peripheral      Participation.    Cambridge,     UK:
      University Press.
Martínez, A., Dimitriadis, Y., Rubia, B., Gómez, E., Garachón, I., & Marcos, J. A. (2002). Studying social
      aspects   of computer-supported       collaboration    with  a mixed   evaluation      approach.    CSCL,   Boulder,
      Colorado.
McCarthey, S. J., & McMahon, S. (1992). From convention to invention: Three approaches to peer interaction
      during   writing. In R.  Hertz-Lazarowitz   &   N. Miller  (Eds.), Interaction    in  cooperative   learning groups.
      The theoretical anatomy of group learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Moody, J., & White, D. R. (2000). Social Cohesion and Embeddedness: A hierarchical conception of social
      groups. Unpublished manuscript, Ohio State University.
Piaget, J. (1926). The language and thought of the child. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Reffay, C., &  Chanier,    T. (2002). Social   Network   Analysis  Used   for   Modelling    Collaboration    in  Distance
      Learning Groups. ITS 2002, Biarritz.
Reyes, P., & Tchounikine, P. (2003). Supporting Emergence Of Threaded Learning Conversations Through
      Augmenting Interactional And Sequential Coherence. CSCL.
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1997). Social network analysis methods and applications (Vol. 8). Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press.

                                                           
