        Establishing Communities of Practice among
                  Students and Start-Up Companies

    Markus Rohde                               Ralf Klamma                              Volker Wulf
  International Institute                 Lehrstuhl Informatik V                  Information Systems
for Socio-Informatics (IISI)                 RWTH Aachen                             and Digital Media
    Bonn, Germany                                Germany                          University of Siegen,
        rohde@iisi.de                klamma@cs.rwth-aachen.de                            Germanys
                                                                                wulf@fb5.uni-siegen.de

     Abstract. This paper presents the concept and an empirical evaluation of the course "High-tech
     Entrepreneurship   and   New    Media". The   course   design is  based on socio-cultural theories  of
     learning and considers the role of social capital in entrepreneurial networks. By integrating student
     teams   into the communities    of practice of   local start-ups, we offer  learning opportunities  to
     students, companies, and academia. The student teams are connected to each other and to their
     supervisors   in academia  and   practice through   a  community-system.    Moreover,   the  course is
     accompanied by a series of lectures and group discussions. In this paper we present empirical
     findings and reflect on changes in the design of the course which took place between its first and
     the second instantiation. These design changes were based on the empirical evaluation of the first
     course and a deeper analysis of the role of social capital.

     Keywords: Communities of Practice, Social Capital, Regional Start-Up Networks

INTRODUCTION
Engineering universities have a strong record in knowledge sharing with industries ranging from cooperative
research projects to  student  internship linked   with the  engineering  curricula. Start-up  companies    in  the
environment  of technical institutes heavily benefit   from the  innovations  made   in research. Surprisingly, in
German computer science the lab courses are not organized according to the model of engineering curricula.
Since 30 years, instructors and students have developed an academic practice similar to the practice in the
natural sciences. In contrast, many German computer science students are already practitioners in software
engineering since they work as software developers for local IT companies often founded recently. German
computer  science faculties do not   encourage   entrepreneurship   in general. So,  even in  IT-related start-ups
interaction rate between entrepreneurs and academia is low.
This paper describes an attempt to establish an institutional frame between industry and academia to foster
knowledge sharing. First, we wanted to draw on the existing practice of students in academic teaching, second
we wanted to transport newest methods of software engineering into industry, third we wanted to get access to
real world problems of companies to identify innovation potentials on both sides. So, we have developed a new
course in computer science teaching which is based on the concept of computer-supported communities of
practice. It is called "Entrepreneurship and New Media". Since 2001, we organize supervised student project
work together with local start-up companies. The courses are accompanied by a series of lectures in which
university lecturers and practitioners address topics related to entrepreneurship and the design of media. A
community system is deployed to facilitate communication and document sharing between the different actors.
Besides  the development    of adequate    technical   functionalities to support   the  learning  processes,   the
appropriation of the community system in the context of these innovative didactical concepts is a challenge. The
combination of practice oriented education at universities and concepts of learning on the job within companies
is a precondition of a successful integration of academic theory and industrial practice. Identity-building in
communities of practice and the building of social capital are expected to enable a fruitful exchange between
universities' experiences and companies' practice.
In the following, we first sketch our theoretical background. Then we present experiences with the course and its
evaluation in two different years (winter term 2001 and winter term 2002). Between the two instances of the
course a major design change took place to reflect the evaluation results from the first instance. In the last
section we discuss the empirical findings and conclusions with regard to computer supported communities of
practice between students and start-up practitioners.

                                                        
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
In the last decade    constructivist  theories   of   learning  played  an   important  role  in  the development     of new
computer-based learning designs (Duffy and Jonassen, 1992). In this understanding, learning does not mean the
transfer of knowledge     from   a  teacher   to a learner,   but rather the  learner's permanent     (re-) construction   of
knowledge, based on former experiences.          Socio-cultural theories take learning as a collective process which is
linked to specific contexts of action. Knowledge emerges in communities of practice by discursive assignment
of meaning (Lave and Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998). Processes of social identification (Tajfel, 1982; Turner et
al., 1987) play a central role for the establishment of common practice and a shared identity. To foster networks
among student groups, academia, and start-up companies, the scientific discussion on social capital offers a
relevant scientific context (Putnam, 1993; Cohen and Prusak, 2001; Huysman and Wulf 2004). Many authors
found  the  concept   of  CoP    helpful  to  understand    and to   support cooperation,   knowledge    management,     and
collaborative   learning  (e.g., Brown     and   Duguid,    1991;  Osterlund  and    Carlile, 2003).  Several    case studies
conclude that this is true even for computer-supported, virtual or distributed communities (e.g., Haas et al.,
2003; Arnold and Smith, 2003). The theoretical approach of Communities of Practice (CoP) integrates identity
theory, theories of practice, and theories of social structure and situated experience (Wenger, 1998). In their
research on situated learning in working groups, Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger focus on common daily practice
of group members, active membership, and in-group awareness (Lave and Wenger, 1991). The most important
inclusion mechanisms concerning these communities are processes of collective learning and the production of
shared meaning and collective identity. In this approach the social practice refers to explicit and tacit knowledge
and competencies. It integrates language, tools, documents, symbols, and roles as well as conventions, norms,
rules, perceptions, and assumptions.
In CoP, an individual's learning is inherent in the processes of social participation in CoP. Knowledge and
learning in CoP are not abstract models but relations "between a person and the world" (Duguid, 2004, p. 8) or
"among people engaged in an activity" (Osterlund and Carlile, 2003, p. 3). Individual learning in a CoP is
mainly   based  on  "legitimate    peripheral    participation" (Lave    and  Wenger,   1991).    During  the    participation
process, an individual might enter the community as a beginner at the periphery and then gain a more centered
position over time by acquisition of cognitive apprenticeship. This acquisition process leads to an intensified
inclusion into the social practice of the community. Learning is based on this process of inclusion of outsiders,
becoming more and more insiders in the common practice. The communities of practice themselves can be seen
as "shared histories of learning" (Wenger, 1998, p.86). The mechanism of (social) identification of individual
persons in the social context of the community plays a key role for the formation of a community of practice.
We can see that the CoP approach combines the "two sides of the medal" of community participation: The social
practice of the community as a collective phenomenon and the identity of its members as an individual one. CoP
theorists focus on both levels of communality and individuality. Thus, processes of community- and identity-
building are central.

EXPERIENCES WITH LINKING ACADEMIC AND START-UP PRACTICE

Based  on   the theoretical   foundations    sketched  above,   we    designed   the course   `Entrepreneurship    and   New
Media"   as shown     in figure  1. A    major   part of   learning  was supposed    to happen     by legitimate  peripheral
participation in the community of practice of the start-up companies. We intended to support processes of social
identification  and social   capital-building    between    entrepreneurial  practitioners    and  university students.  The
cooperation of students and practitioners to carry out a common real-world task should allow the establishment
                                                                              of a shared practice and therefore mutual
                                                                              learning. Projects were always related to
                             Guest Lecturers                                  one of the local start-up companies in the
                                                                              region. Therefore, the companies and the
                Communityof PracticeMarket                                    designer   of   the  course   developed     theCommunityof PracticeMarketprojectsjointly.WeintendedtoinitiateCommunitiesofPractice(CoP)between
                                                                              students and company practitioners in the
                                                                              project groups (cf. big circles in figure 1).
                                                                              By getting start-up practitioners engaged
            CommunitySystem   Instructors              Students               in the    group    work,  a   market-orientedperspectivewasintegratedinthecourse
            Digital Media                              Practitioners          work.     Lecturers       and      instructors/
                                                                              supervisors     were thought    to accompany
                          Figure 1: Course Design                             the project work.

                                                               
Group oriented learning processes, especially among the student teams and between them and their academic
advisors should be facilitated by a community-system. Thus, the instructors put task relevant learning materials
on the community-system. Additionally, instructors were available for consultancy and supervision. Several
review meetings supported the reflective processes of the students related to their tasks. Moreover, these reviews
were  supposed   to work     as forums  for  discussion  among   students  and   guest lecturers from  industry  and
academia. While initiating learning processes among the students, the course design supported the knowledge
transfer from academia to industry, as well. Discussions between students and practitioners were thought to be
the starting point of learning processes in practice. We calculated 50 hours of student time for the course itself
and 150 hours for the project lab.
In the following, we shortly describe the evaluation results of the first course and our conclusions for the design
of the second one. Afterwards experiences and empirical findings of this second course are presented.
Although the first course (winter term 2001) was rated as successful in general, several shortcomings have been
observed: The establishment of CoP between students and start-up practitioners was less successful. In our
empirical evaluation we found the following reasons: the start-up companies were very young enterprises which
had not  established   a consolidated   own  practice;  the start-ups were    very small  enterprises with  only few
employees  and   therefore   very  limited resources to supervise  the lab groups;   the  supervisors were  not  very
experienced in organizing the course. Furthermore, socio-cultural differences between university students and
start-up practitioners   and physical   distance between    the start-ups and  the  university  caused  problems  in
communication    and   cooperation.  Besides  the  observation   that electronic   communication  makes    peripheral
participation in CoP more difficult, the community system (named CommSy; cf. Rohde et al., 2005) was used
not very frequently by students and start-up practitioners in this first course (cf. Klamma et al., 2003).
According to these results, following changes were made to the second instance of the course (winter 2002):
Start-up companies have been selected which were thought to have a more stable software engineering practice,
and which had been founded earlier and therefore had a longer history, and more employees. Bigger student
groups were established (each of the three groups started with six members); each lab group was supervised by
an academic tutor therefore supervision of the project groups was intensified. Extreme Programming (XP)
instead of Unified Modeling Language (UML) was used as software engineering method, because XP seemed to
us more   appropriate  for   short-term software  development    projects  within  smaller teams.  The   course  was
accompanied by six students from the department of organizational psychology which supported the lab groups
by intense coaching and training for presentation techniques. Four review meetings were conducted during the
second instance of the course (instead of two review meetings during the first one). The reviews were taped on
digital  video and  analyzed    by the  psychology   students to give  the lab   students feedback  on  their review
performance. Finally, another community system (BSCW instead of CommSy) was deployed to the course
participants and usage of this platform was motivated by stronger demands of the supervisors.
The overall learning experiences in this second course have been evaluated quite positively by the students.
They mentioned the following factors:
    x    working on practical real-world problem solutions,
    x    the cooperation with real partners from start-up companies,
    x    the cooperation in teams,
    x    practical experiences with presentation techniques in the review sessions,
    x    and the method of extreme programming (XP).
However, we believe that we have not yet exploited the full potential of our concept. In the following more
detailed results of  the  evaluation   are  presented. All  reported  results are  taken  out of 25   semi-structured
interviews with students, company practicioners, and academic tutors and supervisors) that lasted between 60
and 180 minutes and have been recorded and transcribed afterwards. The reported empirical findings represent
condensed interview statements (and observations during the course).
CoP between students and company practitioners
As in the first instance of the course in winter term 2001, the establishment of CoP between students and the
company employees was limited again. A real participation of students in the companies' communities of
practice could not be established. In case of one company, due to the very intense engagement of the company
founder, a very good relationship between the entrepreneur and students emerged. The entrepreneur confirms a
good atmosphere but is disappointed with regard to the work result, because the competences of students did not
fit his expectations. On the other hand, the students and the instructor stated that the task definition was too
fuzzy to solve the problems in time. A second lab group showed a different picture: Here the result of the work
was very successful while the personal relationships between students and the entrepreneurs were not that good.
Fluctuation in the personal of the start-ups and physical distance limited the participation in the company's
practice. Furthermore, the entrepreneur behaved like the leader of the group. Another lab group met with their
start-up supervisor only two times during the course. He was part of the management of the company and had
not time enough to show up more frequently. But the students understood his limited resources and sent him

                                                          
written reports on their work progress weekly. Nevertheless, all students stated that they were very satisfied with
the course and that they had learned a lot.
This can be seen as a hint that ­ according to the presumptions of Social Identity Theory (SIT) ­ processes of
"generalization" and "accentuation" (Tajfel, 1982) are working within the initiated CoP: Amongst the student
"in-group" phenomena of social identification occurred, while between students and entrepreneurs (as "out-
group"  members)   identification  is less likely. Therefore, community-building      of members  of  distinct social
groups with different cultural and historical experiences faces specific problems of understanding and needs
advanced coordination efforts. The economical presumption that the students work for the entrepreneur as a
customer, may be an additional barrier for CoP building processes.
The role of the method change has to be investigated further on. Extreme programming (XP) was introduced by
the course designers to have a method at hand which is known to be more suitable for short projects with small
development teams than UML and the unified process. Most of the students were very pleased with the method
itself but the difficulties with the applications of all the XP rules were obvious. In case of urgency, students
ignored  programming    principles and  returned   to  "good  old  hacking" approach.    The companies    were   very
interested in the XP approach because their established software engineering methods proved to be even more
underdeveloped than in the projects with the students. A CoP-aware software development method is still an
open issue. As XP rules demand the on-site customer and team oriented programming, this could be a possible
starting point to integrate XP as a software engineering method.
To sum up the interview results, we can see that limited resources (both persons and time), spatial distance,
cultural differences, and incommensurable expectations still hinder the establishment of CoP between university
students and company practitioners.
CoP within the lab groups
The establishment of a common practice was quite successful within the lab groups since all computer science
students   showed  only slight differences   in  their competencies.   All  participants  underlined that the    close
cooperation in the labs was one of the main learning effects. They expect that the established cooperation and
relationship will last longer than the course.
The group structure in the project labs was developed self-organized and described as non-hierarchical. Some of
the students and one of the tutors stated that it would be better to establish a formal leader of lab groups to draw
decisions and coordinate the process. In this regards, the role of the group supervisors has to been researched
carefully.
One of the major design changes in comparison to the first course was that the groups in the second course had a
distinguished supervisor. The supervisor was responsible for establishing the contact between the group and the
start-up company, for the facilitation of meetings, for the allocation of rooms, lab places, software and books,
and for the consultancy of the groups in daily work and around reviews. The implementation of such concepts
depends deeply on the changing role of university level supervisors. They are challenged by the intensity of
temporal and emotional engagement as well as by the needed professional qualification. By monitoring the three
different supervisors we can observe that they understood their role in different ways. For further studies on the
interplay between teachers and learners in university CoPs our theoretical setting can be used as a framework.
Training for presentations techniques was introduced as a new module into the course. This was appreciated
very much by the students. The social ties between the students in the group and the psychology students
developed very intensively. Some of the students turned out to be very good presenters. So, the offering of
training for presentation techniques is not only very attractive and sometimes also proved successful for students
but also helps in shaping CoP by additional common practice and further identity-building. In the next years we
want to have also computer science students from the last years to become mentors for the groups to give new
students the opportunity to meet real experts (apprenticeship learning)
Technological support by the cooperation platform
We assumed that group-oriented learning processes can be facilitated by a community system. In our case, the
instructors put project relevant learning materials into the community system. Additionally, instructors were
electronically available for consultancy and supervision. The lecture series and review meetings supported the
reflective processes of  the   students  related   to their tasks. Discussions   between   students,  lecturers, and
practitioners were intended to be a starting point of learning processes in practice. The course's time schedule
contained  fixed  meetings,  review    sessions,   workshops,  and  a  tentative list of  lectures.  As a  technical
infrastructure, a community-system      (BSCW)     was  deployed   to the  project groups.   The system   supported
cooperation within and between working groups. Lecture and project materials have been published regularly on
the net. In order to find these materials, the system offered various options for retrieval. Programming tools like
a source code management system (cvs) and various editors have been installed to support community-oriented
work settings.

                                                          
Contrary to the first course, the community system was used very frequently by all groups and students. From
the beginning of the lab, the instructors enforced the use of the system in the tutorial and the reviews. In the
tutorial one of the first tasks was to fill in personal data and to upload a portrait. Therefore, the first use of the
system   was  already   manipulative   and the  barrier   to upload  and    to exchange    materials  was  lowered.    In
comparable teaching situations, when students are not asked to change information in the system, the use of the
system is more passive.
Furthermore, the lab groups were bigger and the start-up practitioners used the system more intense than in the
first course. All interviewees evaluated the usage of the community system as very positively, in fact we have
got the  strongest  positive reactions  referring to  the community     system  and  the  presentation  techniques.    Of
course the bigger project groups affected the more intense usage of the community system.
The  community     system was   used  for  up- and    download   of documents,   for  discussions   in  forums,   for  co-
authoring of documents, for annotations, and for awareness information. For planning activities and negotiation
on meetings, other media like phone and e-mail were used instead of the cooperation platform.
Interviewees named some shortcomings of the system: They missed features for synchronous communication
like chat. The up- and download of documents was evaluated several times as too complicated.
Furthermore, the introduction process for the community-system has to be designed carefully to reach a mission
critical use of the system during the course and later on. Barriers in using the system were lowered by the first
guided steps to use the system. Consequently, later use was very intensive extending the use of the system far
beyond the timeline of the lab course (especially for downloading materials not stored elsewhere like videos
taped in the review sessions and personal information about other lab members). Based on the good experiences
with the introduction process we have codified the process and use it for a community-oriented continuing
education portal.

DISCUSSION
Socio-cultural theories of learning stimulate the design of practice-based courses in computer science. The
results of   the evaluation  have  shown   that both   networking    on  a  technical and   a  social   level offer   new
opportunities for university level education. Especially the work on real-world problems, collaboration in teams
together with partners from start-up companies were evaluated very positive. Following a first instance of the
course  the  didactical design  was  modified   considerably   according   to  evaluation  results. By  a more    precise
selection of start-up partners, larger lab teams, coaching of the lab groups by tutors, and increased motivation to
use the technical community-system, collaboration and therefore the establishment of a common practice within
the lab groups have been encouraged.
The  computer    support  for  learning   CoP  causes   new   duties and    requirements   for academic    supervisors.
Establishing of CoP needs developed social competences in fostering trust and team spirit. This observation
corresponds with the theoretical assumptions of the social capital approach (cf. Cohen and Prusak, 2001).
Furthermore, additional engagement of students of organization psychology, certain trainings (e.g., presentation
techniques), and the conduction of more review meetings, led to a better evaluation of the second instance. In
the first  instance of   the course  in 2001,   design    flaws, cultural  as  well as  professional    diversities,   and
imponderableness of reality limited the success. Although the second instance of the course in winter term 2002
was redesigned, again we did not succeed in establish a common practice between academia and industry within
the scope of the course. Most important barriers for the establishment of CoP between university students and
start-up companies are limited resources (time and personal) and cultural differences. Especially the differences
in  cultural background   and   different  historical experiences   in  the two   distinct groups    of "students"     and
"entrepreneurs"    might  make   processes   of   social  identification  more   difficult  and  therefore    successful
community-building      less likely. Generalizations   within    "in-groups"   lead  to  reinforcement    of   perceived
similarities, while accentuation between members of different "out-groups" increase perceived differences (cf.
Tajfel  1982).   This   perception of  intra-group    similarities  and  inter-group  differences    might    hinder   the
establishment of CoP between members of different group and should be taken into account with regard to the
design of supporting conditions for the establishment of communities of practice.
Moreover, according to the social capital approach the establishment of CoP between academia and regional
industry depends on a culture of mutual trust (cf Putnam, 1993; Cohen and Prusak, 2001). Therefore, mutual
learning  of  university students  and  regional  company     practitioners needs   social capital   which    is built by
common experiences and shared practice. So our approach will need more instances to build a sufficient level of
trust and social capital in regional networks between university and industry. Both establishment of CoP and
building of social capital need time to emerge (cf. Lave and Wenger, 1991; Cohen and Prusak, 2001). Thus, the
limited time frame of a course taking place during just one single term (3-4 months) limits the opportunities for
successful initiation of CoP between students and company practitioners. On the other hand, repetition of the
course should establish social capital and CoP between academia and regional industries.

                                                          
The personal     reputation of   the supervisors from   the university   in the entrepreneurial   networks  has  been
leveraged by the courses, e.g. they are included into information exchange networks and are invited to start-up
related events like business plan competition, and company fairs. In the meantime, many joint supervisions of
master thesis work and joint presentations at different fairs document the successful cooperation between local
start-up companies and the university. Further development of university structures is needed but also new
potential for universities is offered by networking with local industry and life-long learning activities within
continuing education. This established cooperation structures and a culture of mutual trust can reinforce the
opportunities for further lab course cooperation in the future. Many instances of the course in the following
years allow us the do slight modifications in the design of single elements of the course and to study the effects.
Nevertheless,    good personal   relationships and   therefore rich  social capital was   established between    some
students and     practitioners. We   cannot  answer   the question,  whether    self-organized   and non-hierarchical
structures or the existance of a groupleader would better support the building of social capital within the lab
groups.  In  all lab  groups    learning mechanisms   of  legitimate participation  have  been   proved successfully.
Especially the students reported on high intensity learning while creating a common practice in the lab groups.

REFERENCES
Arnold,  P.; Smith,   J. D.  (2003):  Adding   connectivity  and loosing    context with    ICT: Contrasting learning
      situations from a community of practice perspective. In Huysman, M.; Wenger, E., and Wulf, V. (eds.):
      Communities and Technologies (C&T 2003), Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 465-484.
Brown, J. S.; Duguid, P. (1991): Organizational learning and Communities of Practice: Towards a unified view
      of working, learning, and evaluation. Organization Science 2 (1), 40-58.
Cohen, D. and Prusak, L. (2001): In good company ­ How social capital makes organizations work. Harvard
      Business School Press, Boston.
Duffy, T. M.; D. H. Jonassen (eds.) (1992) Constructivism and the Technology of Instruction: A Conversation.
      Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Duguid, P. (2004): Social capital and communities of practice: differences that make a difference. To appear in:
      The Information Society, Special Issue on "Communities and Technolgies", in preparation.
Haas, R.; Aulbur, W.; Thakar, S. (2003): Enabeling communities of practice at EADS Airbus. In: Ackerman,
      M.; Pipek, V.; and Wulf, V. (eds.): Sharing expertise        - Beyond knowledge management, Boston: MIT
      Press, 275-298.
Huysman, M., Wulf, V. (eds.) (2004): Social Capital and Information Technology, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Klamma, R.; Jarke, M.; Rohde, M.; Wulf, V. (2003): New Approaches to Media-Supported Project Work at the
      University     Level. Proceedings    of  ICALT   2003,   3rd   IEEE   International Conference    on Advanced
      Learning Technologies, July 9-11, Athens, Greece, 2003, 356-357.
Lave, J.; E. Wenger (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge University Press.
Osterlund, C.; Carlile, P. (2003): How practice matters: A relational view of knowledge sharing. In Huysman,
      M.;    Wenger,   E.,  and   Wulf,   V. (eds.): Communities     and Technologies     ­ Proceedings  of  the first
      international conference on Communities and Technologies (C&T 2003), Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
      Publishers, 1-22.
Putnam, R.D. (1993): Making Democracy Work. Civil Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton University Press.
Rohde, Markus; Reinecke, Leonard; Pape, Bernd; Janneck, Monique (2005): Community-building with Web-
      Based Systems ­ Investigating a Hybrid Community of Students, In: International Journal on CSCW
      (JCSCW), Special Issue, in press.
Tajfel, H. 1982: Social identity and intergroup relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., Wetherell, M. S. (1987). Rediscovering the social
      group. A self-categorization theory. Oxford: Blackwell, 42-67.
Wenger, E. (1998): Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge University Press.

                                                           
