            Towards A Design Framework for Mobile
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning

       Jeremy Roschelle                            Ricardo Rosas                       Miguel Nussbaum
Center for Technology in Learning                Dept. of Psychology                 Dept. of Computer Sciences
         SRI International              P. Universidad Católica de Chile          P. Universidad Católica de Chile
    Jeremy.Roschelle@sri.com                        rrosas@puc.cl                          mn@ing.puc.cl

       Abstract. We present one component of a foundation for mobile, handheld device-supported
       collaborative  learning   (mCSCL),     a design framework.   Our    design  framework    proposes   that
       mediation can occur in two complementary layers, social (e.g. rules and roles) and technological.
       Further we suggest that for mCSCL, the technological layer has two components, representational
       mediation   and networked     mediation.  A  particular  design challenge   is achieving  an  effective
       allocation of supporting structure to each layer as well as simple, transparent flow between them.

       Keywords: CSCL, mobile, handheld, design, collaboration

INTRODUCTION
Mobile,  handheld   devices   are growing   in  importance   in  education, in  part  because they   are much    more
affordable than conventional laptop or desktop computers (Norris & Soloway, 2003). Further, mobile handhelds
can easily be used in any classroom or field site; hence they can be used more often than computer labs (Vahey
& Crawford, 2002). In addition, students may own these devices and be able to take them home, multiplying
their potential utility in the learning process (Consortium for School Networking, 2004). In sum, these devices
enable a transition from occasional, supplementary use of computing to frequent, integral use (Roschelle & Pea,
2002).
   We focus on two affordances that these devices provide which are closely coupled to learning: (1) dynamic
representation (e.g. graphing, simulation, mapping, visualizing, modeling) and (2) classroom-area networking.
The  use of  dynamic   representation  to   enhance   what   and how   students  learn  has a long   track record  in
educational computing (Roschelle, Pea, Hoadley, Gordin, & Means, 2000). Early experiments suggest the power
of dynamic   representation   can translate   well in mobile,  handheld-sized   screens (Tinker  &   Krajcik,   2001).
Classroom-area networking is a newer concept, focusing on the creation of an information flow topology within
classrooms that enhances individual, small group, or full classroom activities that are occurring face-to-face
(Roschelle, 2003).
   Presently mCSCL is a rapidly growing field with much of its intellectual activity focused on discovering,
describing, and documenting the effectiveness of specific designs for using these devices in learning. Relative to
these activities, a strong design framework could have three important benefits: (1) developers could use a
comprehensive framework to more carefully think though their planned design (2) researchers could use a
framework in developing taxonomies, comparisons, and data aggregation across individual projects (3) teachers
and students could benefit from a more complete, standard way to describe what they should do.
   This paper is organized to argue for a candidate design framework for mCSCL. Starting from a literature
review, we develop the idea that core design challenge for collaborative learning is designing activities (or
tasks) that artfully  align  and  interrelate content  and   relationship goals,  achieving  synergies   between  the
imperatives of human relationships and the imperatives of the educational content. We suggest technology plays
two mediating roles: (1) representing content to support student reasoning and (2) coordinating the flow of
information  in support   of collaborative learning.   We  have  deployed   our  framework   to describe  eight  well-
known, successful mCSCL learning activities. Due to space limitations, we cover only two here.

LITERATURE REVIEW
   We   see  mCSCL     as nested  construct,  building first upon  research  on  social constructivism   and  general
research findings on how people learn, second upon foundations of collaborative learning and CSCL, and third
upon the new affordances unique to this technology.

Social Constructivism
   According    to Johnson    &   Johnson   (1987),   classroom  learning   improves   significantly when    students
participate socially. Research    on constructivist   learning  environments   has   shown  that children  see   their

                                                          
classmates as a source of knowledge and help, rather than as a competition. Social cognition creates knowledge
and skills in the context of use (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Lave & Wenger, 1991).
  Social constructivism suggests five principles for an educational activity (Newman, Griffin, & Cole, 1989).
Educational activities should be:
        1.   Constructive: existing student knowledge schemes are integrated with new information to acquire
             new knowledge.
        2.   Active: each child is expected to participate in generating new knowledge and learning from peers.
        3.   Significant: learning has to be personally meaningful to the student.
        4.   Reflexive: the group acts as a mirror for each student's learning process.
        5.   Collaborative: where the student learn with the other members of a group, the group has the same
             pedagogical goal, and each member is a potential source of information.
  The childrens' experience and knowledge, mutual feedback, and their own and shared reflection allows them
to build their answer as a group constructive (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995). Students are encouraged to explain
their findings, i.e., the meaning of words (reflexive). The children contribute with their ideas and knowledge
socially,  interacting and  negotiating  possible     concepts  (based  on  consultation). Finally, every    child's
contribution should be shown to the other children within the group in a common space (significant, reflexive
and collaborative) (Zurita & Nussbaum, 2004).

How People Learn
  The foundations of social constructivism resonate with accumulated evidence from the Learning Sciences, as
synthesized in the book, How People Learn (National Research Council, 1999). Research spanning multiple
ages and subject matters suggest that Students come to school with prior knowledge that strongly effects how
they learn new subject matter. If this incoming knowledge is not engaged in the course of instruction, students
frequently fail to learn desired subject matter concepts. To develop competence in a subject matter, students
need to learn facts in relationship to a conceptual structure that organizes their understanding and use of the
subject matter. Conceptual understanding is an essential goal for instruction. Teaching should aim to encourage
students to be more active in taking control, monitor, and regulate their own learning. Learning strategies are not
generic across subject matters, and treating them as generic can lead to failure. Thus such "metacognitive"
emphases can and should be integrated into subject matter teaching.

Collaborative Learning
Collaborative or cooperative learning seeks to use small groups for instructional purposes in such a way that
students work together to maximize their own learning and the learning of others (Johnson, Johnson & Smith,
1991; Cohen, 1994).    In order to achieve collaboration, it is essential that the activity include: opportunities for
face-to-face interaction;  joint  attention to ideas   or   materials, positive interdependence   (each  students'
contribution is needed for the group to succeed), individual responsibility, interpersonal and small group skills,
and group processing (Johnson, Johnson & Smith, 1991; Holubec, 1999; Cohen, 1994, Barron, 2003). When
these essential features are present and the above additional considerations are addressed, collaborative learning
can produce strong student motivation and achievement.
   In collaborative learning activities, there is both content to be learned and a relationship between group
members that has to be sustained. "Collaboration might productively be thought of as involving a dual-problem
space that  participants must simultaneously   attend    to and develop   a content space   and a relational space
(consisting of the interactional challenges and opportunities)" (Barron, 2003, pp. 310).    The content space can
be defined by the proposals generated by the members about the given content. The relational space is defined
as the joint attention to those proposals. According to Barron, more successful groups respond by accepting or
discussing the proposals, whereas less successful groups have a high probability of rejecting or ignoring the
proposals.  According to Dillenbourg (1999), an educational collaborative activity can be successful when there
is: (a) a well-defined objective, (b) regulation through rules and roles, (c) a defined domain consisting of the
number of group members, the criteria for the group composition, and the specification of the technological
mediation, and (d) an adequate environment for the educational context.

mCSCL
Wireless communications are particularly conducive to the sharing and comparing of information and results
whenever students work in groups (Vahey & Crawford, 2002). While collaborative learning based on laptop-
type computers makes students focus their attention on spaces which are fully contained within the limits of the
screen,   handhelds increase  the  space    available in exchanges     of information (Roschelle    & Pea,   2002).
Simultaneous interconnection makes the students more active and engaged in the learning process (Inkpen,
Mandryk & Scott, 2000; Inkpen, Ho-Ching, Kuederle, Scott & Shoemaker, 1999). mCSCL applications can:

                                                         
organize the managed information, provide a negotiation space, encourage coordination between the activity
states, and mediate synchronization and interactivity, (Zurita & Nussbaum, 2004).

OUR PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
The root construct of our proposed framework is an
activity or task--a coherent, planned process that is                                         Activity
intended  to   facilitate a  large   group of   students
making  significant   progress    in learning particular
content  in  a bounded    time   and  space.  Activities
could  be  more   elaborately    rendered  via  Activity
Theory (Nardi, 1996) or more simply rendered as                           Relationship        Alignments          Content
lesson plans. Within an activity, the design should                          Facets                                Facets
encompass two important facets: relationship facets
and content facets .
   The  relationship      facets  of an  activity design
should describe how the human imperatives of face                                           Mediation
to face  learning    will be  addressed.   Relationship
facets  include   joint   attention, group  processing,      Teacher                                                            Representation
individual responsibility, positive interdependence,
and   social skills, as   described   in  our   literature     Roles         Socialreviewabove.OneoftheHowPeopleLearnRulesMediationTechnicalCouplingMediationCoordination
constructs,  community-centeredness,       fits  here as
well.  The   content    facets   of  an activity  design
should describe how the subject matter imperatives
of face to   face learning   will be  addressed.  These
facets include learner-centeredness, knowledge-centeredness and assessment-centeredness.
   An mCSCL activity cannot be simply simultaneously social and contentful--the social and content facets
must be mutually supporting.. The prior literature provides theoretical constructs that may prove useful for
giving  reason  to   the  alignment   of  social  and  content  facets   (e.g., social   activity may     increase cognitive
conflict, leading to pressure to transform conceptual schemes to accommodate new ideas).
   Social learning activities do not happen just because they are planned, nor are they necessarily easy to carry
out productively. A major focus in design, therefore, is to specify appropriate mediational means to ameliorate
expected troubles or activate latent potentials. Mediation can be social or technical. In any given mCSCL, both
are likely to be employed.
   Social mediation may be provided by specifying guidelines for the teacher, roles for students, or rules for
their joint work. The teacher may be asked to motivate or instruct the students, coach students on social skills,
monitor the process of the activity and make adjustments to facilitate progress, and provide helpful feedback.
   Technological mediation, first of all, may be paper-based. The activity designer, for instance, might right
rules or roles on paper. Given the small screens of mCSCL devices, paper can dramatically expand the space
available to a designer for structuring an activity. Within uses of the devices themselves, we see mediation as
broadly representational or broadly coordinative. For example, a graph that controls an animation may be a
powerful representation for learning mathematics. Coordinative mediation provides ways of organizing the flow
of information among mCSCL devices to support the objectives of the activity. For example, aggregating a set
of students answers but only allowing the students to see whether they all agreed or they differed may support
the objective of an activity.
   It is to be expected that some of the activity will be mediated technically and some will be mediated socially.
Thus it is critical, if the activity is to succeed, for the designer to attend to how these two channels are coupled.
How for instance can the student talk about "my idea" when it has been transmitted to another students' device
and incorporated into their representation? Likewise, if some important part of the activity is occurring socially,
how does the technology become aware of what has happened? Commonly, shared reference to technologically
mediated learning may be accomplished by the use of a large, public display.

TWO ILLUSTRATIONS OF USING THE FRAMEWORK

Match My Graph
"Match my graph" (MMG) uses Palm handhelds with infrared beaming to engage students in refining their
ability to use concise mathematical vocabulary to describe linear functions. The content facet of MMG involves

                                                             
translating between graphical and linguistic definitions of functions. Students have great difficult describing
how linear functions differ; where a mathematician would use terms like "slope" and "y-intercept", students may
see a graphed function as "short" or "jaggy." The student descriptions may reflect artifacts of the computer
screen than an expert would ignore and the students may ignore the very features an expert finds most salient.
The relationship facet of MMG is patterned on the popular game "mastermind" ­ one student has a secret which
the other student tries to guess. If a guess is wrong, the secret-holder provides a hint. Social and content facets
are aligned   in MMG   because    the "secret"  is  a graph  that the  other student  cannot  see. Hints   are given
linguistically; to solve the challenge students must translate the features of their graphed function into a verbal
hint, and the other student must translate the hint back into a new graph. The social and content aspects of MMG
are aligned because the game motivates students to develop clearer ways of talking about linear functions.
    Mediation in MMG is both technical and social. Students sometime have no idea about what kinds of hints
they might try. The technical mediation is both representational and coordinative. The representational aspect
involves the use of the stylus and the Palm's graphic display to make it easier to sketch and manipulate graphs
of linear functions. Because the Palms are small and personal, students can easily hide their "secret" by holding
their screen vertically. The Palm also supports coordinative mediation: a student beams a guess to the secret-
holder. When the guess is received, the secret-holder can see both functions on one graph. This facilitates
comparison between the secret and the guess. Hints, however, are given verbally ­ not through the technology.
Further, teachers mediate hint-giving by coaching students, again socially without technical mediation. The
technical and social mediation is linked by consistently color-coding a player's function. This makes it easy to
talk about a particular function, e.g. "your red function" vs. "my blue function." After students play MMG
several times, the teacher engages the students in a group discussion. The purpose of the group discussion is to
reflect on the   different ways  of  describing functions   that  each student   used and   on the  nature  of  clear
mathematical communication.

Collaborative Construction
The goal of a collaborative construction activity is for students to assemble a creative object from the unique
component pieces each student holds. In one simple example, "Silaba," each student receives a syllable (Figure
2). Students work together to assemble their syllables into words (Figure 2). A group of three members is
defined (Dillenbourg  1999, Zurita   & Nussbaum 2004a). Each child     receives  an element, i.e. a different syllable.
In Figure 2, Miguel receives "si", Gustavo "la" and Rodrigo "si". The children have to find out the correct
combination   of  syllables. For the  example,  the possible combination     is "silaba", "bala", "la" and  "si". (In
Spanish unlike English several words can be built from a set of syllables).

          (a)                    (b)                   (c)                      (d)                    (e)
    Figure 2: Collaborative Construction application; construction of words

    We analyze the Relationship Facets following the Social Constructivism principles. The children previous
knowledge, mutual feedback, and own and shared reflection allows them to build as a group their answer
(constructive). They are encouraged by the teacher to explain their findings, i.e., the words meaning (reflexive).
The children contribute with their ideas and knowledge socially, interacting and negotiating possible words
(based on consultation). Finally, every child contribution is shown to the other children within the group in a
common space (significant, reflexive and collaborative). For example, Miguel selects his syllabus, the machine
shows the syllabus to him (Fig 2d) and the other members (for example Rodrigo, Fig 2e) in their corresponding
screen and tells also Miguel that he has now to wait for his partners.
    The cognitive effort is targeted to the collaborative construction activity. All the necessary information and a
structured decision-making    procedure  is given   through  the  handhelds.    The handhelds  network     provides a
negotiation space that encourages coordination between the three activity states. Each child decides how his
syllable is used, i.e. when his turn is in relation to the rest of the group, allowing collaborative discussion on the
construction procedure, mediating the handhelds synchronization among the members.

                                                         
  Finally we have the role of technology, i.e., representation and coordination. This includes assignment of
tasks; within each group, each member receives his own syllable. Since the syllable is only available to one
member, s/he has to inform the other members, providing interdependence and interactivity within the group. In
terms of representation, the screens provide a space for sharing the current state of the group construction. In
Figure 2c, 2d, and 2e Miguel and Rodrigo share what Miguel did. Since the word is constructed simultaneously
on all screens, the technology provides a visual negotiation space. Technology forces synchronicity blocking the
child that already chose his her syllable.

CONCLUSION
Mobile,   handheld, wireless  devices are   opening new    possibilities for collaborative learning. As interest in
mCSCL grows, researchers, developers, and teachers will look for ways to organize, analyze, and synthesize
resulting knowledge.  We    suggest  that  articulating a design framework     that potential spans  many mCSCL
activities can contribute the foundations of further work in this area.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by a grant in Chile (FONDECYT #7040082). This work was supported in part
by a grant in the United States, NSF award #0427783. Any opinions offered are those of the authors and may or
may not reflect the views of their respective funders.

REFERENCES
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
          Researcher(18), 32-42.
Consortium for School Networking. (2004). A guide to handheld computing in K-12 schools.
Dillenbourg, P. (Ed.). (1999). Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches. Oxford:
          Pergamon.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1987). Learning together and alone: Cooperative, competitive, and
          individualistic learning. New York: Allyn & Bacon.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning:   Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
          University Press.
Nardi, B. (Ed.). (1996). Context & consciousness: Activity theory and human-computer interaction. Cambridge,
          MA: MIT Press.
National Research Council. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school. Washington, DC:
          National Academy Press.
Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1989). The construction zone: Working for cognitive change in school.
          London: Cambridge University Press.
Norris, C., & Soloway, E. (2003, April). The viable alternative: handhelds. Retrieved May 12, 2003, from
          http://www.aasa.org/publications/sa/2003_04/soloway.htm
Roschelle, J. (2003). Unlocking the learning value of wireless mobile devices. Journal of Computer Assisted
          Learning, 19(3), 260-272.
Roschelle, J., & Pea, R. (2002). A walk on the WILD side:    How wireless handhelds may change computer-
          supported collaborative learning. International Journal of Cognition and Technology, 1(1), 145-168.
Roschelle, J., Pea, R., Hoadley, C., Gordin, D., & Means, B. (2000). Changing how and what children learn in
          school with computer-based technologies. The Future of Children, 10(2), 76-101.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995). Construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In
          C. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer-supported collaborative learning. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Tinker, R., & Krajcik, J. (Eds.). (2001). Portable technologies: Science learning in context. New York: Kluwer
          Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Vahey, P., & Crawford, V. (2002). Palm Education Pioneers Program: Final Evaluation Report. Menlo Park,
          CA: SRI International.
Zurita, G., & Nussbaum, M. (2004). mCSCL: Mobile computer supported collaborative learning. Computers &
          education, 42(3), 289-314.

                                                         
