    Implementing Online Collaborative Professional
                Development for Innovative Educators

           Donna Russell, Ph.D.                                   Art Schneiderheinze, Ph.D.
                 Assistant Professor                            Professional Development/Project
      University of Missouri-Kansas                                            Supervision
                          City                                  Project Construct National Center
                   5100 Oak St.                                    Columbia, Missouri, U.S.A.
       Kansas City, Missouri, U.S.A.
                 russelldl@umkc.edu

      Abstract. The purpose of this study was to describe how four teachers in different cities in Missouri
      implemented an innovation cluster that paired an online technology with a problem-based unit design
      framework. The motivating principle for the study originated from prior research on teacher adoption of
      technology innovations and principles of professional development for educators. Using a multiple case
      study research method, the researchers collected and analyzed data to (1) understand how effectively the
      teachers implemented the unit while participating in online collaborative professional development and
      (2) identify cross-case issues that arose as the teachers collaboratively implemented the problem-based
      unit.

      Keywords: Guidelines, formatting instructions, author's kit, conference publications

OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSES
The purpose   of this study   was  to  understand how  teachers participate in  collaborative online professional
development in order to implement an innovation cluster that included emerging online technologies and a
framework for a constructivist-based learning environment. The researchers focused on three progressive issues
that emerged during in vivo data structuring: (1) what factors in a teacher's school environments influence the
implementation of an innovation cluster?     (2) how does a teacher's participation in collaborative professional
development influence the implementation of an innovation cluster?       (3) how  does a  teacher's  belief about
learning and technology influence the implementation of an innovation cluster?
  We used Activity Theory's concept of development of object in order to identify the work activity model of
each teacher's classroom practice. We designed and categorized each teacher's AT model based on initial pre-
unit interviews. We then identified the teacher's responses to contradictions, pressures within their work activity
settings that arose during the implementation of the unit. We further defined the response of the teachers to these
contradictions as turning points, changes in activity in their classroom. We then evaluated these turning point
responses as resulting in 1) a resolution of the contradiction thereby widening of the teacher's object or 2) a
response which did not resolve the contradiction resulting in narrowing of their object. Next we identified the
cross-case issues that developed over time among the teachers in order to evaluate the effectiveness of the online
collaboration that was    the only  collaborative professional  development  available to  the  teachers as  they
simultaneously implemented an online problem-based unit in their classrooms. As a result of this systemic and
contextual identification of contradictions and the focus on three progressive issues in order to clarify the inter-
relationships of these responses   to  the development  of the  object, we  were able  to identify the important
influences that  affected the effectiveness  of the online professional development   program   in responding  to
contradictions in their work activity.

Theoretical framework
  The theoretical grounding for this study was sociocultural theory of human interaction, and development
(Vygotsky,  1978;  Bruner,    1990)   with an emphasis  on  understanding   the processes  of  mediated  activity
(Wertsch, 1998). The researchers used Activity Theory, (Engeström, Miettinen & Punamaki, 1999; Il'enkov,
1977) in order to design a systems framework for understanding the implementation processes in context and
over time. Activity Theory defines the elements of human interactions in a work activity setting and was used by
the researchers to design analytical procedures that developed systemic and contextual relationships among the
dataset (Engeström, 1987; Barab, Hay & Yamagata-Lynch, 2001; Schoenfeld, 1999). Using this systems-based
methodology, the researchers studied the interactions of the constituents of the system that produce behavior
(Aronson, 2003) and developed explanations that link the components as a "consilience of inductions" (Wilson,

                                                       
1998, pg. 98). The compelling purpose of complex systems analysis is to recognize the organizing relationships
between entities in the system from which emerge the unique properties of the systems (Banathy, 1991). This
form of analysis provides contextually valid responses to complex social systems by making the interactions in
the system explicit so practical and theoretical implications can be developed. The overarching premise for this
form of analysis was that the nature of human development is socially embedded and fundamentally activity
oriented resulting in an anticipated outcome (Cole & Engeström, 1993).
  This    research studies the  online  professional     development    of  four k-12   teachers     that implemented     a
collaborative online  problem-based    unit. The    unit involved   an  introduction    of  two  new      tools, an online
technology and a problem-based unit of study design template, into the classrooms. We defined the insertion of
these two co-dependent tools as an innovation cluster. The insertion of new tools mediates the action of the
agent (Wertsch,    1998). In  this case study   analysis  the   agents  are  the  teachers.    New   tools   contain   both
affordances   and  constraints that  insert  a source    of    tension into  a work     activity system      identified   as
contradictions.  We  used    previous  research  to    define   the relationship    among    the     AT   aspects   of  the
implementation of this unit including studies of innovation (Rogers, 1995; Hall, Wallace, & Dossett, 1973;
Wilson,   Sherry,  Dobrovolny,  Batty,  &    Ryder,  2001)     and  collaborative design    and  implementation        of a
constructivist-based learning  environment   (Jonassen,   2000;    Savery  &   Duffy,  1996;   Lave   &   Wenger,    1991;
Schank, 1994; Salomon, 1993) and identify the resulting contradictions in the work activity of these innovative
teachers.
  The object of an activity system is something given and something anticipated. In this study, the initial goal
for the educators involved collaboratively implementing the problem-based unit and incorporating the online
workspace so their students can work together online to problem-solve. Using Activity Theory (AT) to define
the constituent components, nodes, of the work activity of the teachers, the researchers used N*UDIST software
to structure the nodes of the AT model (e.g., motive, goal, subject, mediation, object, community, rules, division
of labor, outcome) and integrated the theoretical constructs from related fields (e.g., professional development,
innovation, collaboration) into operational categories of interactions in the work activity of the teachers. The
researchers identified the contradictions in each teacher's work activity, structured around the three progressive
issues. We then focused on defining the turning points resulting from these contradictions as teacher behaviors
during the implementation of the unit in their classrooms and finally we evaluated these resulting turning point
behaviors  as resulting in a  type  of reformulation   of the   teachers'  objects, such    as widening,    narrowing     or
disintegrating their object. Finally, the researchers also identified cross-case patterns of responses among all four
teachers using the progressive issues that arose in vivo to clarify the relationships and develop conclusions
concerning the four teachers' professional development responses. As a result, the researchers were able to
describe the online collaborative professional development processes of the teachers and how they impacted
their implementation of the advanced problem-based unit of study using online technology.

METHODS

Setting
The researchers studied four elementary teachers who work with students in 4th and 5th grades in four different
cities throughout Missouri who were implementing a collaborative online problem-based unit during the final
quarter of the   2001-2002  school  year. The   students  represented    inner   city, small   city, suburban    and   rural
students. All the teachers had computer labs in their classrooms as a result of their participation in eMINTS
(enhancing  Missouri's  Instructional  Networked    Teaching    Strategies). eMINTS      is an   technology      integration
program developed by Missouri's Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE). It establishes
classroom computer labs in order to illustrate the use of technology in classroom instruction and trains teachers
in constructivist-based instruction. Because of their involvement in the eMINTs program, the teachers that
participated in this study had the same prior amount of technology and inquiry-based learning training, 3 years,
and the same amount of hardware and software in their classrooms. The classroom settings are depicted in Table
1 below.
  These four eMINTS teachers were invited to participate in an online pilot project with MOREnet (Missouri
Research and Education Network) called the Pioneers Program. The teachers volunteered to implement a new
Linux-based   middleware,   Shadow     netWorkspaceTM     (SNS),    and  collaboratively    develop   and    implement    a
problem-based unit that incorporates constructivist-based learning methods and takes advantage of the many
affordances   of SNS.   SNS  was   provided    free to   their classrooms   through    the  University    of Missouri     at
Columbia's College of Education as part of the School of Information Sciences and Learning Technologies.
SNS provided the teachers and the students with online workspaces where they could dialog in synchronous and
asynchronous forums and work on creating and disseminating artifacts. The researchers designed professional
development interactions among the teachers including an initial phone conference, multiple weekly chats, and

                                                         
an online  reflection  journal. Throughout    the implementation  of   the  new unit,   teachers' only  collaborative
professional dialogs were in the seven weekly online chat rooms.
   The unit that the teachers volunteered to implement was an authentic design-based problem solving unit
titled "Improving I-70". The researchers created a unit design template which was used by the teachers to
develop their individual and collaborative problem-based unit. The problem addressed by the students was the
repair of Interstate 70 which runs across the state of Missouri. Each classroom worked collaboratively online
with students  in  the other  classrooms   to  design a response  to   the  state-wide  problem   from  the multiple
perspectives  of  students in a  rural, urban,  suburban and   small   city setting. The  unit was   designed  to  be
implemented in three phases. In Phase 1 the students worked in their local classrooms developing the problem
background.   In  Phase 2   the students  worked   in online SNS    workgroups   to    understand different areas  of
expertise involved in solving the problem. In Phase 3 the students worked back in their local classrooms to
develop strategies to solve the problem. The purpose of the collaborative online problem-based unit was for the
students to develop problem-solving abilities with multiple perspectives.
                                          Table 1: Classroom Descriptors

                  Grade      Community                   Students                       Technology Access
 Linda             4th        suburban         12 boys and 10 girls, allCaucasian As a part of theirparticipation in the eMINTS
 Helen             4th           rural         12 boys and 12 girls, allCaucasian program, each teacher has12-14 Pentium3 LCD
 Janice            5th           urban         7 boys and 10 girls, all Black     computers, a teacheror African-Americanworkstation, laptop, a
                                               9 boys, 10 girls; 11               Smartboard and projector, a
 Carol             4th      mid-size city      Caucasian,    8 Black or           scanner, a color printer, and
                                               African-American                   a digital camera.

Findings
   The data collection process used interpretive research practices (Fraenkel & Wallen, 1996) to capture the
dynamics and complexity of the teachers' online professional development        throughout implementation of the
unit (before, during, and after implementing the unit). The goal of data collection was to capture aspects of the
implementation and identify the influence of the online professional development in a way that enables the
researchers to fully realize its complexity and make it available for contextual analysis and evaluation. The data
collected from the teachers included initial and follow-up interviews, transcripts from a phone conference and
seven chatroom conferences, messages posted on discussion boards, reflective questionnaires related to their
design of the unit and the principles of constructivist learning, an online journal, and documents the teachers
produced related to the unit and technology.
   Each teacher's transformative processes were analyzed through the identification of contradictions using
activity theory. Secondary contradictions were identified in each individual teacher's activity setting. These
contextual contradictions defined the progressive issue, what factors in individual teacher's school environments
influenced the implementation of an innovation cluster? The researchers designed an AT teacher model for each
teacher to illustrate secondary contradictions. An example of a teacher's post-unit AT model is shown as Figure
1 below. Contradictions unresolved are shown as solid broken lines in AT Model. Resolved contradictions are
shown as dashed broken lines. The top of the triangle depicts the new tools inserted into the activity system of
each teacher which included the new problem-based unit, Improving I-70 and SNS. The middle of the triangle
shows the subject, the names are pseudonyms, and the object, the implementation of the problem-based unit
using SNS with the teacher's initial anticipated outcome for the activity, the potential to develop advanced
problem-solving skills including multiple perspectives in their students. The bottom of the triangle depicts the
contextual issues  such  as rules in the  context,  school  or district, community,    and  division of labor, those
necessary to the implementation. The factors listed in each category were assigned after initial interviews with
the teachers.
   A  tertiary contradiction  occurs    between interacting  activity systems.  This   type of contradiction   was a
response  to  the second   progressive  issue, how  does a   teacher's   participation in collaborative professional
development influence the implementation of an innovation cluster?       This type of contradiction occurred when
the teachers collaborated to define a common object during their weekly online chats. The researchers coded the
teachers' online dialogs to define the dialogic turning points as text instances when the teachers redefined their
object and changed an aspect of their implementation in their classrooms (Kärkkäinen, 1999). A dialogic turning
point is an event when a teacher or the teachers began to outline their object in a different way. The signifiers of

                                                        
turning points can be a questioning of an established practice or concept, an aspect of a multi-voicedness of the
collaborative processes   and  a change    in emphasis    in the  sequencing   of  the   dialog. These   aspects of  the
identification of turning points in the reformulation of object are described by Virkkunen (cited in Käkkäinen,
1999) and are based on Leont'ev's concept of object, Halliday's theory of register (Wells, 1999) and Bakhtin's
concept of voice (Bakhtin, 1982).
  We     operationalized  the  concept    of  dialogic turning   points using  three     indicators  of transformation:
disturbance clusters,  questioning, and   interaction  of different voices.  The   first indicator  of  change  was  the
appearance of disturbance clusters, namely clusters of dilemmas, disturbances, and innovation attempts of team
discourse. Halliday's concept of register focuses on the identification of patterns in social dialog. Dialogic
turning points were identified as breaks from this pattern of exchange. The second indicator was questioning. A
part of the transformational process was questioning of the ideas and accepted practice. The researchers located
points of change by identifying questioning episodes in the dialog of the teachers indicating a change in the
formulation of the object. The last indicator of dialogic turning points used in the study was the concept of
multi-voicedness. This concept is based on Bahktin's theory of genre in social language. The multiple voices of
the teachers during their dialogs throughout the design and implementation of the unit introduced variations in
their concepts of the pedagogy of reform and perceived attributes of the innovation cluster.
  A primary contradiction defines the relationship between motive and outcome. A primary contradiction is as
negative tension between the concepts underlying the implementation of the object. This type of contradiction
defined the progressive issue, how do individual teacher's beliefs about learning and technology influence the
implementation    of an  innovation cluster?  In  this study  the teacher's  pre-unit    motive  for implementing    the
innovation cluster was defined as the potential to develop advanced problem-solving abilities in the students
with awareness of multiple perspectives in problem-solving. The researchers identified changes in motive and
outcome relationships by the teachers in response to work-related pressures. The researchers coded the teachers'
concept of the learning processes potentially available as a result of developing their object, the implementation
of the unit, as hierarchical levels of the teacher's philosophy of learning using Bereiter's Scheme of Knowledge
(Bereiter, 2002).

Case Study Conclusions
  Linda's final Activity Theory model is shown below as Figure 1. Linda is a suburban teacher that has
developed innovative units previously and was very supportive of the goals for the I-70 unit. In her pre-unit
interview she stated her goals for her students for implementing this unit as the development of problem-solving
skills with multiple perspectives. Linda experienced three contradictions during implementation of the unit. She
resolved one  and    two were   unresolved.   She  overall   narrowed   her object   in-depth    because,  although  she
completed the entire unit, she did not implement Phase 2 online with the other classes which prevented her
students from studying the problem with the perspective of the other classes. Pre-unit she described her local
work  environment    as very   collaborative  and supportive  of  reform  efforts.   Prior to beginning    the unit, she
resolved a  contradiction   in her  local work  environment    between   rules and    subject when     she changed   her
schedule so she would not be departmentalized during the unit.
  Both of her unresolved contradictions were related to the mediational tools that she added to her classroom
practice, the I-70 Unit and SNS. The tool to subject contradiction shown below was between the learning
potential of the problem-based unit and her beliefs about student learning. It was identified during the post-unit
interview when she said that she would not again implement an authentic problem-based unit such as Improving
I-70 because   it did   not deliver enough    content   for  standardized   testing. Her   original  stated motive   for
implementing the unit, to develop problem-solving abilities with awareness of multiple-perspectives, was coded
as a Level 5 learning response using Bereiter's Scheme of Knowledge. However, her post-unit subject concept
of delivering content in order to prepare students to take a standardized test was coded as a Level 2 knowledge
response. The unresolved tool to object contradiction was identified in her online dialogs. During Phase 2 when
all the students worked online in groups, Linda expressed discomfort with the student online chats describing
them as "chaotic." When she decided to take her students off the internet so she could finish the unit in her
classroom where she was more comfortable with the learning activities, she prevented them from studying a
problem from multiple perspectives. This contradiction between her beliefs about learning and the problem-
based unit was not resolved as a result of her online professional development processes.
  She did not resolve either contradiction as a result of the online professional development. She did not
contact either researcher for help during the unit. She had experienced inquiry-based learning units prior to the
development of this problem-based unit. However, she had not previously worked in open-ended problem-
solving problems with her students. Her inert contradictory concepts of how this unit would progress in her
classroom and how her students would respond in the unit's online activities were not identified and addressed
in the online professional development process.

                                                          
                                               MEDIATING TOOLS
                                               "Improving Interstate 70" unit design
                                               framework, emerging technologies,
                                               teacher talk in professional
                                               development conferences

                     SUBJECT                                                                  OBJECT
                     Linda                                                                    implementation of the unit

                                                                                                                                    OUTCOME
                                                                                                                                    development of problem-
                                                                                                                                    solving skills, including multiple
                                                                                                                                    perspectives

 RULES                                               COMMUNITY                                   DIVISION OF LABOR
 MAP testing schedule, schedule of end-              (1) principal, (2) other                    (3) sharing expertise working
 of-year activities, social studies                  teachers in her grade                       with the students during Phases
 departmentalization                                 level, (3) high school                      2 and 3, (5) providing
                                                     teacher and his students,                   professional development related
                                                     (4) other participating                     to the innovation cluster
                                                     teachers in the
                                                     collaboration, (5)
                                                     researchers/designers

                                             Figure 1: Linda's Final Activity Theory Model
    Helen,  the      rural  teacher,      experienced  two              contradictions,      both  unresolved,             and overall   disintegrated       her
object by ending her unit early. In her pre-unit interview she was very supportive of the new online tool and the
unit goals.   Pre-unit      she       described  her  local          context     as   collaborative   and   supportive.           However,        she did    not
describe  her technology              support person   as  supportive.                Her    contradictions  both           occurred     as context-related
problems. Helen had an unresolved contradiction between object and division of labor. Her technology support
person added a filter to her local server during the unit and she was off-line for over a week during the unit. She
did  not talk to     him    about      her  sudden  loss  of            the   internet  and,    as a result, her           students   lost  valuable     online
collaboration time during the unit. The second unresolved contradiction was between community and object.
Prior to the unit in an online chat with the other teachers, she agreed to a shortened schedule for her unit even
though   her  rural    school         ended  the school    year               earlier than   the   others. Eventually             she ran   out    of time    to
implement    the     unit  and       disintegrated her  object.               As a    result of  her online  professional             development,       Helen
lessened her ability to implement her unit goals. Helen did not effectively communicate about her unit goals and
technology needs. This limited her potential to resolve contradictions.
    Janice,  the     urban  teacher,       experienced  four            contradictions,       two  resolved    and         two    unresolved,     and overall
widened her object in depth by adding new learning experiences to her unit. Prior to the unit, Janice did not
expect her students to successfully communicate online with the other students. She felt they would not be able
to type a coherent sentence. In her urban district she was under a lot of pressure to raise student test scores. She
only volunteered       for   this     collaborative   unit           because     she   felt  pressure  from    the         district   to use     her eMINTS
technology   in      innovative       ways.  She   described            her    local   context   as  non-collaborative            and    not     supportive   of
innovation. The two unresolved contradictions were both related to local context issues including the continuing
of departmentalization in her school throughout the unit, rules, and problems with her local server, division of
labor. She    did     not    dialog       within   her school                 with    either  the  other   teachers            or her    principal    to     end
departmentalization        or       with her technology    support             person.    This   limited   her ability         to  resolve       contradictions
related to context.
    However, during the course of the unit she was open to all professional development processes outside the
school available to her. She worked very collaboratively online resolving two contradictions related to her object
by  adding   new      activities      as  a result of  dialoging               online  with   the   other  teachers.           She  developed        her    urban
community resources by asking an engineer to come in each week and work with her students. She also asked
the local researcher to come into her classroom and work with her. As the unit progressed she found her urban

                                                                                 
students to be very successful at problem-solving and interacting online with the other students. As a result of
her students' success in the unit, she radically changed how she thought about the learning potential of her urban
students   and resolved   the  primary   subject   contradiction   between  her  beliefs about   the learning   and the
development of her object. In her post-unit interview she said she was planning more problem-based units for
her students in the future. She stated that she "would never teach long-division for six weeks again." Her
openness   to  professional  development     helped   her overcome     contradictions between   her  beliefs  about the
learning of her students and the implementation of a problem-based unit despite the pressure to prepare her
urban students to take a standardized test and her perception of her school and district as not being supportive of
innovation.
    Carol, the small city teacher, experienced four contradictions; two resolved and unresolved, and overall
widened her object temporally by increasing the length of the unit and adding more activities. In her pre-unit
interview, Carol stated that she did not want to do the entire unit. She only wanted to do Phase 1 and use SNS in
her own classroom. She stated that Phase 2 and Phase 3, which included the online collaborations and the more
advanced problem-solving processes, were "useless" and too difficult for her students. She stated that she did
not work collaboratively with other teachers in her local context calling the process "lock-step" teaching. She
volunteered for the unit in order to get SNS into her classroom. Nevertheless, she eventually completed Phase 2
and 3 so she could work with the other teachers. In her post-unit interview she said she did not want to stop the
unit because it would she did not want to "let down" the other teachers. She also benefited from the online
professional development by adding new activities as a result of the dialogs. However, unlike Janice, in her post
unit interview she again stated that she did not believe that the collaboration phase or the problem-solving phase
of the unit were beneficial to her students. The online professional development did not help her resolve this
contradiction between her learning beliefs and the object of her work activity.

Cross-Case Conclusions
    In order to look for patterns among all four teachers, the researchers designed a Transformation Model,
figure 2 below, that shows the AT models for each teacher, the turning points and when these turning points
occurred during the unit. The Transformation Model shows the AT Models of the teachers pre-unit and during
each of the three phases of the unit. A TP in the transformation model represents the teacher's response to a
contradiction in relation to the phase of the unit. The turning points are shown on the line going through the AT
triangles. The line widens or narrows dependent upon whether the TP resulted in a widening or a narrowing of
the  object.  The  final AT   model  for  each   teacher   is   show inside the  circle. This   Transformation   Model
graphically depicts the contradictions that arose during the implementation of the unit and how the teachers'
responded to the problems. This model aided the researchers in the identification of patterns of responses among
all the teachers   over  the course  of  the unit. It also allowed   the researchers  to identify the   types of online
professional development that were effective or ineffective in aiding the teachers in meeting their goals.
    Using the transformation model, the researchers found that all the teachers narrowed their object during
Phase 2 when all their students were online in synchronous chat rooms. In all cases, the teachers' responses to
the contradictions that occurred during this critical phase of the unit were to use SNS less or not at all. Without
SNS the students could not interact with other students throughout the state and understand the problem from
multiple perspectives. The collaborative professional development process available to the teachers, a weekly
online chat, was insufficient to help these teachers in resolving contradictions, especially critical technology-
based contradictions, during this phase.
    Two teachers, Janice and Carol, benefited from the online collaboration. Both of these teachers decided as a
result  of the online   professional development      to  develop  new   lessons or   extend the  unit. In their initial
interviews both had described their local context as not collaborative. Both Linda and Helen described their
context as collaborative prior to the initiation of the unit. During the unit, Linda did not make any decisions that
developed her unit or solved any contradictions. Helen made a decision online to delay the initiation of her unit
that lessened her ability to implement the unit as she planned. This decision led to her ultimately having to stop
the unit during Phase 2. The online professional development was beneficial only to the two teachers who stated
pre-unit that they did not work collaboratively in their local context.
    There were three belief turning points among the four teachers. Two resulted in a narrowing of the object.
One teacher, the urban teacher, changed her beliefs about the potential of her students as a result of working
collaboratively   with   the other  teachers  and   the   researchers. Janice identified  and   resolved   the  primary
contradiction between what she believed her urban students could potentially do and how the unit could develop
their  potential. Janice developed   all professional    development   processes available   to her  including, but not
limited to, the online professional development. The other two teachers, Linda and Carol, did not identify or
resolve  their primary   belief contradictions   as   a  result of the online   professional development.     Carol did
implement the entire unit despite her belief that the unit was too difficult and useless to her students because she

                                                           
wanted to continue to work with the other teachers. Linda cut short her students' online interactions because she
could not reconcile their online problem-solving activities with her concepts of learning activities.
   In response to the first progressive issue, what factors in a teacher's school environments influence the
implementation   of   an innovation   cluster,  teachers who   are implementing    innovation    need  problem-solving
professional development programs that allow them to resolve the potential contradictions that will occur in
their local activity setting as a result of implementing change. Anticipatory problem-solving and the definition of
productive communication structures are beneficial constructs for online professional development models of
teachers implementing innovation. These teachers used the online professional development program to share
information and schedule events but they also needed the online forum to aid them in developing supportive
structures in anticipation of problems, especially technology-based problems, which arise when implementing
technology-based learning environments.
   In response to the second issue, how does a teacher's participation in collaborative professional development
influence the implementation of an innovation cluster, the researchers found that the two teachers who described
their local contexts as not collaborative benefited, they resolved contradictions, as a result of their chat room
dialogs. However, the two teachers who said they were already working at a high level of collaboration locally
did not benefit and one even reduced the effectiveness of their reform efforts as a result of decisions made
during the collaborative chat room dialogs. Collaborative online processes should be modified to fit the level of
previous collaboration and innovation of the participating teachers. Teachers that are isolated in their local
context can be more effective implementing innovative as a result of sharing information online with other
innovators.  However,    teachers   who   are   already  innovative    and working   collaboratively   need   an online
professional development program that will develop their reform capabilities more fully by integrating dialogs
with experts, mentors or other innovative educators that are working at the same or a higher level of innovation.
   In response to the third issue, how does a teacher's belief about learning and technology influence the
implementation   of   an  innovation   cluster, teachers  implementing     reform-based    units designed   to  develop
advanced  learning    processes in  their students can    have primary     contradictions between  their beliefs   about
learning and the instructional processes required for practical implementation of the innovative tools that they
bring into their classroom. When confronted with a contradiction between their motive and the practice none of
the teachers overcame primary-based contradiction with only a weekly chat as their professional development
program.  Previous    studies have   identified effective reform-based     processes in   professional development   in
education (Korthagen, 1993; Shulman, 1986; Schön, 1983; Lieberman, 1997). These studies have identified the
importance   of  collaborative   professional   development   for  teachers  implementing    reform that   involve both
advancement   of   the teachers'   understanding  of  inert  (gestalt) cognitive theories  (episteme)   as well  as  the
development of the practical (phronesis) instructional design aspects necessary to implement units based on
these theories (Korthagen, 1993). Online professional development programs for innovators should include
multiple forums allowing teachers to dialog in private and public concerning their beliefs about the types of
constructivist-based   learning processes   and  activities  that they  are  developing   in their  classrooms.  These
processes should occur prior to the implementation of reform and during the implementation process. For
example, field-based case study analysis where teachers view and then dialog with other teachers implementing
similar levels of constructivist-based learning environments can help highly innovative teachers understand and
make   overt their underlying   beliefs in order  to  identify and  resolve  primary  contradictions.    Innovators  in
education require a different quality and form of professional development programs to be successful.               The
design of   professional  development     programs  should    include  processes that   help innovators    in education
problem-solve, proactively communicate their goals and needs and develop coherent mental models of the
classrooms that they are developing.
   Innovation in education can be a sporadic process as teachers respond to pressures to use new technologies
and correspondingly    attempt  to  incorporate  new    understandings   about learning   emerging    from  research in
cognitive science. However as teachers attempt to reconcile these new understandings about human learning
processes and the addition of these new technologies into educational processes there are no assurances that the
two will be compatibly linked and utilized for the development of knowledge needed by students participating in
a post-industrialist,  knowledge-based,    technology    infused  modern   society (Bereiter, 2002).   When    teachers
attempt to implement a technology innovation, they naturally face the complex challenge of fitting together new
ideas with deep-rooted beliefs and practices. As a result, teachers often introduce an innovation in ways that
reflect a negotiation between old and new ways of doing things (Bruce, Peyton, & Batson, 1993; Bruce &
Peyton, 1990) and they may not have adequate professional development to reconcile these tensions with their
goals for implementing innovation into their classrooms. As a result, there is an imperative to develop new
understandings concerning effective professional development programs for innovative teachers implementing
cognitive-based    reforms    that are  anchored   in    the concept    of  developing    knowledge    workers   for  a
technologically-advanced society.

                                                          
                  TPTP
                              PRE-UNITPHASE 3
                                         PHASE12PHASETP
                                                   LINDAJANICE
                                                                                              HELENCAROL
                                                                                                                                        PHASE12PHASE
                                                                                                                                                PRE-UNITPHASE 3TP

                                                                                                                                                          TP
                                                                                                                                                            TP

                                                                                                                       2 PHASEPHASE1

                                                                                                                                TPPHASE 3PRE-UNIT
                                                                                                                 TPTPTP
                                                            TP                                                    TP
                                                  TP                    PHASE 3       PHASE 1       PRE-UNIT
                                                       PHASE 2                                                         PHASE  1

                                                              POST-UNIT                                    POST-UNIT

                                                              POST-UNIT                                    POST-UNIT

                                                                    Figure 2. Transformation Model

REFERENCES
Aronson, Daniel. (2003). Targeted Innovation: Using systems thinking to increase the benefits of innovation
     efforts. R & D Innovator. (6.2).
Bakhtin, M. M. (1982). The dialogic imagination: Four essays. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Banathy, B. (1991). Systems design of education: A journey to create the future. Englewood Cliffs, N.J:
     Educational Technology Publications.
Barab, S. A., Hay, K. E., Yamagata-Lynch, L. C. (2001). Constructing networks of activity: An in-situ research
     methodology. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 63-112.
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. New Jersey. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bruce, B.C., & Peyton, J.K. (1990). A new writing environment and an old culture: A situated evaluation of
     computer networking to teach writing. Interactive Learning Environments,1, 171­191.
Bruce, B.C., Peyton, J.K., & Batson, T.W. (1993). Network-based classrooms: Promises and realities. New
     York: Cambridge University Press.
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cole, M., & Engeström, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Salomon (Ed.),
     Distributed cognition: Psychological and educational considerations. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
     University Press.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.
     Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.
Engeström, Y., Miettinen, R., & Punamaki, R. (Eds.). (1999). Perspectives on activity theory. Cambridge, U.K.:
     Cambridge University Press.

                                                                                   
Fraenkel, J.R., & Wallen, N.E. (1996). How to design and evaluate research in education. NY: McGraw-Hill,
     Inc.
Hall, G.E., Wallace, R.C., & Dossett, W.A. (1973). A developmental conceptualization of the adoption process
     within educational institutions, Austin, TX: Research and Development Center for Teacher Education,
     The University of Texas.
Il'enkov, E. V. (1977). Dialectical logic: Essays in its history and theory. Moscow: Progress.
Jonassen, D. H. (2000). Toward a design theory of problem solving. Educational Technology Research and
     Development, 48(4), 63-85.
Kärkkäinen, M. (1999). A longitudinal study of planning and implementing curriculum units in elementary
     school teacher teams. Retrieved March 3, 2002, from University of Helsinki, eThesis: Electronic
     Publications at University of Helsinki: http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/english.html.
Korthagen, F. (1993). Two modes of reflection. Teacher and Teacher Education, 9(3), 317-326.
Lave, J.,Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
     University Press.
Lieberman, A., & Grolnick, M. (1997). Networks, reform and the professional development of teachers. In A.
     Hargreaves (Ed.), 1997 ASCD Yearbook: Rethinking Educational Change with Heart and Mind (pp. 192­
     215). Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations (4th ed.). NY: The Free Press.
Salomon, G. (1993). No distribution without individuals' cognition: A dynamic interactional view. In G.
     Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations. NY: Cambridge
     University Press.
Savery, J. R., & Duffy, T. M. (1996). Problem based learning: An instructional model and its constructivist
     framework. Educational Technology, 35(5), 31-38.
Schank, R. C. (1994). Goal-based scenarios. In R. C. S. a. E. Langer (Ed.), Beliefs, reasoning, and decision
     making: Psycho-logic in honor of Bob Abelson. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schoenfeld, A. (1999). Looking towards the 21st Century: Challenges of educational theory and practice.
     Educational Researcher, 28(7), 4-14.
Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Shulman, L. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2), 4-
     14.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in Society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
     Harvard University Press.
Wells, G. (1999). The complementary contributions of Halliday and Vygotsky to a "language-based theory of
     learning". In G. Wells (Ed.), Dialogic Inquiry: Toward a practice and theory of education. (pp 3-50).
     Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Wertsch, J. (1998). Mind as action. NY: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, B., Sherry, L., Dobrovolny, J., Batty, M., & Ryder, M. (2001). Adoption of learning technologies in
     schools and universities. In H.H. Adelsberger, B. Collis, & J.M. Pawlowski (Eds.), Handbook of
     Information Technologies for Education & Training. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Wilson, Edward O. (1998). Consilience: The unity of knowledge. New York. Alfred A. Knopf.

                                                   
