Problem-Based Learning Online: Multiple Perspectives
            on Collaborative Knowledge Construction

            Ellina Chernobilsky, Anandi Nagarajan and Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver
            Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1183
       ellinac@eden.rutgers.edu, annagara@eden.rutgers.edu, chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu

        Abstract.    Online   problem-based   learning    (PBL)    environments   afford many    opportunities to
        engage in collaborative knowledge construction. Activity theory is a suitable framework to study
        such environments and the processes learners go through when using these environments. Two
        complementary perspectives are blended in this paper in an attempt to create a comprehensive
        picture of learning using an online PBL system. One perspective is the detailed analysis of tool
        use   and  discourse   students and   facilitator engage    in. The    second   perspective is facilitator
        reflections   about    the  evolution    of  the   group's   collaborative    practices  and   norms.

        Keywords: Problem-based learning, online learning, collaboration

 INTRODUCTION
 Problem-based    learning  (PBL)   is  inherently  collaborative   (Barrows,   2000;   Hmelo-Silver,  2004).  In  PBL,
 students   work  in small  groups    with the   guidance  of   a  facilitator learning through  solving  problems   and
 reflecting on their experience.    Moving PBL online can provide scaffolding to further support collaborative
 knowledge construction. Collaboration allows learners to share ideas and develop new, authentic solutions to
 problems they are trying to solve, and, while doing so, acquire useful knowledge of theories and concepts
 (Hmelo-Silver,   2004;   Palincsar &   Herrenkohl,   1999),    In PBL,  students   collaborate  on complex    problems,
 thereby distributing the cognitive load among group members as well as taking advantage of the distributed
 expertise within the group (Pea, 1993). Exchanging information is an important part of learning together as
 knowledge is constructed socially through joint efforts towards common objectives. As some would argue, the
 very essence of collaboration is the construction of shared meaning (Roschelle, 1996).          From this sociocultural
 perspective, as learners participate in activities, they internalize what they have learned from working together
 (Palincsar & Herrenkohl, 1999; Vygotsky, 1978).
            This view of learning also accounts for the important role of tools and discourse in mediating learning.
 In particular,  activity theory   serves  as  a framework    for   understanding   how   learning  occurs  in complex
 environments (Engeström & Miettinen, 1999). Each activity is composed of a subject, an object, mediating
 artifacts, community     and  division of   labor  and  rules.   Two   basic  processes are found    in any   activity ­
 internalization, a process of shifting the material from the social plane to an individual and, externalization, a
 process of joint construction of an understanding of an activity, which is characterized by a movement of
 material   from a  person  to the  social   environment  (Valsiner,    1997;   Engeström  & Miettinen,   1999).   These
 processes are complementary and intertwined, and help move the knowledge between the individual and one's
 social environment. In our work, we have moved PBL to an online eSTEP system that provides a number of
 tools to support individuals and groups as they engage in instructional redesign activities (Derry, in press).         In
 addition, a facilitator works with the group to help guide their learning process.      One of our goals of this paper
 is to understand    how  the  online  tools and facilitation   mediate  these   transformations as students   engage   in
 collaborative knowledge construction.       Because learning in this environment is multifaceted, we take the view
 that multiple methodologies are needed.
            In this paper, we examine two perspectives on collaborative knowledge construction as preservice
 teachers engage in an online problem-based learning activity. One perspective is a detailed analysis of online
 collaborative learning through chronologically-oriented representations of discourse and tool-related activity
 (CORDTRA), which allows us to look in detail at both collaborative discourse and use of various on-line tools
 to mediate this process (Hmelo-Silver & Chernobilsky, 2004). The second perspective includes the reflections
 of a facilitator who tries to understand the role of facilitation in this online problem-based learning environment.
 In introducing the two perspectives we are blending the more fine-grained mixed methods analysis (Hmelo-
 Silver, 2003) with the traditional, ethnographic approach to studying activity systems (e.g. Cole & Engestrom,
 1993).

                                                            
eSTEP      SYSTEM         AND      ACTIVITY          STRUCTURE
eSTEP system is an on-line problem-based learning environment (Derry, in press). The goal of this system is to
provide  preservice teachers  with an opportunity    to engage   with   learning sciences  concepts  while using   video
cases as contexts in collaborative lesson re-design. The system consists of three components that are intended to
mediate student learning. One component is the online learning sciences hypertext, the Knowledge Web (KW).
The second component is a library of video cases that present examples of classroom instruction. These video
cases serve  as the basis  for instruction  as   they   present  opportunities   for discussion   and  improvement    of
instruction depicted in the cases. The video cases are intertwined with the KW. Finally, there is PBL online
student module. It is a collection of tools that scaffold students' online individual and group work following a
PBL format (Hmelo-Silver, 2004). Some of the tools that are presented in this environment include a personal
notebook   where students  record  their initial observations,   a  threaded  discussion  board,  where  students  share
their research  and analysis  of the  video  cases,  and  a   white board    where   the students post  their  proposed
solutions for the lesson redesign. eSTEP is a complex system because learning occurs during a combination of
nine intermingled face-to-face   and online steps.  Additional   details   about the system  can  be found in  Derry, et
al. (this volume) and Hmelo-Silver, et al. (this volume).

                                              Figure 1: STEP activity system

         During  eSTEP   activities, students  interact  and   engage   with  various  parts of the  activity system  as
depicted  in Figure 1. The  objective of  the learning   activity   is to analyze a  videocase  using learning  sciences
concepts and to subsequently apply those concepts to their own instructional design. In the course of this study,
students worked  on  three online  problems.     In the first of these  problems,  the students viewed   a video   of an
inquiry-oriented classroom in which children were engaged in design activities to learn science (Kolodner et al.,
2003).  In this problem, the  students were  asked to   design   an approach  to  assessment.   In the second problem,
the students  watched   two   video  cases. One     showed    a  traditional physics   teacher  who  used  lectures and
demonstrations. The other, contrasting video case, showed a constructivist instructional approach. The students
were asked to help the first teacher adapt some of the techniques the second teacher used in order to improve the
lesson on static electricity.  The third problem    showed    a  video  of a foreign language   teacher who   wanted to
redesign her lesson to meet new foreign language teaching standards.

PARTICIPANTS
The participants included a group of five students and a facilitator who worked together in three online PBL
activities. The facilitator had two roles: to assist the students in the PBL process by guiding them through the
steps of the activity through metacognitive guidance (Hmelo-Silver, 2004), and by answering their questions
and guiding them in using the eSTEP tools effectively. The group was part of a larger Educational Psychology
class in a large Northeastern University. This group was among the top two groups in the class performance-
wise. We chose this group and not the other because the first group exhibited consistent performance throughout
the semester. This group, on the contrary, revealed a dramatic evolution in group dynamics, involvement in the
task, and  productivity in face-to-face  and  online    discussions    and development    of redesigns  across the three
online problems they participated in.    Since our primary interest was in learning how tools     mediate  activity and
learning, we felt that this particular group would be better suited for this purpose.

                                                           
CODING      AND      ANALYSIS          OF   ACTIVITY
The discourse of the group was coded for content, collaboration, questioning, complexity, justification, and
monitoring. These categories were  chosen because     they serve   as   indicators  of   cognitive   engagement      (Hmelo-
Silver, 2003). Each category was further broken into subcategories as shown in the examples presented in Table
1. In order to address the issues of complexity, the Bereiter and Scardamalia (1987) scale was adapted. The
adapted scale included three categories: telling, elaborated telling and transforming (Chernobilsky, daCosta &
Hmelo-Silver,  2004).  An utterance  was  coded    as  telling when     students  talked    about  the   concepts    without
elaboration or clear connection to the problem.    Utterances   coded     as elaborated    telling were    those  where    the
students provided more conceptual details but where the connections to the case were not evident. Transforming
utterances  were those where   students provided    deep elaborations        of the   concepts   together    with    coherent
theoretical interpretations and a clear connection to the problem.

Table 1. Examples of coding categories.
                 Category                 Example
Content        Task-related utterances    I  recommend     that   you   spend   a bit more   time    on  discussing     EACH
                                          proposal and then vote let's say late afternoon on Tuesday.
               Tool-related utterances    Frank and I decided instant messenger may be useful for discussing
                                          comprised info and ideas.
               Concept-related            Elaborative rehearsal better equips the student with the information he
               utterances                 is rehearsing    because     it becomes     more   accessible    in his  long    term
                                          memory he has found ways to relate it to other instances and in his
                                          own words and he can help          his  peers  understand   it on   a more    simple
                                          level.
               Personal talk              Hey,   I just wanted    to let  everyone    know   that  I will  might   be   a  little
                                          late logging    in on   Monday     morning.     I will be   in  Connecticut      until
                                          early Monday morning.
Collaboration  New Ideas                  Peer assessment      done    by each    student  in each   group    on  their group
                                          members.
               Modifications              I  don't think   its necessary     to  peer  evaluate    within  the   groups.   We
                                          might    try to give    roles out  within   the   group  to make    sure   that  each
                                          student has a    part in the    experiment   and  is  working    and   not slacking
                                          off.
               Agreement                  I like Mary's proposal for a hypothesis sheet...
               Disagreement               I  don't believe   peer    assessment    should    be  a factor  in   the  student's
                                          grade but it could be done as feedback for both students and teachers
                                          to use.
               Summaries                  What we have so far: Jack ­ teacher beliefs, Beth ­ hands on learning,
                                          Ellen - prior    knowledge use,        Carol   ­  cognitive    flexibility    theory,
                                          Sylvia ­ collaborative learning
               Acknowledgment             I like Mary's proposal for a hypothesis sheet.
Questions      Informational questions    Should   we   meet   before class at    9:15   so  we    can  go over    and    refine
                                          what we have done?
               Explanatory/               What do you mean by self-regulated learning?
               elaborative questions
               Metacognitive questions    What do others of you think?

Complexity     Telling                    direct   instruction:   method of   instruction    for mastery   of    basic  skills,
                                          concepts, strategies, facts, and information. This instruction             is    done
                                          piece by piece rather than all together. ...
               Elaborated telling         Games and     activities   that  students    are  familiar  with    can help    teach
                                          specific facts about       a  country   its  culture,  and   its language.       ... I
                                          thought   Monopoly      would   be  a   good   game   to use.  As   long   as it was
                                          carefully    coded   as to appropriate    linguistic   level   and  maturity     level
                                          suggested for students.
               Transforming               This   idea  supports    our    objective   of  "Transfer   knowledge      of   static
                                          electricity to everyday examples" And so both motivation and transfer
                                          can be achieved through Authentic Instruction, two characteristics of
                                          which    are  Students'    work    has   value    beyond     the school     setting.
                                          Lessons become more authentic as the connection              to  the  real world     is
                                          increased.    ...  Thus,     one   (authentic)    activity   would     be   a    field
                                          experience (trip) to a     lab, power   plant,  etc.,  which   would    should   real

                                                         
                                               world use and is social.
Justifications  Personal experience/           I think  a good   assessment    is to have  each  student   do  a mini  science
                belief                         project based on static electricity, which        I  think   would    encourage
                                               students to think more and to not just concentrate on a grade.
                Grounded beliefs               According to Sociocultural theory, "to capture a student's motivation,
                (clearly evidence   based)     the culture    of school   must    find  a way    to  be   valuable,   relevant,
                                               interesting, and challenging     in the  eyes  of  a  child.   This  may   mean
                                               engaging   the  students  in  authentic  activities  of the  larger  society. It
                                               also means challenging them        with  tasks   that  are meaningful     to the
                                               larger  culture  and  are relevant    to their lives  outside   of  the   school
                                               environment." ...
Monitoring      Individual monitoring          I have made a summary about the stuff I got from the knowledge web
                                               that i posted as well as my research        and    printed  it  out  so we   can
                                               attach it to our sticky paper on Thursday.
                Group monitoring               Ok, so   I think  we  need   to revise or  come   to  a concensus    about   how
                                               we want to word our final proposals.
                Self-directed learning         I will research metacognition.
                                               I still need to look up the concept of "self-directed learning"
                Planning                       Let's meet on Monday after class to talk about our gallery walk.
                (other than SDL)

         During   the  activity, students   used   several  eSTEP    tools,  including    PBL-online,     KW     and  research
library, video cases, whiteboards and discussion boards, online help, personal notebooks and lesson plans. The
whiteboard  served   as the  editable solution   space, where    students could   post  and  edit  their solution   proposals
during and after discussions.
         To  make    sense   of our data,  we  used   CORDTRA        diagrams,    a  methodology     adapted    from   Luckin
(2003).  CORDTRA is a tool       that allows   us  to examine relationships     between the    various   parts of  an  activity
system, particularly between the students, the discourse they engage in while collaborating, the tools they are
using to solve the problem, and the artifacts they produce. An advantage of CORDTRA diagrams is that they
can include    as many    or as  few   coding    categories  and  tools   as   needed   (Chernobilsky,     Hmelo-Silver     &
DelMarcelle, 2003).    Here, we include the various     tools  that the students    used, the  particular  speakers,   and  the
coded utterances.
         To  understand   the   CORDTRA       diagrams    (Figures 2 ­   4) it is  important   to   know   that  the  data  are
arranged in chronological order. At the bottom of each diagram, there is a running count of lines of codes. Each
code is either a tool that a student used or an utterance. For example, in Problem 1, the lines from zero to 200
are showing that the students in the group are mainly involved with the PBL online student module. They are
also watching the video and looking into KW. There is some use of "Lesson Plans" tool as well. The tools,
discourse categories and speakers are listed on the right of the diagram next to a corresponding string of codes.
On the bottom of each diagram the arrows indicate when a certain step was begun by one of the group members.
Although we marked the beginnings of each step, these are not the absolute ends of the prior steps ­ students
are free to move   between   the step  they are  currently  working   on  and   the  previous   steps  of  the  activity.  For
example, in problem 1 some students are still visiting steps 1 and 2 as late as line 883.

RESULTS
We  present  our  results in two  parts.  First,  we  present   the  main   results  of our   coding   through   CORDTRA
diagrams  that show   how    the group's  pattern  of discourse   and tool   use  changed   as  they   worked    on  the three
problems.   Second, we    present the reflections of the facilitator based on her course journals.

CORDTRA
The CORDTRA diagrams are presented in Figures 2 through 4. Our analysis demonstrated that the group had a
very different pattern  of   interaction  from   problem    to   problem.   In  Problem    1  the   group   showed     limited
collaboration (see Figure 2). The facilitator and one student (Jahnvi) were most active during this problem. One
student did not participate at all. The participating four students had at least 3 utterances each. However, the
quality of their discourse was low.       For  example,   CORDTRA       diagram    shows   that  14   questions were asked
during  Problem   1. Ten   of   these questions   were  explanation   questions,     with eight   out  of ten  asked   by   the
facilitator. There were very few new ideas (eight) and even fewer modifications (five). Looking at the discourse
as depicted by    CORDTRA,       we   see that students   do  not   have any   agreements    or  disagreements     during   the
discussions, and throughout working on Problem 1, gave each other only three acknowledgements. This pattern
of interaction suggests that although all students were online, they did not collaborate in solving the problem,
but rather worked in parallel. This finding is supported by the fact that very few explanations and justifications
(i.e., personal or grounded beliefs) were given during Problem 1.

                                                             
Codes
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Facilitator
                                                                                                                                                                                                CHS
      40                                                                                                                                                                                        Michelle
                                                                                                                                                                                                Heather
                                                                                                                                                                                                Betty
                                                                                                                                                                                                Jahnvi
                                                                                                                                                                                                Mark
      35
                                                                                                                                                                                                Self-directed learning
                                                                                                                                                                                                Group monitoring
                                                                                                                                                                                                Individual monitoring
                                                                                                                                                                                                Grounded beliefs
      30                                                                                                                                                                                        Personal beliefs
                                                                                                                                                                                                Elaborations
                                                                                                                                                                                                Explanations
                                                                                                                                                                                                Transforming
      25                                                                                                                                                                                        Elaborated telling
                                                                                                                                                                                                Telling
                                                                                                                                                                                                Acknowledgement
                                                                                                                                                                                                Summary
                                                                                                                                                                                                Disagreement
      20                                                                                                                                                                                        Agreement
                                                                                                                                                                                                Modifications
                                                                                                                                                                                                New ideas
                                                                                                                                                                                                Metacognitive ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                Explanation ?
      15                                                                                                                                                                                        Information ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                Personal
                                                                                                                                                                                                Concept
                                                                                                                                                                                                Tool
                                                                                                                                                                                                Task
      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                Lesson Plans
                                                                                                                                                                                                Help
                                                                                                                                                                                                Research library
                                                                                                                                                                                                White board
       5                                                                                                                                                                                        Discussion boardNotebook
                                                                                                                                                                                                KW
                                                                                                                                                                                                Video
                                                                                                                                                                                                PBL
       0
          0            200                    400                     600               800            1000          1200                                 1400           1600           1800
 Steps 1 and 2            Step 3                         Step 5      Step 6Step 4              lines                                 Steps 7, 8 and 9

                                                                Figure 2: Problem 1 CORDTRA

               The  pattern           of  tool            use     in Problem        1 is     also       of interest. The                              most frequently   used      tools      were                the
discussion and white board. However, at the same time, there was little discussed. This suggests that although
students went on to see what was happening in the common tools area, they preferred to watch, not participate.
It is interesting to note that the KW was rarely consulted. The students seemed to supplement the use of KW
with        the use of            research library, another eSTEP                              tool that      provides     various references and links                                               to         the
information outside of KW and eSTEP. Students spent a lot of time viewing the video prior to discussion and
continued to use it during and to some extent even after the discussion.
               In Problem 2, the pattern of tool use changed                                         (Figure 3). Students viewed the                               video       intensively              at       the
beginning of Problem 2, just like they did in Problem 1. However, once the discussion started, the students did
not      use   the video            until the           end      of  the       problem.     The      use   of the  KW     was                             also different.     While  it      was                very
dispersed       in  Problem            1,            in Problem             2, students     used     the   KW   specifically                           when     working       on  steps      4        and        5,
which are the research steps. At the same time, they were talking and discussing some concepts. This indicates
that     in  Problem              2 there is            a beginning            of a reciprocal       relation   between                               the use  of tools       and discourse.                    The
pattern of interaction and the quality of the discourse was also drastically different in Problem 2 as compared to
Problem 1. Everyone actively participated ­ all students and the facilitator asked a lot of questions. Students
brought in new ideas, and modified these ideas extensively, initially on the discussion board, and later on the
group whiteboard. There were still no disagreements, but students did acknowledge each other much more than
in    the   previous             problem             and  explicitly           agreed about          what   they  were    discussing.                           While   students      worked                     on
Problem 2, four summaries were posted, three by a single student. We see the use of summaries as an important
sign     of    an  emergent           successful                 collaboration.       It     appears       that summaries                              help    students see      what   they                    have
achieved and assist them in setting further group goals that otherwise maybe difficult for the group to negotiate.
In     fact,   CORDTRA               shows              that     a  lot      of monitoring           is  going  on,  especially                            group   monitoring        by      both                the
facilitator and the group members. Students also provided a greater number of justifications, although most of
them were not evidence-based.
               The pattern of interaction again changed in Problem 3 (see Figure 4). This was the last problem of the
semester       and students were                        simultaneously             preparing         for the  "end of     the                         semester"   mastery      test. CORDTRA
thus reveals that the use of the tools continued long after the problem was finished (approximately line 1300).
Although students continued to visit the discussion board at the end of the problem, there was nothing posted.
This     suggests    that           students            continued            using  the     information       that   had   been                           posted  on  the      discussion               board,
along with other tools, as a resource in preparation for the mastery test.                                                 CORDTRA also shows that                                    the             pattern
of KW and video use was different. This time students did not use video while talking. Instead the use of the
KW increased. This suggests that students better understood when and why they were to use KW in order to
improve        the quality           of   their           arguments.           Again, the     facilitator     and  students                            in  the  group   were      asking            a   lot      of
questions, and the students brought in a lot of new ideas, modifications and explanations about their points of

                                                                                                     
CodesCodes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Facilitator
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHS
      40                                                                                                                                                                                                         Michelle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Heather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Betty
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jahnvi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mark
      35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Self-directed learning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Group monitoring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Individual monitoring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Grounded beliefs
      30                                                                                                                                                                                                         Personal beliefs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Elaborations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Explanations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Transforming
      25                                                                                                                                                                                                         Elaborated telling
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Telling
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Acknowledgement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Summary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Disagreement
      20                                                                                                                                                                                                         Agreement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Modifications
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 New ideas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Metacogntive ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Explanation ?
      15                                                                                                                                                                                                         Information ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Personal talk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Concept
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Task
      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lesson plans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Help
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Research library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 White board
       5                                                                                                                                                                                                         Discussion board
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Notebook
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Video
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PBL
       0
         0                 200                     400            600                       800                    1000              1200                         1400           1600               1800
        Steps 1 and 2                    Step 3                       Step 4                             Step 5                         Step 6             Step 7                                Steps 8 and 9

                                                           Figure 3: Problem 2 CORDTRA

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Facilitator
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CHS
      40                                                                                                                                                                                             Michelle
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Heather
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Betty
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jahnvi
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mark
      35
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Self-directed learning
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Group monitoring
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Individual monitoring
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Grounded beliefs
      30                                                                                                                                                                                             Personal beliefs
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Elaborations
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Explanations
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tansforming
      25                                                                                                                                                                                             Elaborated telling
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Telling
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Acknowledgement
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Summary
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Disagreement
      20                                                                                                                                                                                             Agreement
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Modifications
                                                                                                                                                                                                     New ideas
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Metacognitive ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Explanation ?
      15                                                                                                                                                                                            Information ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Personal talk
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Concept
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tool
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Task
      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lesson Plans
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Help
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Research library
                                                                                                                                                                                                     White board
       5                                                                                                                                                                                            Discussion board
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Notebook
                                                                                                                                                                                                     KW
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Video
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PBL
       0
         0               200                    400          600                   800            1000                  1200                   1400               1600          1800             2000
      Steps 1 and 2    Step 3       Steps 4 and 5                                 Step 6         Step 7          Steps 8 and 9                             Looking at other cases: mastery testpreparation

                                                                             Figure 4: Problem 3 CORDTRA

                                                                                                                     
view.  Together   with    acknowledgements       and  agreements,    there   were   also  some   disagreements     during  the
conversations.   CORDTRA       shows that justifications shifted        from  personal-belief based    to   clearly evidence-
based. The   combination       of these  two   trends   may     mean that    students  were  more  comfortable      in  online
conversation. It may also suggest that the students understood the "rules of the game" that in order to convince
someone that their argument is stronger, merely a strong personal belief may not be enough.
         While the CORDTRA analysis examined the evolution of group collaboration and discourse patterns
from Problem 1 to Problem 3, a look at the individual and group mean scores showed similar trends across the
problems. The mean scores ranged from 9.80 (SD = 1.09) out of 12 possible points for Problem 1 to 10.80
(SD = 0.45) for Problem 2 to 11.00 (SD = 0.00) for Problem 3.               The  group   ranked  second   in the  class on the
final learning outcomes.
         A  synergistic   look    at the collaboration    data  and  the  learning   outcomes    suggests    that  along  with
improving patterns of communication among groups, the group solution also improved in quality. In addition,
each group  member     engaged    in online conversations     to a  greater  extent and  scored   higher  points   by the  last
problem.   Since the primary focus of      this  paper    is on  examining   the  processes  whereby     tools and    activities
mediate learning in a group, making causal attributions for this learning or drawing statistical conclusions is
beyond the scope of this paper.

REFLECTIONS               FROM        THE      FACILITATOR
Most college students are taken by surprise when faced with a course that is mainly anchored in a PBL format
(Hmelo-Silver, 2000). The group chosen for analysis in this study was no different. The second author of this
paper (AN) acted as the facilitator for this group, both in face-to-face discussions and online collaboration, and
maintained a journal documenting the functioning of the group over the semester. In this section, we discuss
some of the insights of AN on how and why the group functioned differently from problem to problem and
how her role changed as well.
         At the first meeting with this group, the apprehension and uncertainty on each student's mind as they
started on their first problem was apparent. The groups worked on two problems face-to-face before using the
online environment for the last three problems. We expected that the first two problems would serve as a good
"warm-up exercise" before the switch to the online set-up. However, in the case of this group, it was not so.
The  group had   barely   started understanding     the   PBL   process and  the switch   to the  online  set-up   completely
threw them off. For the first online problem, there was little demonstration of any online communication and
participation. They tended not to question each other; rather each student posted their research and proposals
without much interaction with other group members. In fact, when AN asked certain questions to try to get the
group discussion going, one of the group members, Jahnvi, responded:
         I understand that     you are   there to help.   However,   I  just try to  clarify anything    that  you  may   have
         missed during our group discussion. I always get nervous that when you ask questions, our group may
         be on  a totally  wrong   path to solving   this problem    or else you would not    be  questioning  it.  Therefore,
         I just try to verify what we're doing is ok.
AN   subsequently responded:
         The reason for my asking you questions is to see whether you can clearly explain what you're referring
         to and can adequately justify it. So take it easy and take my cues as constructive feedback- Whenever
         you go totally on the wrong path, you'll find me spending more time in your group.

         On the first online problem, this group had not completed their group solution and was quite unsure of
what they were supposed to do when asked to present at the class poster session. They were given extra days to
complete their work. The online participation recorded for this group occurred largely after the class deadline,
Even  so,  the  level  of participation   on   the  first online  problem    was  quite   limited compared     with   the next
problem.   This was   probably    because  they  were   still trying to understand    the process  and   expectations   of the
task. The group found it hard to ask and answer questions in the asynchronous environment. Their first solution
was  not   terribly innovative    but    they  did  begin    to see  how    they should   be    tackling  the  problems    and
communicating with each other online.
         When this group moved to the second online problem, they were more than caught up with the other
groups. The sheer embarrassment of not being ready with their presentation at the first problem and being able
to identify why that happened led them to strategize well for the next problem. Understanding the expectations
of the task, the steps essential to meet those expectations, and a more accurate projection of the time and effort
needed to  succeed     at this task  led them    to plan   better  and  expend   the  necessary   effort. All  students   took
ownership of the task, laid out the components of the problem clearly, and planned their group solution after
thoughtful research and prompt communication with one another. In the first problem, AN was trying to get
them to understand the task and model questions they might ask of each other. By the second problem, they
were  doing most    of that, allowing    AN   to ask them     higher-level   questions and   at times  just   stay out  of the
conversation.   For example, in Problem 2, AN was able           to focus  on asking   questions  that   pushed   the students
to consider how different types of instruction affect learning "now that you've listed three types of learning and
the activities and assessments for each, what might be the advantages of using one over the other..how will each

                                                                
type of learning and/or teaching facilitate understanding..."       In fact, one student   in the group  started   asking the
very same questions asked by the facilitator at an earlier discussion. Sometime during the second problem, the
students  were   discussing  the  proposed    activities and  the  need   to  choose   between    them.  Jahnvi     gives the
rationale for why she thinks her idea is worth keeping.          Her use of language shows that she understands the
concepts and that her ideas are based on research evidence. At the end she asks a question inviting other group
members to do the same for their proposals in question:
          Self-explanation   is supported  by research    on explanation    based   learning. Using   real-life examples   is
          supported by example based learning (My research). Also, the               students  must     explain  it to   other
          students using their own words and to study it using other reference materials, which incoporates them
          in active  learning   (Betty's  research). The   assessment    will  meet   the objective  of understanding     the
          concept and also is supported with research on transfer. So do we want to keep it or go with the other
          activity? What is the other activity supported by?
          The  second   problem    was,  by far, the   most  complicated     problem    of the  semester   and     this  group
participated in the online discussion with a strong commitment and motivation to succeed. When they moved
to the third problem, the group had a clear understanding of the task and had a set of strategies that they could
use to  tackle the  given problem.   They   also had   somewhat     defined  roles  wherein   two  students   acted  as  joint
leaders   trying to make   sure   that the group   was   on  task  and   on  target.  Two   other  students   in   the   group
contributed   by identifying    relevant  research and    connecting   previously    learned  information    to  the    current
problem.   Even    the one student   who   didn't  participate   as much    in  the first  problem   started  engaging    and
communicating in the online discussion board. Overall, the group had converged in their collaborative efforts
and worked    together  effectively  and  efficiently. The   two  "leaders"  of  this  group  were   amongst    the top   five
students in the class and the other three also received high grades. A major factor contributing to this group's
success was their motivation and willingness to learn from their mistakes.
          As with the students in the group, the functioning and role of the facilitator changed across the three
online problems. When the group failed to present the group solution at the gallery walk in class, AN held a
private meeting with the group to understand what went wrong. Based on this meeting, it became clear that the
students  did  not  understand  what   was  expected   of them   and how    to  go  about  planning   a group   solution.  In
addition, the group was unskilled at questioning one another and carrying on an online conversation. AN
clarified the task expectations as well as expressed her concern at the limited interest and participation from the
group and offered her help to resolve any conflicts or misunderstandings with the task.            Once the students were
attentive and expressed an interest to rectify the mistakes, AN encouraged and motivated them to work on the
problem   for an additional number of days so that     the group    could come    up  with a  reasonable   solution.    During
the first problem,   AN   spent a  lot of time   providing   words  of   encouragement,    answering    technical   questions
about  the   STEP   site,  and  modeling    different  questions    that could   elicit   reflective answers  and   promote
collaboration.   In her attempt   to make   students   participate  and  make    their thinking   explicit and   visible  she
posted the following comment on the white board in response to one of the proposals: "elaborate on each of
these forms of assessment and relate it to the research. FOr [sic] example, what will a lab report look like and
how will that demosntrate [sic] what students' have understood. What types of assessments do each of the above
mentioned fall under?" Prompt response and feedback to e-mail and online discussions helped the students to
move at a faster pace and develop their group solution. By the second problem, the focus largely shifted from
managing the task to getting the students to think intellectually, find reliable sources of evidence, justify their
proposals  with  appropriate  research,   and continue   with higher-level    reflective  questions.  AN   also    encouraged
disagreements on issues among group members and pointed that disagreeing and debating with evidence was a
useful component to expanding one's thinking. By the last problem, AN spent even less time facilitating the
group as the group discussion was initiated and continued by the students in the group. Overall, the synergistic
effort and commitment of      the group   and the facilitator contributed to     the  success  of the   group   in  this PBL
course.

DISCUSSION
Our analyses demonstrate that group       collaboration   in online  PBL     evolves   and  becomes     more  complex     over
time. Both the evolution of student discourse and use of the video cases change over time. Although the use of
other tools remains relatively unchanged throughout the semester, the use of video as a tool is different in every
problem. It is possible that as students gain more experience with the online PBL course, they get better at
watching   videos   and   noticing  the  details they  initially do  not  pay    attention to. By    noticing   more    details
appropriate  for the   group discussion,   they  eliminate   the  need   to  go  back  and  view  the   video   again   during
discussions. It is also possible that as the semester goes on, the students learn that their focus is not a "video"
per se, but the "problem" that they need to solve and that is presented in the video. Thus, once they are familiar
with the problem they learn to shift their focus from the video to the problem itself.
          The CORDTRA diagrams indicate the dramatic change in the interaction pattern after Problem 1. There
are a few possible explanations for these changes. The reflections of the facilitator indicate that during the first
online problem students were lost and did not realize that active involvement in the problem-solving process
was necessary for successful online collaboration. By failing to solve Problem 1 effectively and on time, the

                                                             
group  was   forced   to re-think  their  performance    and    consider the   reasons  for   doing  poorly.     The   facilitator
continued to show them what was expected of them and made them understand what the task required them to
do. This renewed understanding of the task motivated them to engage with Problem 2 at a different level. The
modeling    of various   questions   provided  by the    facilitator allowed   the   group  to both   ask   a  variety   of good
questions and appropriate some of the necessary language. In addition, data depicted in CORDTRA diagrams
suggests    that the  usage    of tools  (such as    the   KW)   in  subsequent    problems    mediated      student    learning.
CORDTRA shows that as the group's learning progresses, the usage of tools not only shapes the interactions
but is also transformed during the activity.
         One can argue that it is natural that students improved in their performance as the semester progressed.
The improvement in performance may be due to the fact that the students figured out the "rules of the game"
and in  subsequent    problems    knew   exactly  what   to   do and  how.  It is possible,   however,    that   on  top of    this
natural tendency to improve due to the familiarity with the task, in problems 2 and 3, the students put in more
effort, engaged more with the task and as a result saw more value in it. This is corroborated by the reflections of
the facilitator. In addition to increased student effort, the encouragement and support provided by the facilitator
may have contributed to the performance leap between the problems.
         The role of the facilitator, thus, seems to be extremely important in an online learning activity. The
facilitator reflections  help  us see "between    the lines"     of CORDTRA       diagrams    and   help  us  understand     what
indeed happened during the learning process.          For  example,   the  facilitator insights   made   it clear that   much   of
the work on Problem 1 happened after the poster session and that the students needed that opportunity in order
to fully understand the task. The facilitator also helped explain why students kept working online at the end of
Problem 3. This explanation confirms the belief that the task of preparation for the final test was meaningful. It
helped the students master the material by engaging in learning even after the last problem was solved.
         Learning collaboratively, yet asynchronously has specific             challenges.  While    this   group   is a specific
example     of what   the students    go  through    during   the   online  learning,   some   general    approaches     towards
asynchronous discussions can be seen from the example of this group. The facilitator reflections clearly indicate
that the group would not have been successful had they not understood that working online requires a different
level of commitment than face to face meetings. It requires an increased responsibility in being prompt to reply
to other members, increases the dependency on others and on the technology that students are working with. It
also places a    certain responsibility   on  the facilitator.   The facilitator needs   to    recognize    the  importance     of
encouragement for     the  students   and  provide    prompt     feedback.  The   facilitator  also  needs   to   be   patient  in
explaining the importance and function of multiple tools that the system provides.
         The fact that students need to engage in learning the online tools at the same time they are engaged in
learning the   material  may   be of  special challenge    to both   the facilitator and the   group  as    students   experience
additional  cognitive    load. For the  students, there    is a  tension between   learning    to use the   eSTEP      tools   and
engaging in PBL. It is critical that course instructors adequately prepare and support students in working with
the online system and its multiple tools to ease students' transition to the online learning environments.
         Online PBL environments can extend facilitation resources and allow a single facilitator to work with
many groups (Steinkuehler et al., 2002).       This is important in the typical class when one instructor           may   have a
number of groups working at the same time. PBL online allows the facilitator to respond promptly to many
groups  which    is  impossible   in large face   to  face  classes.  Another   advantage   of  online    environments      is the
discussion trace. Such archives become an additional resource that the students can draw upon when forming
their solution to the problem. The availability of the discussion trace also assists the students in monitoring
their progress as it allows students to see what they have already done and what else needs to be accomplished.
         Finally, online learning formats such as eSTEP provide effective scaffolding through tools that help
communicate      the problem-solving     process, elicit   student   articulation, and  provide    hints    about the   kinds   of
concepts that    need to  be explored   (Collins  et  al., 1989;    Hmelo-Silver,    in press).   In the    case of  the eSTEP
system, the steps themselves serve as a scaffolding device that help students know what is coming and what
else needs to be done before the problem is completed. PBL online also allows for the creation of both personal
and group spaces, which are essential for the processes of internalization and externalization. The white board
also triggers externalization by providing each student with a place to not only propose their ideas for solution,
but also comment on each other's proposals. This helps make their thinking visible and open for renegotiation.
         Tools such as CORDTRA provide specific mechanisms for thinking about learning in light of activity
theory. Reflections   provided    by  the facilitator give  an   additional perspective  into   group     and  help    understand
how a   group    engages  in   collaborative  knowledge     construction.   Blending    the two   perspectives      can  help   us
understand how different aspects of an activity system mediate collaborative knowledge construction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was made possible by an NSF ROLE grant # 0107032 to Sharon Derry and Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do  not  necessarily  reflect  the views  of  the  National     Science Foundation.     We    would     like to  thank  Olga
Mastov for helping us with the coding and Mikhail Chernobilsky for his help with proofreading.

                                                                
REFERENCES
Barrows, H. S. (2000). Problem-based learning applied to medical education. Springfield IL: Southern Illinois
       University Press.
Bereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The Psychology of Written Composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989).        Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching
       the crafts of  reading, writing, and mathematics.       In  L. B.   Resnick   (Ed.),  Knowing,    learning, and
       instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chernobilsky E., DaCosta., M.C., & Hmelo-Silver, C.E. (2004). Learning to talk the Educational Psychology
       talk through a problem-based course. Instructional Science, 32(4), 319-356.
Chernobilsky, E., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & DelMarcelle, M. (2003, April). Collaborative Discourse, Tools, and
       Activity in Online  Problem-Based     Learning.    Paper  presented at the  Annual    meeting  of the  American
       Educational Research Association, Chicago IL.
Cole, M.   &  Engeström,   Y.   (1993).   A  cultural-historical approach  to distributed  cognition. In  G.  Salomon
       (Ed.), Distributed Cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 1 ­ 46). New York:
       Cambridge University Press.
Derry, S. (in press). eSTEP   as a   case of theory-based  web   course  design.  In A. M.   O'Donnell,  C.  E. Hmelo-
       Silver & G. Erkens (Eds.), Collaborative reasoning, learning and technology.          Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Derry, S.J., Hmelo-Silver, C.E., Feltovich, J., Nagarajan, A., Chernobilsky, E., and Halfpap, B. (2005).
       Making a mesh of it: A STELLAR approaches to teacher professional development. In D. Suthers and
T.
       D. Koschmann     (Eds.). Computer supported     collaborative learning: The   next ten years!  Mahwah,   NJ:
       Erlbaum.
Engeström, Y. & Miettinen, R. (1999). Introduction. In Engeström, Y., Miettinen, R., Punamäki, R-L. (Eds.),
       Perspectives on activity theory (pp. 1 - 16). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (in press). Design principles for scaffolding technology-based inquiry. O'Donnell, A. M.,
       Hmelo-Silver,    C. E.,   &   Erkens,   G. (Eds.).  Collaborative     reasoning,   learning,   and    technology.
       Mahwah, NJ. Erlbaum.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2000). Knowledge recycling: Crisscrossing the landscape of educational psychology in a
       problem-based learning course for preservice teachers. Journal of Excellence in College Teaching,
       11(2&3), 41-56.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2003). Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction: Multiple methods for integrated
       understanding. Computers and Education, (41), 397-420.
Hmelo-Silver, C.E. (2004).    Problem-based learning:     What   and how  do students learn?  Educational    Psychology
       Review, 16(3), 235-266.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. & Chernobilsky, E. (2004). Understanding collaborative activity systems: The relation of
       tools  and discourse  in mediating    learning. In Y.  Kafai,  W.A.   Sandoval,  N.   Enyedy,  A.S.   Nixon, F.
       Herrera  (Eds.). Proceedings of    the Sixth International  Conference  of the   Learning   Sciences: Embracing
       diversity in the learning sciences (pp. 254 - 261). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hmelo-Sivler, C. E., Derry, S. J., Woods, D., DelMarcelle, M., Chernobilsky, E (2005). From parallel play
       to meshed interaction: The evolution of the eSTEP system. In D. Suthers and T. D. Koschmann (Eds.),
       Computer supported collaborative learning: The next ten years!         Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kolodner, J. L., et al. (2003). Problem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle school science
       classroom: Putting Learning by Design into practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 495-547.
Luckin,   R.  (2003).  Between     the  lines: Documenting       the  multiple   dimensions     of computer-supported
       collaborations. Computers & Education, 41, 379-396.
Palincsar, A. S., & Herrenkohl, L. R. (1999). Designing collaborative contexts: Lessons from three research
       programs. In A. M. O'Donnell & A. King (Eds.), Cognitive Perspectives on Peer Learning (pp. 151-
       178). Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Pea, R.D. (1993).   Practices   of   distributed intelligence  and   designs  for education.    In G. Salomon    (Ed.),
       Distributed Cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations. (pp. 47 ­ 87). NY: Cambridge
       University Press.
Roschelle, J. (1996). Learning by    collaborating:  Convergent    conceptual  change.   In  T. D.  Koschmann    (Ed.),
       CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 209-248). Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Steinkuehler,  C. A., Derry, S.  J., Hmelo-Silver,   C.   E., &  DelMarcelle,  M.    (2002). Cracking the resource  nut
       with distributed problem-based learning in secondary teacher education. Journal of Distance Education,
       23, 23-39.
Valsiner,  J. (1997). Magical    phrases,    human  development      and psychological    ontology.   In Cox    B.  D.,
       Lightfoot,  C.   (Eds.),  Sociogenetic perspectives on        internalization. (pp.   237-256).   Mahwah,   NJ:
       Erlbaum.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

                                                           
