                 Local and Distributed Interaction in a
          Collaborative Knowledge Building Scenario

                  Kurt Rysjedal                                              Barbara Wasson
 Department of Information and Media Science                  Department of Information and Media Science
                    & InterMedia                                                & InterMedia
                University of Bergen                                        University of Bergen
          kurt.rysjedal@intermedia.uib.no                           barbara.wasson@intermedia.uib.no

       Abstract.  The  structure  and   organization of a  learning environment   has    implications for how
       students organize their collaborative interactions and learning activities. Investigating how students
       understand and utilize the collaborative conditions in a learning environment is thus a key issue to
       obtain insight into how to improve the design of such environments. In this paper we identify how
       collaborative knowledge building is produced in distributed and co-located interactions between
       students and discuss how this is related to the design of the learning environment.

       Keywords:    Interaction analysis,  distributed collaborative  learning, inquiry  learning, knowledge
       building.

INTRODUCTION
In the DoCTA project (Design and Use of Collaborative Telelearning Artefacts) the focus is on the design and
use of technological  artefacts  to support collaborative  learning   in distributed settings (Wasson,    Guribye, &
Mørch, 2000; Wasson & Ludvigsen, 2003). One of the most important goals of DoCTA is to develop knowledge
about how to create a good learning environment for students with the help of information and communication
technologies (ICT). A central aspect of such creation is how students work, both individually and collaboratively
in a discipline. As part of DoCTA we have organised a number of different field trials and design experiments
where students have been working together in different virtual learning environments. In this paper we will report
from  our last  scenario, genetikk,  where  we    investigated how   the  pedagogical    design of an  ICT-mediated
collaborative learning environment    enables students  to  learn complex   concepts  and   how   they can  go about
discussing these concepts in the broader learning community1.
    In this paper we focus on the structure and organization of a learning environment and how students organize
their collaborative interactions and learning activities within this environment. Structure and organization here
relate to notions of scripts and semi-structured communication interfaces (Dillenbourg, 2002). We believe that
detailed investigations of how students actually collaborate and struggle to enhance their understanding are a key
issue in order to obtain insight into how to improve the design of such learning environments.
    We take a sociocultural perspective on learning and use Interaction Analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) as
our methodological framework. By studying the interaction between collaborating students in detail from an IA
perspective, we can uncover how the students make their evolving understanding visible to each other (Stahl,
2002) and how the artifacts that they use are an integral part of this process. Small groups of students have been
video  recorded  while    collaborating in  front of   the computer    screen.  These    recordings,  combined  with
ethnographic  methods  like participant  observation   and interviews, give a   detailed account  of  how the groups
organised their  work  (Rysjedal,   forthcoming). The   paper  begins with a  description  of the  genetikk scenario,
which forms the basis of this study.    Then one analysis from Rysjedal (forthcoming) is presented. The paper
concludes with a general discussion of the findings and how these are related to design of the scenario.

THE GENETIKK SCENARIO
Design experiments (Brown, 1992) can be seen as intervention in educational practice since the researchers, in
collaboration with teachers, try to change the way student's work (Ludvigsen & Mørch, 2003). In our design

1 There have been many empirical studies carried out on the genetikk scenario (e.g., Arnseth, 2004; Arnseth,
 Ludvigsen, Guribye, & Wasson, 2002; Brændshøy, 2003; Bråten, 2002; Kolstø, 2003; Ludvigsen & Mørch,
 2003; Roness, 2003)

                                                        
experiment we intervened in grade 10 natural science education by introducing an ICT-mediated collaborative
learning scenario     in gene  technology,   genetikk.  In  genetikk  a  cross curriculum   scenario of natural    science,
religion & ethics (KRL) and Norwegian was developed collaboratively between the researchers and teachers and
the learning  goals   related  to  the biological, ethical  and societal aspects   of gene technology.  The   pedagogical
approach  was     progressive   inquiry  learning  (Muukkonen,      Hakkarainen,   &  Lakkala,  1999)   and  a web-based
groupware system, FLE3, that supports this model was used as the main learning technology.               Students in two
classes collaborated in both co-located (within groups in a class) and distributed (between groups in two different
Norwegian     cities) settings  to share   and discuss  ideas and   arguments  around   scientific and  ethical   questions
related to gene technology. In this section we elaborate on the design rationale behind the scenario by detailing
the pedagogical approach and the didactic design and then introduce the technological environment and describe
the deployment of the scenario.

Pedagogical Approach and Didactic design
Progressive inquiry learning is an approach to collaborative knowledge building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996)
where students engage in an research-like process to gain understanding of a knowledge domain by generating
their own problems, proposing tentative hypotheses and searching for deepening knowledge collaboratively. As a
starting point for progressive inquiry learning, a context and the goal for a study project needs to be established
in order for  the  students   to  understand   why  the topic is worthwhile    investigating. Then  the instructor  or the
students present   their  research   problems/questions    that define  the directions  where  the inquiry  goes.   As the
inquiry  cycle proceeds,   more    refined  questions  will emerge.  Focusing   on  the research problems,    the  students
construct their working theories, hypotheses, and interpretations based on their background knowledge and their
research. Then the students assess strengths and weaknesses of different explanations and identify contradictions
and gaps of knowledge. To refine the explanation, fill in the knowledge gaps and provide deeper explanation, the
students have to do research and acquire new information on the related topics, which may result in new working
theories. In so doing, the students move step by step toward building up knowledge to answer the initial question.
The role of the teachers is to be a facilitator for the students. The teachers can stimulate self-regulation by the
students by giving comments and advice, both within the classroom and in the online environment
    The didactic design was inspired by the progressive inquiry approach to knowledge building and has elements
of a script as defined by Dillenbourg (2002). Animated by a trigger video2 to set the context and supported by the
structure and resources in the learning environment, the students themselves will identify problems on which to
work, decide   where     they wanted    to search  for information,  participate in   inquiry learning cycles  and  create
newspaper articles. We developed a set of activities with instructions which included assignments related to the
inquiry learning cycle (e.g., generate scientific and ethical questions about gene technology; engage in inquiry
about selected questions, compose scientific explanations, etc.) and products related to expressions of what they
have learned (scientific and ethical questions, science questions for use on a test, write individual and collaborate
texts on opinions about an argument or a discussion about a scientific or ethical question to be published in the
national school newspaper).

The digital learning environment
A web portal was designed in order to provide the students with a shared online space. From this portal the
students had access to various learning resources, collaboration tools, and a tool for Internet publishing called
Skoleavisa (an online newspaper generator available for all schools in Norway). Among the learning resources
they could    find an    online   text book  (previously    written by  2 of   the  DoCTA     researchers), a  Norwegian
encyclopaedia, animations, a newspaper database called Atekst and some selected links to external resources on
the Internet.
    The  main  tool   for collaboration    was Future   Learning  Environment    3,   FLE3 (http://fle3.uiah.fi). FLE33 is
designed to support collaborative knowledge building and progressive inquiry learning (Muukkonen et al., 1999).
To  support   the collaborative    inquiry learning process,  FLE3   provides  several  modules,   such as  a  WebTop,  a
Knowledge Building module, and an Administration module. The Web Top provides each group with a place
where they can store and share digital material with other groups. An automatically generated message that tells
what has happened since the last time they visited FLE3 also appears here.            The Knowledge Building module is
considered to be the scaffolding module for progressive inquiry and it can be seen as what Dillenbourg (2002)

2 We edited a Norwegian National Broadcasting Corporation (NRK) documentary on gene technology to 4 5-
  minute segments, each presenting a different theme within genetic technology.
3  FLE3  was   developed    by   the Learning  Environments     for Progressive  Inquiry Research   Group   at  the UIAH
  Media Lab, University of Art and Design Helsinki in cooperation with the Centre for Research on Networked
  Learning and Knowledge Building, Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki.

                                                            
calls a semi-structured communication interface. It is a shared database where the students can publish problem
statements or research questions, and engage in knowledge building dialogues around these problems by posting
their messages to the common workspace according to predefined categories which structure the dialogue. These
categories are defined to reflect the different phases in the progressive inquiry process and included: Question,
Our explanation, Scientific explanation, Summary, Comment and Process Comment. We added a digital assistant
to FLE3 (Chen & Wasson, 2003) to support both the students and teachers in monitoring what happened inside
FLE3 (Dragsnes, Chen, & Baggetun, 2002). All messages are visible as lists of messages which can be sorted by
topic  (thread), person,   category and  date.    In addition   to FLE3,    a   combined  chat  and   mind   mapping   tool
(Dragsnes,    2003)   was  developed    and   made   available  for   the  students to    add  support   for   synchronous
communication.

Deployment
Genetikk took place over 31 hours during the three last weeks of September 2002, and involved two grade 10
classes, one from Bergen (24 students) and one from Oslo (27 students).            Five of the 31 hours were concurrent
(i.e., both  classes worked  on genetikk   at  the same  time)  and   synchronous    communication      was  possible. The
scenario began with each class viewing the trigger video on genetic technology. Then the students brainstormed
about questions related to genetic technology. This brainstorming session generated a long list of questions from
the two   classes, and the teachers  used   these  questions in order   to  make   one  single  list of questions with  12
scientific  questions and  12  ethical questions   about genetics.  This   list of questions  was    published on the  web
portal.
    The two classes were then divided into local groups with 3 or 4 members, and each of the local groups in
Bergen was connected to a local group in Oslo to form a composed group. The scenario had two phases, and in
the first phase the composed groups discussed the list of questions and decided on three scientific questions to
work   on.   These questions  were  posted  as problem-statements      in  FLE3    before they  started to search for  and
discuss information around their questions. Whenever they found something relevant, they could post it as a note
in the Knowledge Building module in FLE3. After having explored the questions for about a week the students
should use the information they had gathered in order to write at least three different articles about genetics.
These articles were published in Skoleavisa, the online newspaper generator.
    In the second phase of the scenario the focus was turned to the ethical aspects of gene technology. The list of
questions was revisited, and this time the composed groups should decide on 3 ethical questions on which they
wanted    to work.   The same  inquiry  process    was repeated    in this phase,  with   about one   week   of inquiry of
questions before publishing articles in Skoleavisa. It was believed that focusing on scientific aspects before they
turned to the ethical aspects would increase the students' abilities to argue on their ethical viewpoints. By the end
of the project 60 articles were published in the online newspaper and every group had contributed with articles.
Some of the groups, however, produced more articles than others. One of the composed groups had published 13
articles, while another group had published 7 articles.

Research procedure
The authors participated in the didactic design, the design of the digital learning environment and in observations
and data collection during the scenario deployment.       In both schools, the field activities were observed4 by at
least 1 researcher and one person from the technical staff.        In this paper we use empirical data collected from
following a distributed group we refer to as Composed A. Composed A comprises one local group from Bergen
(Bergen A) and one local group from Oslo (Oslo A). Bergen A and Oslo A were video recorded while they were
working on genetikk. These recordings, synchronized with logs of their computer activity and a screencam of
their interactions in the environment, give a rather detailed representation of how Bergen A and Oslo A were
working and interacting. A content log of all the recordings gives an overview of how the group organised their
work, and episodes that were considered particularly interesting have been transcribed according to transcription
conventions described in Silvermann (1997) and translated from Norwegian to English. Furthermore, all their
postings in FLE3 are stored on CD-rom and as printouts and group interviews were also carried out after the
project period (see Roness, 2003).     Articles and inquiries within other groups have only been briefly analysed in
order  to  make  sure that the work    within Composed    A  is not   noticeable   different from the   work   within other
groups.

4 The authors of this paper observed the students in Bergen and had daily contact with researchers observing the
 students in Oslo.

                                                          
DISTRIBUTED AND LOCAL KNOWLEDGE BUILDING
Investigation of the notes in the Knowledge Building Module of FLE3 revealed that apart from the negotiations
of which questions to select for inquiry, there had been minimal interaction between the local groups. Composed
A collaboratively selected three Scientific and three Ethical questions on which they wanted to work (they were
to work on each set of questions for one week). For each of the six questions the students created a separate
thread in the Knowledge Building module where they were supposed to engage in collaborative inquiry of the
questions. They   were   to post  their own     explanations,     post scientific explanations  they found             in different
resources, comment on each other entries, follow up with new questions, etc. As table 1 shows, there were only
two threads with more than four notes. Thus, the students did not use the Knowledge Building module and the
categories as intended in order to support the progressive inquiry model. For more detailed analyses about the
students' use of the categories in FLE3, see Ludvigsen & Mørch (2003) and Arnseth (2004).

       Table 1: Number of notes posted within each category in the Knowledge Building module of FLE3

                                                        Scientific phase            Ethical phase
                  Category                            SQ 1       SQ 2  SQ 3     EQ 4    EQ 5    EQ 6
                  Thread
                  Question                              2         3      2        1       1       1
                  Our explanation                                 1      1        3       3       3
                  Scientific explanation                1         2
                  Comment
                  Process-comment                       1         1      3
                  Summary                                         2      3
                  Total                                 4         9      9        4       4       4

Careful examination of the newspaper articles, however, indicated that despite the limited use of the Knowledge
Building   module the  questions   had  been     thoroughly      investigated by  the students (Rysjedal,             forthcoming).
Examinations of how the students actually collaborated to solve their tasks revealed that it was primarily within
the face-to-face interactions going on in front of the computer screen that we could find evidence of students
struggling to enhance their conceptual understanding.
    The extract below is from an episode where the two girls, Gro and Liv, are investigating the question "Can all
kinds of food be genetically modified?". They have decided that in order to be able to answer this question they
first have to find out what gene modification means. Gro is searching for information about this on the Internet
while Liv is reading in an encyclopaedia lying in her lap. Liv finds information in the encyclopaedia that she
thinks explains gene modification, and tries to get Gro's attention by asking if she understands gene modification.

Extract 1
1.    Liv:     Yes, I think I understand it.
2.             (8.0)
3.    Liv:     Do you understand it?
4.    Gro:     What then?
5.    Liv:     This.
6.    Gro:     Yes.
7.    Liv:     What gene modification is?
8.    Gro:     Yes- No.
9.    Liv:     What is it then?
10.   Gro:     Well it is- No.
11.   Liv:     Try then.
12.            (1.5)
13.   Gro:     What gene modification is? Well it is (.) to replace, isn't it. (2.5) No I don't understand it at all.
14.   Liv:     It is modification of an organism's genetic composition by the use of gene and cell technology. ((Liv is
15.            reading from an encyclopedia))
16.   Gro:     So, what are they doing, then?
17.   Liv:     Then they are changing the genetic material.
18.   Gro:     So that (.) No, I don't understand it.
19.            ((Liv is reading silently in the encyclopaedia.))
20.            (7.0)
21.   Liv:     Well, that's what they are doing. (1.5). Well, but that has- How- But what- What connection can that have
22.            with food. (1.0) Then it has to be meat.
23.   Gro:     It has to be meat, doesn't it?

                                                            
24.   Liv:      Well, but when you talked about rice.
25.             (2.0)
26.   Gro:      Ehh. Then we just have to read that rice thing properly.

    This extract   demonstrates    how Liv  encourages           Gro  to   try to  explain  her understanding   of    what gene
modification means (see lines 1-11). Gro seems to have some ideas about what this means, but she has trouble
articulating them and concludes that she does not understand it at all (line 13). Liv reads the explanation from the
encyclopaedia, but Gro maintains that she still does not understand it. The reason is that the explanation Liv read
did not explain what they are doing (see line 16). She thereby argues that in order to get a better understanding of
what gene modification is, they have to find out what is actually done when organisms are gene modified. In
other words, she points out a direction for their further work.
    Liv  turns to    the encyclopaedia again. After        having     looked   in  the encyclopaedia    for seven  seconds  she
questions how the explanation given there can be related to food. She further argues that if this is related to food
it has to be bound to meat. Gro agrees to this argument. They thereby reveal that according to their understanding
it is only animals that can be gene modified. But Liv is also critical to this assumption as she points out that they
have previously come across an article about gene modified rice. Gro's answer to this critique is that they have to
explore the rice article more thoroughly. In this way they identify yet another area they have to explore.
    When Liv encouraged Gro to formulate her own explanation before she introduced the explanation from the
encyclopaedia, she arranged for an opportunity where they could compare the two explanations and identify gaps
or contradictions. They did not explicitly compare the two explanations, but they did evaluate the explanation
from the encyclopaedia by pointing out that it did not explain what they are actually doing. Thus, they identify a
weakness   in  the   explanation  and  an  area they       have    to  explore     further to provide   a   deeper explanation.
Furthermore,   they   related this  explanation  to   their       initial  question  and   concluded  that  according   to their
understanding of the explanation it had to be related to meat. But they also critically evaluate this assumption by
pointing out that they have previously come across information about genetically modified rice.
    The  students    also generated more   specific   questions       during   their investigations  of their initial questions.
These questions were usually related to information that was found or theories that were generated during their
working process. The extract below is from an episode where Gro and Liv are editing a note on their Webtop. As
they are working on this note, Gro introduces a new question about gene modified food.

Extract 2

1.    Gro:     Gene modified food. Is that for example like tomatoes that are huge?
2.    Liv:     Yes, it does not ripen that quickly. (1.0) It keeps longer.
3.             (3.0)
4.    Liv:     Do tomatoes have genes then? ((They look at each other and smile))
5.    Liv:     I have not heard anything about that. Well.
6.             ((Gro starts to read the text in the note again))

    In line 1 Gro is asking if gene modified food can be tomatoes that are huge. Thus, she is trying to relate gene
modified  food  to   something  familiar ­ tomatoes        that   are huge.    Liv confirms   that gene modified   food can  be
tomatoes that are huge, but she also introduce another characteristic ­ that it does not ripen that quickly. That she
mentioned this specific characteristic can be related to the fact that they the previous day found an article on the
Internet about tomatoes that have had an extra gene inserted in order to prevent production of the enzyme that
makes tomatoes ripen. However, in line 4 it is being questioned whether tomatoes really have genes. But this
question is not explored any further. They just look at each other and smile, and Liv proclaims that this is not
something she has heard about (line 5). After that they continue to edit the text in the note.
    Even  though     many  of the questions that were       generated      during   their  investigations were interesting  and
important questions they had a tendency not to be explored any further. The only question (apart from the initial
questions) that they returned to several times was the question about what it really means to genetically modify
food. The rest of the questions just seemed to disappear as they moved their attention to a new activity, such as
editing a Note in FLE3, or reading something on the screen. Nevertheless, one can assume that the questions
affected what information they considered relevant in their exploration of the numerous information sources they
had available.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this study it was found that most of the interaction within the composed group was concerned with which
questions they should choose for inquiry. When the students started to investigate the questions the interaction
within the composed group was greatly reduced. Both local groups complained about lack of feedback from the

                                                                 
other  group,  and whenever    the students     found relevant    information   they   saved   the  information    on  their local
group's   Webtop   instead  of posting    it in  the Knowledge     Building   module.    The    focus  seemed   to   turn from  a
collaborative inquiry of the questions towards local production of articles that they could publish in the online
newspaper. The moderate interaction between the distributed groups can partly be related to the didactical design
of  the scenario.  Although    the teachers     encouraged    the students   to engage      in inquiry  learning   by  using   the
Knowledge     Building  module,    it was    primarily   the  articles in   the newspaper      that the  students    were    made
accountable   for  at the end   of the   project   (Arnseth,  2004).   This   may   suggest    that assessment     methods    that
emphasise process as well as product need to be used and perhaps it would have been better that they not know
about the articles they would produce right from the beginning, but instead introduce them after the inquiry cycle.
    Despite the moderate use of the Knowledge Building module in FLE3, however, the students were engaged in
detailed  investigations  of the questions.     In  many  ways    the face-to-face   interactions   in  front of   the computer
screen  resembled   certain  aspects  of    inquiry  learning  ­  they  tried   to articulate   their  own   explanations,   they
assessed strengths and weaknesses in the explanations, and they searched for information in order to provide
further explanations. The talk in front of the screen was identified as the most important part of the collaborative
knowledge building that took place during the scenario, but it was also found that many important questions and
ideas  that emerged    in face-to-face   interactions    were never    explored    further.  Their  reasoning   and    deepening
explanations became temporal and local, not persistent and shared in the Knowledge Building module, thus the
other local group could not take part in the knowledge building and both groups missed out on the opportunity to
use each others insights and knowledge in furthering their understandings of gene technology.
    While the Knowledge Building module was envisaged to support the students' knowledge building in this
scenario, it was primarily in the face-to-face interactions in front of the screen that we could find evidence of any
kind of knowledge building. Exploring how such local knowledge building can be made more persistent and
shared is seen as an interesting possibility for improvement of the learning environment. An obvious solution
would be to let each student work with a separate computer, and thereby forcing them to communicate through
the digital learning environment. This would probably have increased the interaction within the composed group
and might have resulted in a more distributed collaborative process. It would, however, also remove the fruitful
discussions between the co-located participants. Thus, it remains an open question as to whether such a solution
would be advantageous for the overall learning activity.
    One should never underestimate the role that the institutional dimension plays in such design experiments.
Institutional aspects  influenced     both   the design   and  the  students'   activity.      In the  design   phase  we    were
constrained by the availability of computers in the school in Bergen and thus had to plan for local groups that
would share a computer. The design was also constrained by the curriculum where gene technology was a natural
science  unit of  approximately    15 hours.     We   were,   however,  able    to extend   these   hours  by   creating  a  cross
discipline unit that included their religion & ethics and Norwegian hours during these 3 weeks.                 The result was
that both science and ethical aspects were in focus during the inquiry, and there was an emphasis on writing skills
in the  final product. The   challenges    for  the  students were    many.  They   were    dealing   with both    a new  subject
matter (gene technology) and with a new way of working (inquiry learning) and they had to appropriate a new
technology    (FLE3)  within a  limited   time   frame   and  learn how   to  work   with   another    class in another   school.
There is also some evidence in the empirical data (Rysjedal, forthcoming) that the students were having trouble
with  the "asynchoronous"    nature   of  the  inquiry   process.   They would post a note and then sit and wait for a
response from the matched local group, but the other class might not be logged on until the next day (remember
there were only 5 hours where the classes worked on genetikk simultaneously). This expectation of immediate
response and feedback is ingrained in much traditional classroom behavior, referred to as an initiation-response-
feedback (IRF) pedagogical exchange (Sinclair & Coulthard, 1975) and when they did not receive immediate
response  and   feedback,  this  caused     frustration.  We   did,   however,     see evidence    in  the   local group  of   the
Initiation-Discussion-Response-Feedback          (IDRF)   pedagogical   exchange    Mercer     &   Wegerif   report   on  in their
studies of children's talk in front of computers (Mercer & Wegerif, 1999; Wegerif, 1996).
    Understanding what is going on in ICT supported scenarios is a complex process and a lot of empirical data
needs to be examined in order to make sense of what is going on. In this paper we have given insight into how we
try to understand how the structure and organisation in genetikk has influenced the way the students have worked.
We cannot only look at their interactions within the local and composed group in light of the design of genetikk,
but must    always remember     that  it is  situated in an   institutional setting    that not   only imposes     constraints on
scenario design, but has also influenced student expectations and ways of working over a number of years. How
all these factors can be understood, and how they influence design is a challenge to the CSCL community.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Norwegian National Network for IT-Research and Competence in Education
(ITU) for funding the DoCTA NSS project and Rysjedal's Ph.D stipend, and to the Kaleidoscope Network of

                                                              
Excellence for granting travel support for presentation of this paper. We also thank all the participants in the
DoCTA  project, the teachers and students that   took part in the project, and Frode Guribye   for his      in-depth
comments during the preparation of this paper.

REFERENCES
Arnseth, H. C. (2004). Discourse and artefacts in learning to argue : Analysing the practical management of
     computer supported collaborative learning. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Oslo, Norway.
Arnseth, H. C., Ludvigsen, S., Guribye, F., & Wasson, B. (2002). From Categories of Knowledge Building to
     Trajectories of Participation. Analysing the Social and Rhetorical Organisation of Collaborative
     Learning. Paper presented at the ISCRAT 2002, Amsterdam.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design Experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex
     interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Brændshøy, A. (2003). Knowledge-building in digital learning environments. Masters dissertation, University of
     Oslo, Norway.
Bråten, A. H. (2002). Resource use in a Distributed Collaborative Scenario. Masters dissertation, University of
     Bergen, Norway.
Chen, W., & Wasson, B. (2003). Coordinating Collaborative Knowledge Building. International Journal of
     Computers and Applications, 25(1), 1-10.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
     design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL (pp. 61-91). Heerlen:
     Open Universiteit Nederland.
Dragsnes, S. (2003). Development of a Synchronous, Distributed, and Agent-supported Framework: Exemplified
     by a Mind map Application. Masters dissertation, University of Bergen, Norway.
Dragsnes, S., Chen, W., & Baggetun, R. (2002). A Design approach for Agents in Distributed Work and
     Learning Environments. Paper presented at the ICCE 2002 - International Conference on Computers in
     Education, Auckland, New Zealand.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practice. The Journal of the Learning
     Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Kolstø, S. D. (2003). Et allmenndannende naturfag. Fagets betydning for demokratisk deltagelse. In D. Jorde &
     B. Bungum (Eds.), Naturfagdidaktikk. Perspektiver Forskning Utvikling (pp. 59-85). Oslo: Gyldendal
     Akademisk.
Ludvigsen, S., & Mørch, A. (2003). Categorisation in knowledge building. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U.
     Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for Change in Networked Learning Environments. Proceedings of the 6th
     International Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2003) (pp. 67-76).
     Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Mercer, N., & Wegerif, R. (1999). Is 'exploratory talk' productive talk? In K. Littleton & P. Light (Eds.),
     Learning with computers. Analyzing productive interaction (pp. 79-101). London: Routledge.
Muukkonen, H., Hakkarainen, K., & Lakkala, M. (1999). Collaborative Technology for Facilitating Progressive
     Inquiry: Future Learning Environment Tools. Proceedings of CSCL '99, Stanford University, CA.
Roness, T. E. H. (2003). Koordinering og bruk av læringsressurser i et kollaborativt læringsmiljø. Masters
     dissertation, University of Bergen, Norway.
Rysjedal, K. H. (forthcoming). Structure and Regulation of Interaction in Technology Enhanced Collaborative
     Learning Environments (Working title). Ph. D. dissertation, University of Bergen, Norway.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. In T.
     Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm (pp. 249-268). Hillsdale:
     Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Silverman, D. (1997). Qualitative research : theory, method and practice. London: Sage.
Sinclair, J., & Coulthard, R. M. (1975). Towards an analysis of discourse : the English used by teachers and
     pupils. London: Oxford University Press.
Stahl, G. (2002). The complexity of a collaborative interaction. Paper presented at the International Conference
     of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2002), Seattle, WA.
Wasson, B., Guribye, F., & Mørch, A. (2000). Project DoCTA: Design and use of Collaborative Telelearning
     Artefacts. Oslo: Unipub forlag.
Wasson, B., & Ludvigsen, S. (2003). Designing for knowledge building. Oslo: Network for IT-Research and
     Compentece in Education (ITU), Report nr. 19.
Wegerif, R. (1996). Collaborative learning and directive software. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning,
     12(1), 22-32.

                                                      
