    Supporting Collaborative Discovery Learning by
                                    Presenting a Tool

                  Nadira Saab                                            Wouter van Joolingen
 Graduate School of Teaching and Learning                    Graduate School of Teaching and Learning
           University of Amsterdam                                      University of Amsterdam
               Nadira@ilo.uva.nl                                           Wouter@ilo.uva.nl

Abstract. In collaborative discovery learning students jointly perform experiments to test generated hypotheses
with as a result the co-construction of knowledge by means of sharing knowledge and negotiating. In this study,
we introduce the Collaborative Hypothesis Tool (CHT), which guided 15 of 25 dyads through the collaborative
discovery learning  process.    The results  show    that   working   with the CHT       can influence  the   use  of
communicative   and discovery   activities, which    can lead to a  better learning  performance.     Future research
should be aimed at the stimulation of the use of the tool, since the learners did not use the tool very frequently.

Keywords: Cognitive tools, Collaborative discovery learning, Communication, Discourse analysis,
INTRODUCTION
Collaborative discovery learning combines two constructivist approaches to learning: collaborative learning and
discovery learning. In collaborative discovery learning, learners communicate and work together in order to
jointly construct knowledge by means of sharing knowledge and negotiating. In discovery learning, by altering
the variables and parameters in a simulation and observing the effects, learners can attempt to uncover the rules
governing the simulation, and in so doing, build knowledge (De Jong, & Van Joolingen, 1998; Njoo, & De
Jong, 1993; Njoo, 1994). The skills and processes employed by learners in discovery learning environments are
similar to the skills employed in scientific discovery (Klahr, & Dunbar, 1988; Van Joolingen, & De Jong,
1997). A common distinction in scientific discovery processes is between regulative discovery processes, like
planning  or  monitoring, and   transformative    discovery  processes,  which  represent    the generation   of new
knowledge (De Jong, & Njoo, 1992; Njoo, & De Jong, 1993). Scientists' interactions are important in the
scientific thinking and reasoning process, because many new ideas arise through externalization of thoughts
(Dunbar, 2000). As discovery processes are similar to the scientific processes that scientists use, it can be
assumed that successful discovery learning processes can be positively influenced by learning collaboratively
(Salomon, & Globerson, 1989). Support for the idea that collaborative discovery learning can be fruitful for the
learning process comes from a study carried out by Okada and Simon (1997), where dyads of learners working
together were more effective in discovering rules, because they used more explanatory activities compared to
learners working individually. In a previous study (Saab, Van Joolingen and Van Hout-Wolters, in press), it
was found that communicative activities can contribute to essential stages in a collaborative discovery process.
For example,   directive  and   informative   activities  can  contribute  to  the  testing  of   hypotheses,  while
argumentation can lead to a successful process of conclusion. This leads to the conjecture that when learners are
encouraged to use these communicative activities, a more successful discovery process can be the result.
         In the current study, we are interested in supporting the learning processes in collaborative discovery
environments.  Discovery  processes  need   support   (e.g. De   Jong &   Van  Joolingen,    1998), and although   in
collaborative settings learners can support   each   other, collaborative  discovery learning    also needs  support.
Several studies endorse the view that collaboration without instruction or support on how to collaborate does
not automatically lead to a successful learning process or product (Mercer, 1996; Webb & Farivar, 1994). This
support can be given as an instruction, like the RIDE instruction in a study of Saab, Van Joolingen and Van
Hout-Wolters (submitted), or it can be built into the learning environment as cognitive tools (Lajoie, 1993; Van
Joolingen, 1999).
         Cognitive tools are computer technologies that help learners to carry out cognitive tasks. Learners do
not learn from technologies, but they learn when working with technologies, with the technology as a support to
the cognitive actions of the learners (Salomon, 1993). According to Lajoie (1993), cognitive tools can serve
several functions in assisting learners.
         Collaboration  can improve      learning as shown    by several   studies (e.g. Van   der  Linden,   Erkens,
Schmidt, & Renshaw, 2000; Springer, Stanne, & Donovan, 1999). When working collaboratively, learners
externalize their thoughts and become aware of their own ideas and those of their collaborator. By formulating
their ideas, possible defects in cognitive of metacognitive processes can become perceptible (Van Boxtel, 2000;

                                                         
Van  der  Linden   et  al., 2000).  By  internalizing   these verbalized  thoughts     and  ideas   in an elaborative    way
(Roelofs, Van     der Linden,    &  Erkens,  1999),  by  giving  elaborative  explanations     (Webb,   1994)   and  asking
questions (King, 1997), the learning process will succeed more effectively.
         Examples of cognitive tools to support discovery learning can be found in the learning environment
BioWorld (Lajoie, Lavigne, Guerrera, & Munsie, 2001). BioWorld helps learners with the externalization and
evaluation of their reasoning by presenting them with an evidence palette, where evidence is posted in support
of the hypothesis generated by the learners, and a belief meter, where the learners can show how comfortable
they are with the diagnosis (or hypothesis) stated. The evidence palette is based on the tool that Van Joolingen
and  De   Jong   (1991;  Van     Joolingen,  1993)  developed,    called the  hypothesis    scratchpad.   The    hypothesis
scratchpad   supports   the  process   of   generating  hypotheses    by  presenting    elements    with  which     to   build
hypotheses, like variables and relations.
         In  our  study,  we     introduce a cognitive  tool  that can   also support   collaborative   processes   between
learners. The template offered by the tool should serve as a trigger for collaborative discovery processes. Our
cognitive  tool,  the  Collaborative   Hypothesis    Tool  (CHT),   is  based    on the  hypothesis    scratchpad   of   Van
Joolingen and De Jong (1991; Van Joolingen, 1993). This CHT guides the learners through the processes of
collaborative   discovery.   Moreover,     the learners  are  encouraged      to work   in  a   collaborative   manner    by
stimulating them to argue about what hypotheses they should generate and test. In addition, the learners are
instructed on how they should test their hypotheses by effectively varying certain variables, and to stimulate
them to check if the hypotheses generated are the same as the answer found after doing experiments. We expect
that the learners who work with this tool will show more communicative activities that contribute to successful
collaboration, and more effective discovery activities, which will lead to better learning results, compared to
students who do not use the tool. Our research questions are:

How do the learners use the Collaborative Hypothesis Tool in a collaborative discovery environment?

Does the cognitive tool influence the communicative activities and discovery activities in such a way that the
collaborative learning process and the discovery learning process and product improve?

METHOD
Subjects and design
Research   participants  were    32 dyads   of tenth-grade   students  (15-16    years old) of  six secondary    schools   in
Amsterdam who were enrolled in pre-university education with physics as a subject in their examination. The
mean age was 15.6 years. The design of the study was a pretest-posttest-control-group-design. The students
were randomly divided in an experimental group and a control group. Because of technical reasons (i.e. chat
not completely logged or problems with the connection between the two computers) and one chat log with
utterances  in  a language   other  than   Dutch,  we   had  to exclude  seven    dyads  from   the data  analysis,    which
resulted in an experimental group containing 15 dyads and a control group containing 10 dyads of students.

Learning environment and task
All students    worked   together   with   a   learning environment     that  was   based   on  a   computer    simulation,
"Collisions",  developed    in   SIMQUEST    (Van  Joolingen  &    De Jong    2003; Saab,   et al., in  press)  1. Dyads   of
students  worked   collaboratively   on    two computers   with  a shared   interface,  communicating     through      a chat
channel.  Students    were  not   familiar   with the level   "Collisions",   but were   acquainted    with  the   variables
presented in the environment.
         Before working with the application Collisions, by working with a similar environment, also created
in  SIMQUEST,     all learners   became  familiarized   with  the  learning   environment.    Additional  instructions    on
collaboration (the RIDE rules (Saab, Van Joolingen, Van Hout-Wolters, submitted)) were also provided. RIDE
is based on four general rules, namely Respect, Intelligent collaboration, Deciding together, and Encouraging.
The  aim  of  providing     this instruction is to have   the students   communicating      more    effectively in  order  to
improve the collaborative performance in the learning environment. An earlier study (Saab et al., submitted)
showed that instructing these rules can lead to more effective communication.
         The   learning  environment     Collisions,  with  which   the  learners   worked  after   they had   received   the
instruction and practiced with the rules, was different for the experimental group and the control group. The
experimental group worked with the same application as the control group, but in addition was presented with

1  "Collisions"  was   developed    by Hans    Kingma   and  Koen   Veermans      (Universiteit Twente).    SimQuest     was
  developed in the SERVIVE project coordinated by the Universiteit Twente.

                                                            
a CHT intended to support learners in the generation of hypotheses, planning and concluding. The first process
of discovery learning orientation was paid attention to in the assignments, were learners were stimulated to
explore the  simulation  together. This tool   consisted of a hypothesis  scratchpad,   based on  a similar     tool
described in Van Joolingen (1993). In order to use the tool in a collaborative environment, several adaptations
were made to it.

Measuring learning outcomes
In this experiment, we identified two types of learning outcome. One is associated with the performance within
the learning environment; the other is a measure of what is learned from this performance. For the latter, the
results of a domain knowledge posttest and the gain in score related to the domain knowledge pretest is used as
a measure. For the performance within the learning environment, the students could get three points for each
assignment. All together, the learners could gain 105 points, divided over 35 assignments (17 open-question
assignments and 18 multiple-choice assignments). The multiple-choice assignments were worth 3 points. When
the learners gave an argumentation in addition to the plain answer on the open-question assignments, they
gained one or two points, depending on the completeness of the answer given. The amount of points gained by
a team is taken as a measure of learning results within the learning environment. We label it as SWLE (score
within learning environment). The pretest-posttest measure is taken individually, while SWLE is measured on
dyads. The domain knowledge pretest and posttest each consisted of two domain knowledge tests, an Explicit
Knowledge Test, which tests the learners for declarative knowledge, such as facts and formulas, and a WHAT-
IF Test (Swaak, 1998; Veermans, De Jong, & Van Joolingen, 2000). Both tests were developed specifically for
the domain of Collisions2 and were administered on-screen. Unfortunately, the reliability of these tests were
very low and we did not conduct further analyses.

Procedure
For making up dyads, we chose a heterogeneous group composition (Saab et al, submitted), since research has
shown that groups composed of students with differing levels of school grades are more successful working
together than are groups made up of students with similar learning results (Blatchford, Kutnick, Baines &
Galton, 2003). Participants in the study attended two sessions. In the first session, the participants received
individual instruction on collaboration (the RIDE rules). After the instruction, the students practiced
collaboratively with an application with logical thinking problems. In this way, the students could practice
applying the rules that they had learned earlier in the session. The second session started with the pretest on
domain knowledge for all students. Then, they worked together for 90 minutes with the application Collisions
in the learning environment SIMQUEST, and it ended with the domain knowledge post-tests. The experimental
and control groups worked with different versions of the learning environment, as explained in section
`learning environment and task'.

Data collection
All communicative and discovery learning activities were logged and were put together in a single protocol for
each dyad.  A three-dimensional    analysis scheme   was used to analyze  the protocols.  The  scheme    has    been
developed and used in previous studies (Saab, et al., in press). The dimensions are: a) communicative activities,
b) discovery transformative learning activities, which promote the generation of information (Njoo & De Jong,
1993), and c) discovery regulative learning activities, which support and guide the learning process (Njoo & De
Jong, 1993).
        In the protocols, each chat utterance, defined as a verbalization typed in a chat window, was scored on
the  dimensions   communicative    activities, discovery  transformative  activities, and  discovery    regulative
activities. Chat utterances were coded on all three dimensions. The SIMQUEST action simulation running was
coded only as a discovery transformative activity, collecting data. Two independent raters rated 10% of the
protocols, after both raters were trained in using the analysis scheme. Cohen's kappa of inter-rater reliability
between  the  two raters was .94   for  the  communicative    dimension, .89  for the  transformative    discovery
dimension, and .95 for the regulative discovery dimension, which can be considered as good agreement (Fleiss,
1981).
        Besides the analyses of the protocols, the use of the Collaborative Hypothesis Tool was investigated for
the experimental  group. The  use   of the  CHT   is measured  by the following   variables:  a) The    number   of
hypotheses generated within the tool with each question where the CHT was presented to the learners, b) The

2 Both tests were developed by Janine Swaak.

                                                        
total number of hypotheses generated while using the CHT, c) The proportion of planning activities while using
the CHT, d) The proportion of checking if the answer is the same as one of the hypotheses generated while
working with the CHT, and e) The proportion correctly answered questions after using the CHT. The frequency
of planning and checking if the answer is the same as one of the hypotheses generated while working with the
CHT    is logged   in the  answers    on   the assignments    and  is,  as a consequence,     something   different    than a
communicative or discovery activity logged in the protocols.

RESULTS
First, we   analyzed   the use    of the CHT,     then we   present    the differences   in  learning  results between    the
experimental and the control group, and finally we present the analysis of the learning process.

Collaborative Hypothesis Tool
Relations     between  the  measures     of   CHT   use    and  activities,  including    a  measure    of  asymmetry       in
communication,     were    tested using    Spearman    correlation     analysis. Asymmetry     in communication        is the
difference in the number of utterances between the participants in one team, presented as a percentage of all
utterances of one team. Significant positive correlations were found between the total number of hypotheses
generated in CHT and communicative activities all together (r=.58; p<.05). Significant correlations between
planning in the CHT and Deciding together activities (r=.53; p<.05), and regulative activities overall (r=.54;
p<.05)    are found.  Significant    positive  correlations   were found   between   the    proportion correctly   answered
questions   after using CHT    and   Deciding     together  activities (r=.68;   p<.01), transformative  activities    overall
(r=.58; p<.05), and regulative activities overall (r=.61; p<.05).

Learning results
We   did   not  find  any  significant   differences   between     groups   for  the performance      within   the  learning
environment.

Relation between activities and SWLE for the experimental and control group

To detect which communicative and discovery activities have a positive significant relation with SWLE, we
conducted a Spearman correlation analysis between those variables for the experimental and the control groups.
We also computed the Fisher's Z' scores to compare the correlation of the experimental and control groups.
There   are   several significant    positive  correlations in  the experimental     group:  deciding   together   activities
(r=.62; p<.05), transformative activities overall (r=.55; p<.05), and regulative activities overall (r.53; p<.05)
correlate significantly with SWLE. No significant correlations are found between SWLE and the frequencies of
activities used in the control group. We found significant differences in correlation between the experimental
and  the  control  groups,  with     significantly greater    correlation  coefficients  for the  experimental     group  for
deciding together activities (p<.05) and regulative activities overall (p<.05).

Learning process
No significant differences were found in use of frequency of communicative activities or discovery activities
between the control and the experimental group.

CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
To answer the first research question, we investigated how the collaborating learners used the Collaborative
Hypothesis Tool (CHT) and what activities they performed. The learners were free in choosing to use the tool,
which, unfortunately, resulted in infrequent use of the tool. This indicates that the learners see no obvious
advantage of the collaborative tool. Nevertheless, to see whether the tool contributed to learning in the cases it
was used, we conducted correlational analyses. We found that a higher level of communication was related to
the  number    of  hypotheses  stated    on   the  scratchpad.  The    planning   tool   (indicating  whether   and    how  a
hypothesis should be tested) correlated to communicative activities associated with Deciding together as well as
with   regulation. This   indicates   that the  purpose    of the  planning  indicator   served   its goal, as  it seems    to
stimulate   collaborative  decision   making   and  learners'   regulation   processes.  For  the assignments      for which
learners used the CHT, Deciding together and regulation were positively correlated with the performance on
these assignments. A hypothesis that can be formulated, based on these findings, is that the CHT did induce
effective communicative processes for those learners that used it, and that this yielded better performance on

                                                              
the assignments.  This   is supported    by the   fact that learners  in  the control  group   did  not   show  similar
correlations between performance and communicative and learning processes. These differences in correlations
are significant (Fisher's Z), which means that using the tool could have effects on the learning results.
          We  did not   find  differences   in score   within  the  learning   environment    (SWLE)      between   the
experimental and the control groups, but we did find differences in relations between activities and SWLE for
both groups. The activities that have a positive significant relation with SWLE in the experimental group ­and
notably not in the control group-, are confirmation/acceptance, asking for action (which are both connected to
the Deciding together rule which is one of the RIDE rules), and regulative activities overall. The same activities
have a significant relation with the amount of correctly answered questions after working with the CHT. This
may indicate that these activities, especially communicative activities connected to the Deciding together rule,
were used  more   effectively   by the  experimental   group  and,   moreover,  were   effective for  using    the CHT
combined with correctly answered assignments.
          The hypothesis   that the  use of the   CHT   would  have    an influence  on   the use  of communicative
activities or discovery activities was not confirmed. No significant differences in the use of communicative
activities were found between the group that used the CHT and the control group. Communicative activities
that were mostly used in both groups were informative, elicitative and confimation/acceptance activities, which
is in concordance with Saab et al. (submitted). The experimental group showed a high frequency of use of the
same communicative activities. The experimental group is similar to the control group in the present study,
because both groups received the RIDE rules instructions under the same conditions.
          A likely explanation of the lack of differences between the experimental group and the control group is
the little use that was made of the CHT in the experimental group. As noted above, the learners themselves did
not see obvious benefit in using the CHT. One cause may be that use of the CHT costs time and resources. Also
in a study by Lazonder, Wilhelm, and Ootes (2003) where learners could choose to work with the presented
tool or not, most of the time they did not. Apparently, learners are inclined to use a tool only when they see
direct benefit or when there is pressure to use it. A possible cause of lack of motivation can be the cognitive
overload caused by the many windows that popped up when the CHT was activated. The pop-ups that were
presented  to the control   group  (RIDE    rules pop-ups)   where  in  consistence with   the training   both  groups
received. The CHT was totally new for the experimental group; they did not receive training in how to use the
CHT. An idea for future research is to give the learners an opportunity to practice with the tool beforehand so
that they will know why they should use it, and how they can use it effectively.
          In summary, we found little differences on measures of process and product between the experimental
and control groups. However, within the experimental group we did find relations between working with the
CHT and process and product of learning. It can be concluded that working with the Collaborative Hypothesis
Tool can influence the communicative activities in a way that the collective learning results may improve.
Furthermore,  the CHT    can  influence  both  communicative    and   transformative   discovery   activities, with the
result that working with the tool leads to more performance of simulations, and performance of simulations is
related with giving good answers after working with the tool. Regulative activities seem to be necessary while
working collaboratively with the tool with the aim of generating correct answers or it is possible that the tool
may evoke the use of regulative activities. In future research, when presenting the CHT to learners, they should
be informed about the benefits of the CHT and be trained in the use of the tool before using it in experiments.
Discovery learning needs support and so does collaborative learning. Learners who work in a collaborative
discovery  learning environment     should  now   why   and  how   to  work   with all features  of   the environment
properly, in order to use the presented tools effectively.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The  scholarship  grant  provided    by  Kaleidoscope    has given   me   the opportunity   to  visit the  CSCL2005
conference in Taiwan.

REFERENCES
Blatchford, P., Kutnick, P., Baines, E., & Galton, M. (2003). Toward a social pedagogy of classroom group
    work. International Journal of Educational Research, 39, 153-172.
Boxtel, C. van (2000). Collaborative concept learning. Collaborative learning tasks, student interaction, and
    the learning of physics concepts. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University Utrecht.
de  Jong, T., &   Njoo, M.   (1992). Learning     and  instruction with  computer   simulations:   learning    processes
    involved.  In E.    de  Corte, M.   Linn,  H.  Mandl,    &  L.  Verschaffel    (Eds.) Computer-based       learning
    environments and problem solving.

                                                          
Dunbar, K. (2000). What scientific thinking reveals about the nature of cognition. In Crowley, K., Schunn,
   C.D.,    &  Okada,     T. (Eds.)  Designing    for Science:   Implications  from  Everyday,   Classroom,   and
   Professional Settings. LEA. Hillsdale:NJ.
Fleiss, J.L. (1981). Statistical methods for rates and proportions. NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Jong, T.,  de  & Joolingen,   W.R.  van (1998).   Discovery learning  with  computer     simulations of  conceptual
   domains. Review of Educational Research, 68, 179-201.
Joolingen, W.R. van (1993). Understanding and facilitating discovery learning in computer-based simulation
   environments. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Universiteit Twente.
Joolingen, W.R. van, & Jong, T.de (2003). SimQuest, authoring educational simulations. In: T. Murray, S.
   Blessing, S. Ainsworth: Authoring Tools for Advanced Technology Learning Environments: Toward cost-
   effective adaptive, interactive, and intelligent educational software. pp. 1-31. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Joolingen,  W.R.  van,    1999.  Cognitive  tools for  discovery  learning. International   Journal   of  Artificial
   Intelligence in Education, 10,3-4 (1999), 385-397
Joolingen, W.R., van & Jong, T., de (1991). Characteristics of simulations for instructional settings. Education
   & Computing, 6, 241-262.
Joolingen, W.R., van & Jong, T., de (1997). An extended dual search space model of learning with computer
   simulations. Instructional Science, 25, 307-346.
King, A. (1997). ASK to THINK-TEL WHY®©: A model of transactive peer tutoring for scaffolding higher
   level complex learning. Educational Psychologist, 32, 4, 221-235.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-48.
Lajoie, S.P. (1993). Cognitive tools for enhancing learning. In S. P. Lajoie & S.J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as
   cognitive tools (pp. 261-289). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lajoie, S.P.,  Lavigne,   N.C., Guerrera,  C. &   Munsie,S. (2001).  Constructing    knowledge   in  the context of
   BioWorld. Instructional Science, 29, 2, pp.155-186.
Lazonder, A.W., Wilhelm, P., & Ootes, S.A.W. (2003). Using sentence openers to foster student interaction in
   computer-mediated learning      environments.  Computers & Education,    41,  3, 291-308.
Linden, J. van der, Erkens, G., Schmidt & H., Renshaw, P. (2000). Collaborative Learning. In P.R.J. Simons,
   J. van der Linden and T. Duffy (Eds.), New Learning. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Mercer,  N. (1996). The    quality of talk in children's  collaborative activity in  the classroom.  Learning and
   Instruction, 6, 4, 359-377.
Njoo, M.K.H. (1994). Exploratory learning with a computer simulation: learning processes and instructional
   support. Eindhoven: Technische Universiteit Eindhoven.
Njoo, M.K.H., & Jong, T., de (1993). Exploratory Learning with a Computer Simulation for Control Theory:
   Learning Processes and Instructional Support. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30, 8, 821-844.
Okada, T, & Simon, H.A. (1997). Collaborative Discovery in a Scientific Domain. Cognitive Science, 21, 2,
   109-146.
Roelofs, E., Linden, J., van der & Erkens, G. (1999). Leren in dialoog. Een discussie over samenwerkend leren
   in onderwijs en opleiding. Pedagogische Studiën, 76, 6, 7-34.
Saab, Joolingen,  van   , W.R.,  &  Hout-Wolters,  van   B.H.A.M.   (in press).  Communication    in  collaborative
   discovery learning. British Journal of Educational Psychology.
Saab, Joolingen,  van  ,  W.R.,  &  Hout-Wolters,  van  B.H.A.M.    (submitted). Supporting  communication    in  a
   collaborative discovery learning environment.
Salomon, G. (1993). On the Nature of pedagogic computer tools: The case of the writing partner. In S. P.
   Lajoie & S.J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 179-196). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Salomon,   G., &  Globerson,    T. (1989). When   teams  do not   function the   way they  ought to. International
   Journal of Educational Research, 13, 89-98.
Springer,  L., Stanne,   M.E.,  Donovan,   S.S. (1999).  Effects of small-group   learning  on undergraduates    in
   science, mathematics, engineering, and technology. A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 69,
   21-51
Swaak (1998). What-if, discovery simulations and assessment of intuitive knowledge. Doctoral dissertation,
   University Twente.
Veermans, K.H., Jong, T, de, & Joolingen, W.R., van (2000). Promoting self directed learning in simulation
   based discovery learning environments through intelligent support. Interactive Learning Environments, 8,
   229-255.
Webb, N.M. & Farivar, S. (1994). Promoting helping behavior in cooperative small groups in middle school
   mathematics. American Educational Research Journal, 31,         2, 369-395.
Wegerif, R. (1996). Using computers to help coach exploratory talk across the curriculum. Computers and
   Education, 26, 1-3, 51-60.

                                                         
