             Experiences with Interactive Lectures ­
 Considerations from the Perspective of Educational Psychology
                                         and Computer Science

                        Nicolai Scheele1, Anja Wessels2, Wolfgang Effelsberg1,
                                        Manfred Hofer2 & Stefan Fries2

                            1 Department of Computer Science, University of Mannheim
                                 {scheele,effelsberg}@informatik.uni-mannheim.de
          2 Department of Educational Science II (Pedagogical Psychology), University of Mannheim,
                                        {wessels,hofer,fries}@uni-mannheim.de

       Abstract. The conventional lecture scenario implicates fundamental didactic problems due to a
       lack  of   interactivity and  opportunity   for feedback.  In  an  interactive   lecture, each  student  is
       equipped with a lightweight, mobile device that can be used to wirelessly interact with the lecturer
       during the lesson. This creates an additional channel of communication. In this paper, we present
       our experiences with this new scenario over the last three years. After discussing the benefits of
       interactive lectures,    similar projects, and  possible  mobile   devices, we   introduce  the software-
       toolkit used in our scenario and present a selection of results from over our six major studies.

       Keywords: interactive lectures, ubiquitous computing, wireless communication, blended learning

INTRODUCTION
  In Germany, governmental and scientific institutions (e.g. Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung,
2001; Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, 2002) have launched several programmes to introduce the use of new media into
the system of higher education. These aim to improve the quality and effectiveness of teaching in universities
through the use of multimedia elements. Appropriate new teaching media and learning procedures should help
to achieve a better adjustment to the individual learning needs, learning rates, and time budgets of students, as
well as afford the instructors more flexibility in their teaching.
  But    despite  the   various  multimedia  projects   and  the  efforts on  the  part  of  dedicated    instructors, the
introduction of educational media has led to an only partial modernisation of the universities. This is particularly
evident in the classical university teaching-learning scenario: the lecture. Lectures in universities have profited
from many technical advances over the last few years. Blackboards were replaced by overhead projectors,
which, in turn were substituted by video projectors and electronic whiteboards (Geyer & Effelsberg, 1998).
Most lecture halls nowadays are equipped with computers, as well as video and audio systems, thus allowing the
integration of every possible type of media into the lecture.
  Nonetheless, the basic teaching paradigm continues to remain largely unchanged; one of the few exceptions
is the scenario of the telelecture (e.g. Datta & Ottmann, 2001) or digitally recorded lectures (Zupancic & Horz,
2002).   The main      disadvantage   of  lectures is  their lack  of  interactivity:   Conventional   lectures   can   be
characterized as situations in which a teacher presents new information to the learners without guiding their
learning processes. The limited opportunities for interaction in lectures engender a set of problems regarding
students' attention and motivation, as well as the adaptivity of the lecturer's instruction.
  Lecturers often attempt to overcome such problems by asking questions, to trigger feedback on how well the
students have understood the presented material, as well as to provoke their active participation in the meetings.
This is problematic in lectures with a large audience, since only a few students are able to interact with the
lecturer in  this way.   The    overwhelming  majority   will not  benefit  from   this form  of  interactivity.  Further
problems arise if the lecturer wants to get feedback on how the students accept the lecture or their suggestions
for improvements. In lectures with a small audience, the teacher can typically deduce this information from the
students' reactions,   e.g. bored  expressions.   In meetings   with  large audiences,   however,    this information   is
usually  gathered  by   passing  out  feedback    questionnaires to  the  students at   the end  of  the  lecture  period.
Unfortunately,    this approach   is rather imprecise   and  does  not  allow any   assessment    of  individual   lecture
elements. Nor can the lecturer react quickly to problems. Other forms of interactivity are spontaneous questions
by the students. These can often be difficult in large lectures. First of all, due to time constraints, not all students

                                                           
are able to ask questions. Secondly, many do not dare to ask questions in front of a large audience. Finally, if
students can pose questions only at certain times, these will be out of context when finally put. Given all these
problems, most students do not interact at all during the lecture.
   Thus, despite the possible use of different media to illustrate lecture topics, interaction is hardly possible in
mass meetings. This unidirectional communication leads to several motivational and cognitive problems:
   From a pedagogic-psychological view, learning (in lectures) has to be reconstructed as an active process
(e.g. Ernest,  1995; Jonassen,     1994;  Honebein,    1996;  Wilson  &  Cole, 1991).   Interactivity represents  an
opportunity for the learner to take a hand in shaping the informational, communicational and learning processes,
rather than remaining a passive recipient; thus, the active involvement of the learners has a great impact upon
successful learning (Ramsden, 1992). In respect of the learning success in lectures, empirical results state that
while lectures are not generally ineffective, they still are not suitable for a global knowledge transfer (see for an
overview Gage & Berliner, 1996; Peterson, 1979).
   Directly connected to the problem of the low interactivity in this method of teaching is the lack of adaptivity
of the teacher's behaviour: During the lecture, the instructor can only adapt a limited portion of the contents or
topics of his lecture to the learners' state of knowledge. On the other hand, in the instructional-psychological
context, adaptivity is an essential tool to improve the learning process. The underlying rationale is to adapt
explanations or curricula to the learners' current state of knowledge, thereby achieving greater efficiency and
efficacy of instruction. Empirical findings reveal the effects of diverse learning-centred measures upon learning
success (Sass, 1989; Cronbach & Snow, 1977; Bligh, 1971).
   Finally, an essential problem in lectures is the continuous attention required of the learner, usually over 90
minutes. This requirement is not realistic: Usually, the attention span is only about 20 minutes (Smith, 2001).
Subsequently, an activity change must follow if students are to maintain their attention (e.g. a change from the
lecture to the  discussion phase).  Studies    show that a  decreasing mental  performance  is  responsible for   the
inferior knowledge acquisition (e.g. Siegel, Siegel, Capretta, Jones & Berkovitz, 1963; Bloom, 1953). However,
such activity changes are not foreseen in the classic scenario, and if so, they depend exclusively on the ability of
the lecturer (Ramsden, 1992).
   In   dominant   instruction models    (e.g. Glaser, 1976;  Rosenshine,  1979),  the  diagnosis of   the learners'
knowledge status by the teacher is a central element of the educational process: Each instruction cycle contains
two diagnostic elements: the diagnosis of relevant learners' characteristics and the diagnosis of the learning
achievement,   for the planning    of the further   educational procedure  and/or the   examination   of  success in
learning.  Thus,  learner feedback    enables  an adaptive   teaching behaviour, which  can lead  to   an  improved
learning process. Lecturers, for example, can adapt explanations or contents to the learners' knowledge status, in
order to heighten the efficiency and effectiveness of their instruction.
   Directed interactivity can strengthen learner-centred instruction. This is further strengthened if the learners
feel they can communicate with the lecturer and give him feedback, thus have a real opportunity to affect the
learning process - despite the rather passive role as receptive learners. Since successful learning represents an
active process, active involvement of the learners should have a large effect on learning.
   Effectively increased interactivity should promote students' attention and motivation and, finally, support
their acquisition of knowledge. The pre-condition is that lecturers receive more exact information, to enable a
micro adaptation of their presentation.
   Hence, there are evident theoretical and practical reasons to improve this type of learning scenario or to
create a new (more interactive) scenario as a replacement.
   An innovative approach to improve interactivity and to realize bi-directional, synchronous communication in
lectures is to equip the students with small electronic devices, such as handheld computers. These devices
communicate with the lecturer's computer, thus allowing the exchange of information with the lecturer at any
time, without disturbing the lecture.
   The type of information exchanged can be arbitrarily complex, ranging from a simple "virtual hand-raising"
over detailed feedback to quizzes that may even be counted towards the grades of the students. To avoid cost-
intensive modifications of the lecture hall, the handheld PCs and the server are connected by a wireless LAN.
   Two departments at the University of Mannheim (Computer Science and Educational Science) have initiated
the LectureLab project (http://www.lecturelab.de) to create a new form of multimedia-enhanced teaching: the
interactive lecture. We have designed and implemented a full-featured software system and carried out several
major field studies to evaluate this concept.
   In this paper we will:
x     describe the possible use of mobile devices in large learning environments;
x     present the scenario  of  the Interactive   Lecture, as well as  our own   technology  at the   University  of
      Mannheim, WIL/MA (Wireless Interactive Lectures in MAnnheim);
x     discuss the results of   two  detailed case studies  conducted   among   graduate students, focusing   on   the
      comparison between the use of PDAs and notebook PCs; and

                                                          
x   give an overview of the results of six experimental field studies we carried out in computer science and
    educational  science  lectures in order to investigate  the motivational   and  cognitive effects of  this new
    teaching-learning-method.

MOBILE DEVICES IN LECTURES
Numerous projects focusing on the use of mobile devices in lectures in order to enhance learning and teaching
have evolved over the last few years. Most of them have very unique ideas about what aspect of the lecture they
intend to improve, and about how to cope with eventual problems. The following is a short list of past and
ongoing projects, along with a short description of the basic ideas behind them.
    Classtalk (Abrahamson, 1999, 1998; Webking, 1998; Dufresne, Gerace, Leonard, Mestre & Wenk, 1996) is a
well-known Classroom Communication System by Better Education Inc.. For the better involvement of every
single student, the teacher "beams" three to four Classtalk tasks per lesson to the students' devices; these can be
calculators, organizers or personal computers, and the students often own them. A "task" can be anything from a
simple  question to  a midterm  exam,   from a   group exercise  to a   survey of class  opinions. The results  are
displayed immediately on the teacher's notebook PC; the teacher can either keep them confidential or show
them to the class. The class sessions can be archived for review, and can be analyzed and compared to other
sessions. Additional features include feedback (from the teacher), tests and grading. Classtalk can also be used
for the so-called ,,peer-instruction"-method,  a  kind of   collaborative  learning in  which answers   to several
questions (,,ConcepTests") are to be discussed in small learner groups (Mazur, 1997).
A questionnaire study by Hake (1998) with more than 6 000 American physics-students showed that interactive
learning environments (Classtalk vs. traditional instruction) enhanced the students' capability to solve problems.
Abrahamson (1999) could also assess an increase of the knowledge gain if interactive elements were integrated
into instruction. Another study, in the Netherlands (Massen, Poulis, Robens, & Gilbert, 1998), showed that with
physics students, the integration of the so-called Audience Paced Feedback (APF), a system comparable to the
Classtalk system, leads   to an enhancement    of learning  success.  Finally, Hartline  (1997) stated that using
Classtalk improved the reading comprehension of elementary school pupils.
    ClassInHand,  from   Wake   Forest  University,   turns a PDA     equipped   with  a wireless  adapter  into a
presentation controller and a quizzing-and-feedback device for the lecturer (http://classinhand.wfu.edu/, last
checked   11/10/04). Its major  components   are  a presentation   control application  and a web   server for  the
PocketPC of the teacher; the clients only need a web browser to participate. The Presentation Control allows
remote control of the Powerpoint slides on the lecturer's PC. It also gives him the possibility to forward the quiz
results to the class. The Web Server enables concept tests (quizzes), textual feedback, a feedback meter, and
easy document posting. The quiz feature can be used to present a question with up to four answers, and to view
the results immediately   on  the  PDA  or  to forward  them    to  the students' devices.  The textual   feedback
component allows students to send their questions directly to the teacher's PDA. Finally, the feedback meter
enables students to submit numeric responses (range: -10 to 10).
    ConcertStudeo, a project of the Fraunhofer Institute IPSI, uses an electronic blackboard combined with
handheld devices (Dawabi, Dietz, Fernandez & Wessner, 2003). It features exercises and interactions, such as
multiple-choice quizzes, brainstorming sessions, queries, or role-plays. During a lecture, the teacher introduces
the exercise, and the learners enter their answers into their handheld devices. The software does the collection,
analysis, and presentation.
    Specifically designed for online feedback is CFS (the Classroom Feedback System), from the University of
Washington (Anderson, Vandegrift, Wolfman & Yasuhara, 2003). It allows students to post annotations directly
on lecture slides. The lecturer sees the annotations in real-time. The students use their notebook PCs to generate
their feedback by clicking a location on a slide and selecting a category from a fixed menu (such as "more
explanation", "got it", "example"). The teacher's screen shows the number of feedback requests for each slide,
and displays the aggregated feedback with a shaded dot for each annotation at the actual presentation slide. The
slides depict categorical information by colour (e.g., red for "more explanation"), and the slide context by
location.

THE WIL/MA SOFTWARE
As  shown,  there are  many   different settings  and  ways  to take    advantage of  mobile  devices  to  improve
interactivity in the lecture hall. Most of the earlier work has focused on specific issues, such as quiz only, online
feedback only, or annotations only. Furthermore, the software is often designed to run only on a particular
hardware device or, in some cases, only on very proprietary hardware. Finally, none of the existing projects
features synchronous, bi-directional communication for large classrooms: in most cases, it is only the students
who can send data to the teacher at any time, while the teacher cannot send personalized responses.

                                                        
Our software tools attempt to solve these problems: the same basic software architecture accommodates many
different  interactivity services.  The   system is  written  in Java and   is portable  to almost all  modern  mobile
devices.

System Architecture
The WIL/MA system is designed as a classical client/server application (see figure 1). As the central part of the
architecture, the server provides all the fundamental functionality: management of the connections, users, and
services. Connection management establishes connections to the clients upon request, processes incoming and
outgoing data, and monitors the registered connections for broken links. User management identifies individual
users via  password      and  stores personal   information   for  internal and  external   use.  Service   management
dynamically loads a requested number of plug-in service modules, informs clients about the availability of
certain services, and controls the data flow between the services within the server structure itself and between
clients.

                                          Figure 1: The WIL/MA architecture

  All    functionality   that is visible to the  users is bundled  into services.  Services  are  built as  independent
modules to be loaded by the server and the clients at start-up time; for each service, there is a server-module, a
teacher-module and a student-module.
  The     server-modules   are   the central   part of a  service. They  aggregate   all incoming    data,  analyze the
information,  and  broadcast     trimmed  data  packets   in various ways   back  to the teacher  and   each individual
student. The server software provides a sophisticated messaging system for this purpose. All other modules are
loaded into the clients of the students and the teacher. While the teacher-module focuses more on editing various
aspects of the service, as well as on the display of analyzed data, it is more important for the student-module to
display prepared material appealingly and to provide an intuitive user interface.
  The client for the lecturer runs on a machine typically connected to the server via a wired network; all other
clients use the wireless LAN to connect to the server. By means of interface utilities, multiple servers can be
connected to extend the range of an interactive lecture to other lecture halls easily, without overloading the
network   in-between.    Interfaces  to  other similar software  systems  can   be created  to share   data of common
services.
  Besides the already discussed functionality, the server software also provides several tools to easily manage
a larger number of students' devices. The two most important features are a DHCP server, allowing the central
configuration of all network-related parameters, and a Java class server that offers all required Java classes for
download. Thus, only a very small footage of classes has to be installed on the students' computers, while all
other classes are loaded automatically at start-up. The class server can also be used to update all mobile devices
whenever the software is changed (e.g. new releases, updates).

Implemented Services
Three services have been implemented so far: a quiz tool, an online-feedback tool, and a call-in tool.
  The quiz tool allows the teacher to pose questions (that possibly include graphics or animations) about actual
lecture contents and "beam" them via wireless LAN to the audience. The students work on them and send their
answers back to the lecturer's computer. After a timeout, the cumulated results are presented graphically on the
projector. In this way,    the   lecturer and   the students  gain representative  feedback    on  the  newly  acquired
knowledge. Apart from two different multiple-choice question styles (only one correct answer, multiple correct

                                                             
answers), we integrated other optional question types into this service, which can be automatically analyzed. To
give some examples: Clickable images can be used to ask the student to point into a certain area of a picture as
an answer (for example: "point at the location of Moscow on a map of Russia"). Fill-in questions make it
impossible for the student to accidentally guess the right answer to a mathematical exercise.
  The feedback tool delivers direct and systematic feedback about different aspects of the lecture from all
students to the lecturer, who can then instantly adapt his/her presentation style to the new situation. An aspect -
or category - could be the speed or the level of the lecture; so students can ask the teacher during the lecture to
progress more slowly or to discuss a certain topic in more detail. Technical issues also can be used as a feedback
category; for example, video or audio distortions in telepresence scenarios can be discovered much sooner, or
the students are able to complain, when their learning environment is suboptimal (because other students in the
back rows are too loud ,or bright sunlight makes it impossible to read the projected lecture slides).

         Figures 2a, 2b, and 2c: Screenshot of the students' client, showing a quiz, feedback, and call-in

                Figures 2d, 2e: Screenshot of the administrator client and a typical quiz result

  Finally, the call-in tool forwards spontaneous text questions to the teacher at any time during the lecture. The
questions are stored in a list and can be dealt with in three ways: using the software, they can either be answered
individually, or the answer can be sent to all students if the question is of general interest (of course, the
anonymity of the original student is maintained). In these cases, FAQ lists can be created, which are then put on
the Web for the next generations of students. The third way is to integrate questions or remarks from students
into the lecture. A selection of screenshots from the teacher's client, as well as from the students' client, can be
seen in figures 2a-e.

Group Support
From the software-engineering   perspective, there are three types of group support    to     be considered in an
interactive lecture: device sharing, working groups and distributed working groups.
  Device sharing is particularly interesting in lectures, where many students want to participate but only a
limited number of devices are available. In this case, the software could allow multiple students to log in and
then select their name before accessing a certain service. This way, each student in a group still acts as an
individual, from the server perspective. In quiz rounds, for example, the students could work out their answers

                                                        
on a piece of paper and then use the device only to send them to the server. The ConcertStudeo software is one
of the few projects that support device sharing.
  Most projects - including WIL/MA - do not because of some severe problems with this feature (for example,
the second student in a row can easily copy the answers of his predecessor). Furthermore, the second type of
group support is an easy, but feasible, alternative: A group of students collaborates using a single device. The
software has not to support this explicitly because there is little difference between a working group and an
individual student when using only one login account.
  The third type of group support is much more interesting because it offers a wide range of possibilities. In
this scenario, students are able to form groups or are put into groups, but still have their own individual device.
This way, they can still act individually in some services (feedback or call-in). In other services (quiz, or online
brainstorming, for example), the server specifically aggregates the individual input, to form a homogenous
group input.
  This technique allows the formation of groups over wide distances, connecting students who don't know
each other, or in crowded lecture halls, where group members often cannot sit next to each other. The group-
building process is also much more interesting: students can advertise their skills in a list and can be invited by a
group that lacks these skills. Or groups can be formed automatically using various heuristics, thus bringing
together students of equal or complementary knowledge.
  Obviously, this kind of group support places high demands on the software system. First of all, the students
in a group have to be able to communicate. The communication must be easy to handle, must not disturb other
students, and should be blended into the standard screen of the service as seamlessly as possible. During a quiz,
for example, the students would see little coloured dots next to the answers that their fellow group members
think to be correct. The brighter the dots are, the more confident is that group member of his or her selection.
Whenever there is a disagreement, the students can switch back to a VoIP or chat screen to discuss the final
answer.
  Handling unresolved disagreements is a second demand on the software. The single analysis step of a system
that only supports individual input has to forego a pre-analysis step, where heuristics decide the final input of a
group in case of discrepancies.

Using the Tools within an Interactive Lecture
To dispatch an interactive lecture, only three devices are needed: a single access point is usually sufficient to
handle the connections from more than 100 students. The server software can be run on any computer running
Java; if it is installed in the lecture hall, a standard notebook is sufficient. This computer is usually used for the
teacher software, as well. Finally, a projector is needed to display the aggregated results of several services
(primarily the quiz service) to the audience.
  Since most of the lecture halls are already equipped with projectors or large monitors, all equipment needed
fits into one notebook travel bag and is installed and started in usually less than 5 minutes before the lecture
starts, including the time needed to start the appropriate software.
  Of course, it is quite time-consuming to hand out several dozens of PocketPCs to students who do not own a
mobile device. This requires some assistance; but in our experience, the students are quite disciplined, and all
the devices are usually treated very carefully. Furthermore, more and more students own a PocketPC or Palm or
would like to use their notebook in the lecture anyway. Hence, it is most likely that having to provide large
pools of mobile devices will no longer be an issue in the very near future.
  Once the software is started, the students will begin to log in. In our case, the services: feedback and call-in
are started right at the beginning and are thus accessible the whole time. Quizzes are scheduled approximately
every 30 minutes. In our interactive lectures, the students thus had two breaks for the quiz rounds in each lesson
of about three to four questions, which proved to be very effective. Also, a good practice may be to start with a
short quiz, to see what the students have learned in the last lecture. The questions are prepared before the lecture
and submitted to the students at an appropriate time during the lecture. Depending on the difficulty of the
questions, the students are given three to five minutes to answer them; the discussion of the results usually takes
another five minutes.
  The results of all services are stored on the machine running the teacher's client in a portable XML-based
format, so that the teacher can analyze the information at any time later.

EXPERIMENTAL FIELD STUDIES AND EXPERIENCES
  Altogether, we have conducted six experimental studies to date in order to investigate the motivational and
cognitive impacts of  this scenario (assessed    in the form of questionnaires  with respect to acceptance, and
through the application of tests with respect to the learning success). Four of the studies were carried out in

                                                         
computer science lectures, and two in education science meetings. A seventh study (in education science) is still
running.
   In the following chapter, we will give a brief overview of our studies' results, separated by the different
faculties where the interactive lectures took place.

Interactive Lectures in Computer Science
   First, a test trial (winter semester 2001/2002) of the interactive lecture scenario was carried out (Wessels,
Fries, Horz, Scheele & Effelsberg, submitted). In an experimental study (2x2 design), a first prototype of the
WIL/MA tools was technically and empirically tested in a computer science lecture by comparing two wireless
LAN-supported sessions with two conventional lectures on the same topic. The 44 randomly assigned students
at this lecture each participated in both an interactive and in a conventional lecture session, then the groups were
compared with respect to acceptance of the teaching method (questionnaire based on 13 items) and success in
learning (pre-post measures). Regarding the acceptance, the interactive condition was evaluated significantly
better  than  the  conditional one  (p<0,001;   K²=0.433,    respectively 0.325).Students   also reported significantly
higher   levels of    assumed  attention,   activity, and   estimated  learning success  in  the interactive condition
(p<0.001). Objective measurements indicated better learning results in the interactive condition, though the
values fall just short of significance (p=0.068, ²=.081). And finally, there was no meaningful distraction during
the interactive lectures.
   As the next step, in summer semester 2002, a long-term integration of the system was realised, as well as an
application of the scenario within a tele-lecture (Scheele, Mauve, Effelsberg, Wessels, Horz & Fries, 2003). The
investigated computer science lecture was transferred as an MPEG-stream via the internet to a lecture hall at
another  German    university.  Just   like the students  in Mannheim,    the   students at the  remote location  were
included into the scenario and the study. The lecture was temporally split into a conventional and an interactive
phase1, the latter of which was composed of eight consecutive sessions. For all 99 students participating in these
two conditions, the acceptance of the two teaching methods (as measured in the first study), and their learning
increases (pre-post measures) were quantified. We could replicate the good acceptance scores of the first study:
again, the interactive meetings were rated very well and their acceptance was superior to that of the conventional
lecture  (p<0.005, ²=0.332). The use of the interactive elements/tools had a highly significant effect on the
knowledge acquisition in the respective lecture. The participants in the interactive lecture had a significantly
higher and also faster learning increase (see figure 4) in comparison to those in the conventional sessions.
   In the next summer semester (2003), a variation of feedback to the quiz rounds (i.e. the discussion of the
results) within    an interactive computer     science  lecture was   performed  in another  quasi-experimental   study
(Wessels, Fries, Horz & Hofer, 2003). The investigated computer science lecture was realized as an interactive
meeting over the entire semester and was again transmitted as a tele-lecture. Within the lecture, a systematic
temporary variation of the information capacity of the quiz feedback was realized. There were three conditions,
whereby the verbal feedback from the teacher to the quiz rounds differed in each condition, becoming more and
more informative over time. The 56 students were compared with respect to their acceptance of the lecture and
the three feedback methods, and their respective learning increases. The study results show that the interactive
lecture was once again highly accepted. Moreover, the students prefer an elaborated feedback to the quizzes that
is related to information about the correct and incorrect solutions (see figure 5). Regarding the learning increases
in each   condition,   the highest   increases  could    be seen  when    feedback  was   given  that included further
information about the solutions (condition 2 vs. 1:      p<0.001, condition 3 vs. 1: p   =0.002, condition 2 vs. 3: not
significant).
   The aim of the fourth interactive lecture (summer semester 2004) was a realisation within a computer science
course as close as possible to the reality in higher education. Therefore, the accompanying evaluation was kept
as unobtrusive as possible: only at the beginning and at the end of the semester were measurements with respect
to the knowledge and acceptance of the scenario and the tools carried out. Furthermore, we tested the WIL/MA
group support tools for the first time. In contrast to the other studies, the 69 participating students were equipped
with mobile computers for the duration of the semester. These were distributed at the first lecture of the semester
and returned    at the final  lecture. Initial  results for this scenario indicate  a replication of  the earlier good
acceptance, as well as of the better learning success of the students who visited the lecture as opposed to those
students who did not participate (e.g. just learned on the basis of the lecture recordings). Especially those
students who participated in the interactive lecture in groups attained better examination results at the end of the
lecture.
    In summary, our results for interactive lectures carried out with computer science students show that:

1 Due to the fact that the study took place within a real lecture over the entire semester, a quasi-experimental
 approach     was  realized  to   enhance   the ecological   validity. See  Cook    & Campbell    (19979)  for further
 information about the limits of quasi-experimental designs.

                                                            
   1.    The students highly accept the interactive lecture.
   2.    Learning efficacy increases through the use of the interactive tools.
   3.    Regarding the feedback on the quizzes, students prefer informative feedback on the quiz rounds (which
         includes further information about the quiz solutions), which leads to greater learning success.

                            Figure 4: Study in Summer Semester 2003: Learning Increase
            Note: arrows represent significant increases (continuous lines:    p<.001; dashed line: p<.05).

                Figure 5: Study in Summer Semester 2003: Acceptance of the Feedback Conditions
                                            Note: n.s.: not significant

   The   next  step was  to  carry out interactive lectures  with participants  - and a lecturer - who    have less
technical experience than computer science students. In order to generalize previous findings and to extend the
research   by investigating a technically less experienced    sample, we   implemented   the scenario  within   an
education science lecture.

Interactive Lectures in Educational Science:
  In an education science lecture (winter semester 2003/2004), our research focused on the questions whether
and how a variation of individual feedback on the quiz performance will affect cognitive and motivational
variables. Of  the  214 participants at the lecture,  69 were     equipped with   mobile computers   per   random
assignment. The other students participated in the interactive sessions using a pencil & paper-based procedure.
Additionally, the users of a mobile computer received personal feedback about their actual learning outcome in
the quizzes via their mobile devices. This feedback was systematically varied between and within the groups

                                                        
with respect to the effects of different reference norm orientations (individual vs. social vs. none). The first
results show, in terms of motivational factors, a very good acceptance of the scenario, independently of the
manner of participation over the entire semester. Furthermore, all students were concentrated, and rated the
actual lesson as being of more than average interest. With respect to the learning outcome, the variation of the
reference norm orientation on the quiz feedback shows an advantage in favour of feedback under the use of an
individually   oriented reference   with respect   to the learning   outcome,  as   opposed   to a   socially referenced
feedback   (p=0.018,    K²=0.101   to   p=.082,   K²=0.056),   although   both types    were   accepted   equally   well.
Furthermore, the results show that in both user groups: PocketPC vs. paper & pencil, the learning increase is
significant (p<0.001, ²=0.510 for the PocketPC group, respectively: p<0.001; ²=0.589 for the paper & pencil
group), and was stable over a period of one month after the end of the lecture. Concerning quiz performance,
computer-based    participation  in  the quizzes     yielded greater learning  success   (p<0.001).   Additionally,  the
learning increase, as measured by a pre/post measurement, also was higher if a PocketPC was used (p=0.034;
²=0.041). In general, this study shows that the interactive lecture can be integrated in a non-technical faculty
also.

CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
    Conventional   mass   lectures   entail various    serious   didactic problems     with  respect to  cognitive  and
motivational conditions for learning. Their main disadvantage is that there is little or no interactivity between
teachers and students. The students' attention and motivation ­ and as a consequence thereof ­ their learning
success, are negatively influenced, as is the teacher's ability to react to their remarks.
    In order to optimize education in mass lectures, we have started the LectureLab project. The idea was to
support synchronous interactions between students and teachers by the use of mobile computers in a wireless
network   (teaching­learning    scenario of   the  interactive lecture).  All students   are  equipped   with  handheld
computers and use several wireless interactive learning services that enable feedback in both directions (to
realise bi-directional, synchronous communication).
    Our experiences show that with respect to the technical realisation, an interactive lecture is very easy to
implement. Concerning the use of different mobile devices within this scenario, we strongly prefer PocketPCs
and Notebooks.
    The  experimental    field studies  show    that an  interactive mass   lecture that  involves   the use  of  mobile
computers    strengthens the   learning  process  in  higher education    essentially. Particularly for  mass  meetings,
wireless  networks  (together   with  an appropriate    didactic concept)  are a new    and   promising  opportunity  to
actively  include the   students into   the process   of  learning.  Apart  from  promoting    students'  attention and
motivation, a key point is that this scenario also supports the learners' acquisition of knowledge. Thus, the
interactive lecture seems to be a successful effort to improve a dominant university instructional technology.
    In the future, lectures will definitely not become obsolete in higher education in Germany or most other
countries worldwide. Thus, an enrichment of this dominant teaching method around interactive and adaptive
elements will be a persistent optimization. All faculties can use the technology to transform traditional lectures
into interactive lectures as long as the learning content is to be mediated in lecture methods and there is a big
audience (i.e. mass meetings). Because of the flexible application of the hard- and software, as well as the
adaptive didactic concepts, no structural changes in the system of higher education are necessary. If interactive
lectures are to be immediately integrated in different disciplines, the presence teaching can be strengthened by
the   creation of an    individually   flexible  frame   model.  At   the  same   time,   the  problem   of   the "mass
lecture" diminishes as to its negative didactic consequences. By means of an interactive lecture, it is generally
possible to directly integrate new media into higher education in a didactically meaningful and technically
economical fashion.
    Nowadays, it is still necessary to equip the students with mobile devices. With respect to the hardware, one
can assume that the distribution of mobile computers (PocketPCs) will increase rapidly in years to come. In the
future, most of these devices will be able to communicate over radio, so the availability of this scenario will
increase.
    Group support will be a major issue for the next releases of the WIL/MA software and in subsequent field
studies. The first steps in that direction have been taken, with an early prototype for collaboration in quizzes and
an ongoing project that uses WIL/MA for participatory simulations.
    Future research should also include the role of the teacher within this scenario. Even though the students
obviously benefit from this new technology, and the teacher gets additional information about their learning
processes and progress, the additional integration of interactive elements increase the cognitive load upon the
lecturer. This may be especially a problem for teachers with no affinity for technology. Therefore, an important
question  is how  to  deal with   the  rising demands:    What   is  the  appropriate  extent of information   from  the
learners? Which kind of adaptive behaviour should occur in form and content, as well as with respect to the
point in time of adaptivity (direct vs. indirect)?

                                                           
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Our thanks go to:
x    Virtuelle Hochschule Oberrhein (VIROR, Virtual University of the Upper Rhine Valley), for financing the development of the first
     prototype used in our earlier studies;
x    Forschungszentrum L3S (Learning Lab Lower Saxony), for allowing us the acquisition of 25 PocketPC as well as many other hardware
     needed to conduct our experiments;
x    DFG (German Science Foundation), for financing all the major studies and the acquisition of further 50 PocketPCs; and
x    Prof Dr Wolfgang Effelsberg (Department of Computer Science, University of Mannheim) and Prof Dr Manfred Hofer (Department of
     Educational   Science  II (Pedagogical   Psychology,  University of  Mannheim),  who  were   willing to support the  development  of new
     teaching media and to carry out interactive lectures.

REFERENCES
Abowd, G.D., Atkeson, C.G., Feinstein, A., Hmelo, C, Kooper, R., Long, S., Sawhney, N. & Tani, M. (2000): Teaching and Learning as
         Multimedia  Authoring:    The Classroom   2000   Project. http://www.cc.gatech.edu/fce/c2000/pubs/mm96/index.html     (last  checked:
         10/13/03)
Abrahamson, A.L. (1999). Teaching with a Classroom Communication System - What it Involves and Why it Works. Mini-Course presented
         at the VII Taller Internacional "Nuevas Tendencias en la Ensenanza de la Fisica", Benemerita Universidad Autonoma de Puebla,
         Puebla, Mexico, May 27-30, 1999.
Abrahamson, A.L. (1998). An Overview of Teaching and Learning Research with Classroom Communication Systems. Paper presented at the
         International Conference of Teaching of Mathematics, Village of Pythagorion, Samos, Greece.
Anderson, R.J., Vandegrift,    T., Wolfman,   S. & Yasuhara,  K.   (2003): Promoting  Interaction  in Large  Classes with Computer-Mediated
         Feedback. In: Designing for Change in Networked Learning Environments, Proceedings of CSCL 2003, Bergen, pp. 119-123
Bligh, D.A. (1971). What's the Use of Lecturing? Devon, England: Teaching Services Centre, University of Exeter.
Bloom, B.S. (1953). Thought processes in lectures and discussions. Journal of General Education, 7, 160-169.
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (2001). Untersuchung der Einsatzmöglichkeiten von Notebooks in Lehre und Ausbildung an
         Hochschulen.    Konzeption  zur  Realisierung  zukünftiger   Notebook-Hochschulen    in  Deutschland.  http://www.tec.informatik.uni-
         rostock.de/RA/Notebooks-HS (last checked: 03/22/2003)
Cook, T.D. and Campbell, D.T. (1979). Quasi-Experimentation: Design and Analysis for Field Settings. Rand McNally, Chicago, Illinois.
Cronbach, L., & Snow, R. (1977). Aptitudes and Instructional Methods: A Handbook for Research on Interactions. New York: Irvington
         Publishers.
Datta, A., & Ottmann, T. (2001). Towards a Virtual University. Journal of Universal Computer Science, 7, 870-885.
Dawabi, P., Dietz, L., Fernández, A. & Wessner, M. (2003). ConcertStudeo: Using PDAs to support face-to-face learning. International
         Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 2003, Bergen, Norway, 235-237
Dufresne, R.J., Gerace, W. J., Leonard, W.J., Mestre, J.P. & Wenk, L. (1996). Classtalk: A Classroom Communication System for Active
         Learning. Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 7, 3-47.
Ernest, P. (1995). The one and the many. In L. Steffe & J. Gale (Eds.). Constructivism in education (pp. 459-486). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gage, N., & Berliner, D. (1996). Educational psychology (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Houghton, Mifflin.
Geyer, W. & Effelsberg, W. (1998). The Digital lecture Board ­ A Teaching and Learning Tool for Remote Instruction in Higher Education.
         Wold Conference on Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia (EdMedia) 1998, Frankfurt, Germany
Glaser, R. (1976). Components of a psychology of instruction: Toward a science of design. Review of Educational Research, 46, 1-24.
Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft    (2002).    New   Media    in    Education,  Lessons     Learned    from    a  German   Government     Programme.
         http://www.gmd.de/PT-NMB/New_Media.pdf (last checked: 03/22/2003)
Honebein,  P.  (1996).   Seven goals  for the design of constructivist learning environments.     In B.  Wilson (Ed.). Constructivist learning
         environments (pp. 17-24). New Jersey: Educational Technology Publications.
Mazur, E. (1997): Peer Instruction ­ A User's Manual. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Jonassen, D. (1994). Thinking technology. Educational Technology, 34, 34-37.
Peterson, P.L. (1979). Direct instruction reconsidered. In P.L. Peterson & H.J. Walberg (Eds.). Research on Teaching Concepts, Findings
         and Implications (pp. 57-69). Berkeley, CA: McCutchan.
Ramsden, P. (1992). Learning to Teach in Higher Education. London: Routledge.
Rosenshine, B.V. (1979). Content, Time, and Direct Instruction. In P.L. Peterson & H.J. Walberg (Eds.). Research on Teaching Concepts,
         Findings and Implications. Berkeley: McCutchan, 57-69.
Sass, E. J. (1989). Motivation in the College Classroom: What Students Tell Us. Teaching of Psychology, 16, 86-88.
Scheele, N., Mauve, M., Effelsberg, W., Wessels, A., Horz, H. & Fries, S. (2003). The interactive lecture - A New Teaching Paradigm based
         on Ubiquitous Computing. Poster Proceeding of the CSCL 2003, pp. 135-137, Bergen, Norway, June 2003.
Scheele, N., Seitz,  C., Effelsberg, W.,  & Wessels, A.   (2004).  Mobile  Devices in interactive lectures. World Conference  on Educational
         Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications (EdMedia) 2004 (1), Lugano, Switzerland. 154-161
Siegel, K., Siegel, L. C., Capretta, R., Jones, R. L., & Berkovitz, H. (1963). Students thoughts during class: A criterion for educational
         research. Journal of Educational Psychology, 54, 45-51.
Smith, B. (2001). Just give us the right answer. In H. Edwards, B. Smith, & G. Webb (Eds.). Lecturing. Case studies, experience and practice
         (pp. 123-129). London: Kogan.
Webking, R.H. (1998). Classtalk in Two Distinctly Different Settings. Extract from "Classtalk at University of Texas El Paso", CDROM
         authored at the Dept. of Political Science, Univ. of Texas - El Paso, September '98.
Wessels, A. Fries, S., Horz, H. & Hofer, M. (2003). Interactive lectures: using wireless networks to optimise lectures. Presentation at 10th
         Conference of the European Association for Research on Learning and Instruction (EARLI). Padova (Italy), August 26th ­ 30th,
         2003.
Wessels, A., Fries, S., Horz, H., Scheele, N. & Effelsberg, W. (submitted). Interactive lectures: Effective Teaching and Learning in Mass
         Meetings with Wireless Networks. Computers in Human Behaviour.
Wilson, B., & Cole, P. (1991). A review of cognitive teaching models. Educational Technology Research and Development, 39, 47-64.
Zupancic, B. & Horz, H. (2002). lecture Recording and its Use in a Traditional University Course. In D. Finkel (Ed.), Proceedings of the 7th
         Annual Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science, S. 24-28. ACM: Aarhus, Denmark.

                                                                      
