The Impact of Role Assignment as Scripting Tool on
          Knowledge Construction in Asynchronous
                                   Discussion Groups

    Tammy Schellens             Hilde Van Keer                 Martin Valcke               Bram De Wever
tammy.schellens@ugent.be     hilde.vankeer@ugent.be        martin.valcke@ugent.be       bram.dewever@ugent.be

                                         Department of Education
                                              Ghent University

       Abstract. The present paper describes the impact of learning in asynchronous discussion groups
       on students' levels of knowledge construction. Multilevel analyses were applied to uncover the
       influence of student, group, and task variables and the specific impact of the assignment of roles.
       Results indicate that students' attitude towards the learning environment and their engagement in
       the discussion group are significant predictors. No significant overall differences in students' mean
       levels of knowledge construction between the role and no role condition were observed. However,
       additional analyses revealed (1) that students in the role condition more often reached the highest
       level; and (2) that assigning students the role of summarizer resulted in significantly higher levels
       of knowledge construction.

       Keywords: CSCL, collaborative learning, asynchronous discussion groups, roles, scripting

INTRODUCTION
Computer-supported  collaborative  learning   (CSCL)   environments  have   been argued  to foster  collaborative
knowledge  construction (Clark,   Weinberger,   Jucks,  Spitulnik, &  Wallace,   2003). Collaboration   as   such,
however, does  not  systematically produce    learning (Dillenbourg, 2002). Research  evidence    shows  that   the
efficacy of collaborative learning depends on various conditions such as group composition (e.g., size, gender),
task features (e.g., task complexity), and individual student characteristics (e.g., learning styles, attitude towards
the learning environment) (Schellens     & Valcke, in   press; Schellens, Van   Keer, &    Valcke, 2004).    These
conditions interact with one another in a complex way. Moreover ­ despite their impact ­ it must be taken into
account that not all these variables can be manipulated directly while designing CSCL environments. Instead of
changing the conditions that indirectly determine the group interactions (e.g., group size, heterogeneity of group
members), in the present study we especially focus on variables that can be manipulated to influence students'
interactions in a direct way. More specifically, we try to script students' discourse in CSCL environments. This
aim  corresponds to the suggestion   of   Dillenbourg  (2002)  who   claims that the  application  of  scripts  for
collaborative learning can be a technique to affect collaborative learning directly. Collaboration scripts can
specify, sequence and assign collaborative learning activities in on-line learning environments (Kollar, Fischer,
& Hess, 2003; Weinberger, Reiserer, Ertl, Fischer, Mandl, 2003). The concept of `script' however encompasses
a very broad range of methods, techniques and approaches. In this respect, it is difficult to speak about the
overall efficacy of CSCL scripts. The aim of the present study is to analyze the impact of a specific type of
collaboration script, namely the assignment of roles to group members in asynchronous discussion groups.

CONTEXT OF THE PRESENT STUDY
The present study was conducted in a naturalistic research setting. The asynchronous discussion groups were a
formal component   of a 7-credit,  first year university course  `Instructional sciences', which   is part   of the
academic bachelor's curriculum `Pedagogical Sciences' at Ghent University. This freshman course introduces
students to a large variety of complex theories and conceptual frameworks related to learning and instruction.
    All students taking the course (N = 286) participated in the study. The discussion groups were set up in
parallel to 12 weekly face-to-face sessions. Participation to the discussion groups was obligatory and evaluated.

                                                        
Twenty-five percent of the final score for the course was based on the quality of individual student participation
to the electronic discussion groups.

THEORETICAL EXPLORATION OF THE VARIABLES INVOLVED
     In order to understand the entire story of learning in a CSCL environment we need to consider variables at
different levels.
     Regarding the importance of characteristics of individual students, there is little research evidence about
their specific impact in the CSCL field. Variables such as gender, age, and appreciation towards the learning
environment are rather considered as background variables. Hakkarainen and Palonen (2003) for example report
about the impact of gender on students' interest in CSCL and how this influences learning outcomes. Other
research indicates that learners who are motivated and engaged, tend to learn more than those who are not (Reio
& Wiswell, 2000). Engagement and contributing to the discussion appear to be mutually interrelated: motivated
students are likely  to participate  more in CSCL     environments,     which leads to  higher levels   of knowledge
construction (Schellens et al., 2004). Learners generally are more engaged and motivated when the learning
mode is compatible with the ways in which they cognitively process information (Sternberg, 1997). Workman
(2004) more specifically suggests that design researchers should consider the learning styles of the students and
provide  fitting  learning environments   when      possible. Schellens   and  Valcke   (2000)  also    observed   that
consistency between the requirements of the on-line learning environment and learning styles is important. In
the same study they also pointed at the importance of student satisfaction, which interacts with the impact on
knowledge construction.
     Taken into   account  the empirical  grounds    of the  aforementioned   student  characteristics, the following
variables will be considered in the theoretical base of the present study: gender, learning styles, attitudes towards
the CSCL environment, and engagement in the discussion, which will be operationalized as the individual
amount of messages contributed to the discussion group.
     In relation to group characteristics, prior research has stressed the importance of fostering intensive group
interaction (Dillenbourg, Baker, Blaye, & O'Malley, 1995; Schellens & Valcke, in press; Schellens et al., 2004).
Studies more specifically report that an increase of the amount of discourse promotes learning (e.g., Jeong &
Chi, 1997;   Mäkitalo,  Weinberger,   Häkkinen,     &   Fischer, 2004).  Some  of  these  authors  also  point  at the
relationship between interaction levels and group size. Group size should not be too large, since larger groups do
not provide the opportunity for all members to participate in full. On the other hand when groups are too small,
there is not enough interaction to provide a critical amount of exchange of ideas or information in order to come
to higher levels of knowledge construction (Johnson, Johnson, & Holubec, 1998; Slavin, 1995). In this respect it
is also logical to assume that the number of students depends on the requirements of the collaborative learning
task (Kumar, 1996). In addition to level of interaction and group size, the literature also goes into the issue of
group  composition   as a  critical characteristic. Research   results, however,   are less conclusive  and  come   to
contradicting results. Some studies emphasize heterogeneous groups (Johnson et al., 1998; Nurrenbern, 1995;
Slavin, 1995), while other studies contradict these research results (Felder, Felder, Mauney, Hamrin, & Dietz,
1995).
     In the context of the present study, group size will be kept constant (10 to 12 students per discussion group)
and group composition will be randomized, to obtain heterogeneous groups. Intensity of the group interaction
will be measured and used as an interaction variable.

     With regard to task characteristics, recent CSCL research suggests that a clear task structure is needed to
foster cognitive processing and academic performance (Dillenbourg, 2002; Weinberger, 2003). Other research
points at the need to state directions, guidelines, and specific types of expected cognitive processing (Cifuentes,
Murphy,   Segur,   &   Kodali, 1997;   Harasim,     Hiltz, Teles, Turoff,  1998;   Schellens  &   Valcke,   in  press).
Hakkarainen,  Lipponen,    and  Järvelä  (2002) also    indicate  the need  to prompt    students to  articulate their
conceptual understanding    to  promote   learning    and   knowledge    building. These    prompts  are   also  called
collaboration scripts.
     As stated above, there is a broad range of approaches that fit the description of collaboration scripts. One of
the potential ways of imposing structure on learners' collaboration is the use of roles. Roles can be defined as
more or less stated functions, duties, or responsibilities that guide individual behavior and regulate intra-group
interaction (Hare, 1994). Roles appear to stimulate group members' awareness of the overall group performance
and each member's contribution (Strijbos, Martens, Jochems, & Broers, 2004). In addition, according to Aviv
(2000), certain roles are required to bridge over periods of silence or too silent participants. Advocates of a more
structured learning approach generally assert that assigning roles to group members results in more rapidly and
more consistent levels of interaction, while others contend that less structure stimulates more elaborate and
critical dialogue. According to Rose (2002), assigning roles and providing close monitoring of group interaction

                                                           
creates learning advantages in the short term. However, small groups may approach similar levels of productive
interaction in the long term without the added instructional expense.
    In addition  to   scripting students' interaction  by  assigning   roles, another   important   task  characteristic
brought up in the literature is the extent to which the assignments link up with students' Zone of Proximal
Development. Illera (2001) states that motivation to work collaboratively on a task and the zone of proximal
development are intertwined. He observed that when the task exceeded the abilities of the students, their interest
and involvement reduced. This brings us to a second task characteristic: task complexity. This issue has hardly
been studied in the context of CSCL. Harper, Squires, and Mc Dougall (2000) indicate that task complexity is
necessary to provide authentic learning environments. But they also stress that too much complexity can make
learners feel insecure and lose track of learning objectives. Research has stressed the need to present tasks or
assignments that are within a `zone' that matches the learner's abilities (Schellens et al., 2004; Quinn, 1997). In
the case of too complex task, students did not engage in the discussion, while in the case of rather simple tasks,
students were not interested to discuss the matter.
    More research is, however, needed to get a better understanding of the impact of these task characteristics.
Therefore, the use of roles and task complexity will be considered as key research variables in the present study.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK OF THE PRESENT STUDY
Figure 1 presents a graphical representation of the theoretical base for the present study. This is an extension of
the approach    adopted  in previous   research (Schellens   &   Valcke, 2002).   It integrates    social constructivist
principles and concepts derived from the information processing approach to learning.
    The   key dependent   variable  in the theoretical   base is students'  `levels  of knowledge     construction'  as
reflected in the group discussion contributions. Independent variables are described in the following paragraphs.
    The figure depicts three key substructures: (1) the individual learning process of a student, (2) the task put
forward in the CSCL environment, and (3) the collaborative dimension in the CSCL setting. The learning
process of an individual student (student a) is presented at the center of the figure. `Learning' is considered as
an  information  processing  activity, building  on  the  assumption   that   learners engage   actively   in cognitive
processing in order to construct mental models. In this way, new information is integrated into existing cognitive
structures.. Because of the importance of individual experiences and existing cognitive structures, characteristics
of the individual learner, such as attitude towards the CSCL learning environment, gender, and learning styles
are considered of importance. Moreover, it can be hypothesized that the more students express their line of
thought,  the more  the  construction  of  mental   models is  facilitated. Therefore,     student engagement   in  the
discussion (i.e. the amount of individual contributions) is regarded as relevant.
    A  second   substructure  points  at the  impact  of the  task put  forward   in   the learning  environment   and
discussed in the CSCL setting. The student assignments in the discussion groups are assumed to trigger the
cognitive processes   of the individual   students. The  amount    of imposed   structure   in the  discussion, that is
discussing with or without roles assigned to the students, and the complexity of the task are considered to
influence the nature of the cognitive activities. This results in varying levels of knowledge construction.
    Finally,  a third substructure refers  to the   importance of  the group   in the   CSCL    setting.  An  important
characteristic in this respect is the intensity of the group interaction. The task is put forward in a collaboration
environment. This invokes collaborative learning that builds on the necessity of the learner to organize output
that is relevant input for the other learners (student a to n). The exchange at input and output level is considered
to reflect a richer base for the further cognitive processing at individual level. This assumption is central in the
cognitive flexibility theory of Spiro, Feltovich, Jacobsen, and Coulson (1988). The more exchange at input and
output level, the more knowledge construction that can be realized. The output is a central element in the
theoretical base of the present study. The asynchronous nature of the discussion environment forces the learner
to communicate the output in an explicit way. All the written communication in the CSCL environment is
therefore considered   relevant.  The  student  output   mirrors their cognitive  processing    activities.   Individual
processing is slowed down by the complex nature of the tasks since learners have to cope with selection,
organization, and integration processes. As a consequence, learners experience the limited capacity of their
working memory, also referred to as cognitive load (Sweller, 1994). However, learners in a collaborative setting
can profit from the processing effort of other group members. Since the output of other learners is organized,
students are expected to experience lower levels of cognitive load when using this output as input for their own
individual cognitive processing. This subsequent output is expected to be of better quality, thus reflecting a
higher level of knowledge construction. In the present study, we build on the work of Gunawardena, Lowe, and
Anderson (1997) to identify students' levels of knowledge construction. This analysis and coding system will be
used to analyze the transcripts of the written communication and to determine students' individual levels of
knowledge construction. At a more basic level, the coding will also identify whether the discussion input is task-
oriented or not task-oriented. This distinction is derived from the work of Veerman and Veldhuis-Diermanse

                                                         
(2001). Task-oriented communication input can be coded further following the levels of knowledge construction
as distinguished by Gunawardena and her colleagues (1997).

Figure 1. Graphical representation of the theoretical framework

    According to the theoretical framework, learners construct knowledge by active participation in discussing
and sharing knowledge with their peers when working in small groups. Students actively engage in learning
processes when working jointly on a learning task by mutually explaining the learning contents, giving feedback
to  other group members,   asking   and  answering   questions, etc. (Weinberger,   2003).   However  some   groups
encounter difficulties when engaging in activities of collaborative knowledge construction. Numerous studies
indicate that the desired effects often fail to emerge. Research for instance indicates that not all group members
are actively engaged   in  the discussions  (Salomon   &  Globerson,     1989) or   that the  content of the group
discussions remains superficial (Coleman, 1995). Reasons for these deficits can result from characteristics of the
individual students or from characteristics of the group, but can also be due to the unique character of the task.
The focus in the present research will be especially on the task characteristics and more specifically on the
impact  of task complexity  and  the  use of  roles. Considering    the theoretical framework,   student and group
characteristics will also be taken into account in the analyses, since we suppose they interact with one another
and influence the dependent variable `level of knowledge construction'.

PROCEDURE
All students (N = 286) enrolled for the course `instructional sciences' were randomly assigned to a discussion
group (N = 23). Each group consisted of about 12 students.
    An experimental design was adopted with the entire first-year student population being randomly assigned
to  the discussion groups. More   specifically, two  research   conditions can  be   distinguished: students in the
discussion groups did or did not receive role assignments. Informed consent was obtained of all students.
    After a trial discussion session of three weeks, students participated in four consecutive discussion themes.
The entire treatment lasted 4 months. Within the three-week time frame students were flexible as to time and
place to work on the discussion assignments. After three weeks, student no longer had access to the particular
theme and a new discussion theme was presented.
    During the first face-to-face session of the semester, the objectives of participation in the discussion were
communicated    to the students, at  the same time,  a demonstration    was   given of   the CSCL   environment. A
number of strict rules, were stated. At the start and at the end of the course, a number of instruments were
presented to the students. In this way, data was gathered with regard to the student characteristics age, gender,
and educational level. During the first administration, a special section was added to measure students' attitude
towards the task-based learning environment and their attitude towards participation in the discussion groups.
Furthermore,  the  Approaches    and Study  Skills   Inventory  for  students (ASSIST)    was  presented  to gather
information about students' `learning styles' (Entwistle, Tait, & McCune, 2000). Reported reliability for the
ASSIST is high, with Cronbach's  between .80 and .87.
    The information about the group characteristic `intensity of interaction' was derived from the analysis of the
contributions to the discussion groups (see infra). The task characteristic `task complexity' will be explained
when describing the discussion themes.

                                                        
Students worked together in the discussion groups by applying the theoretical concepts of the course to solve
problems, which were presented in the on-line environment. These problems were, in line with the constructivist
principles, based on real-life authentic situations. For a more detailed description of the kind of discussion
assignments see the research of Schellens and colleagues (2004).

   Task complexity was determined for each task in the discussion groups. The degree of complexity of the
tasks showed a strong upward trend in the second and third assignment, while the fourth assignment was again
less complex.
   The nature   of  the discussion  assignments was    the same  for  all 23  discussion groups  in the  research,
regardless of the research condition the groups were in: the same learning goal, context, inquiry expectations,
time requirements, and deliverables were put forward. The experimental treatment was based on whether roles
had been assigned or not. Students in 15 out of 23 discussion groups were assigned specific roles. Four different
roles were distinguished: `moderator', `theoretician', `summarizer', and `source searcher'. These roles were
assigned randomly to 4 students in each group. At the start of every new discussion assignment, the roles were
assigned to 4 other students within the same group. This is in line with a collaboration script proposed and tested
by O'Donnell and Dansereau (1992).
   The `moderator' closely monitored the discussions in the on-line environment (every 2 or 3 days) and
interjected praise, offered advice, answered questions, and posed critical questions. This student stimulated
active group participation. The `theoretician' had to make sure that all appropriate theories were considered
when tackling the task and had to indicate which aspects, relevant theoretical knowledge, or information was
lacking. The `summarizer' summarized the contributions and initial solutions of the students in the discussion
groups. This student had to indicate the different points of view and had to try to make some provisional
conclusions. The `source searcher' looked for additional sources and further information, so that students were
prompted to look further than the content of the available course reader.

HYPOTHESES
The present research aims to observe the differential impact of assigning discussion roles to students on their
level of knowledge construction. In addition, the impact is studied of variables at the level of the student, the
group, and the task. The following hypotheses present step-by-step sub-questions in relation to this general
research questions.

       Impact of student characteristics:
          -     More    intensive and  active participation  in the   discussion groups  is  positively related to
                students' level of knowledge construction.
          -     Students   with   a positive  attitude  towards  the  on-line  learning  environment    will reach
                significantly higher levels of knowledge construction.
          -     Students  with  a   deep or  strategic learning style will obtain  significantly higher  levels of
                knowledge construction.

       Impact of group characteristics:
          -     Being   part of a   group with  intensive  discussion activity will lead  to significantly   higher
                individual levels of knowledge construction.
       Impact of task characteristics:
          -     The complexity of the task has a significant impact on the level of knowledge construction.
          -     Working in the role condition will have a significantly positive impact on students' levels of
                knowledge construction.

ANALYSIS OF THE TRANSCRIPTS OF THE DISCUSSION GROUPS
The transcripts of eight groups were randomly selected from the larger data set. For each of the eight groups, the
complete communication submitted in relation to the four discussion themes was used for analysis purposes
using the scheme of Gunawardena and colleagues (1997). This content analysis scheme          has been developed
following a grounded theory approach. It proposes a typology to evaluate knowledge construction through
social negotiation. The authors developed an interaction analysis model that discriminates between five phases
in the negotiation process during a learning process. Every phase corresponds to a typical level of knowledge
construction. In the long run, every learner is expected to reach the highest phases in the negotiation process,
thus reaching the highest level of knowledge construction.
   In the present research the complete message was used as the unit of analysis. According to Rourke and
colleagues (2001) this choice presents some advantages. Firstly, it is objectively identifiable: multiple coders can

                                                        
agree consistently on the total number of units. Secondly, it produces a manageable, controllable set of cases. In
the case of the present study for example, we recorded a total of 1933 messages. The third advantage is the fact
that we are dealing with a unit which parameters were determined by the author of the message.
     To establish inter-rater reliability we used the following method: three independent researchers carried out
the coding task. After the coding of each complete transcript of a discussion by the individual coders, the quality
of the coding was assessed by determining percent agreement measures. A value of .70 was put forward as a
criterion for inter-rater reliability. The initial value was .85. After negotiations percent agreement was .91. To
check whether it was not always the same researcher changing the coding category, percent agreement was also
calculated for each individual researcher. The latter represents the agreement between the first and second
coding of a unit of analysis. Intra-rater reliability always exceeded .70.

RESULTS
Because in the present study the students are divided in a number of groups, the problem under investigation has
a clear  hierarchical structure. Because  of the  joint modeling   of individual  and  group variables,   we took a
multilevel modeling perspective on analyzing the data, for these models are specifically geared to the statistical
analysis of data with   a   clustered structure. To analyze the   data, MlwiN     for multilevel analysis was  used
(Rasbash et al.,1999).
To test the hypotheses regarding the impact on students' levels of knowledge construction students' `mean level
of knowledge construction' per discussion theme was used as a dependent variable.

The first step in the analysis was to examine the results of a fully unconditional three-level null model (Model
0). The intercept of 1.95 in this model simply represents the overall mean of the level of knowledge construction
according to the 5-level coding scheme of Gunawardena and colleagues (1997). As can be inferred from Model
0, the overall variability in the mean level of knowledge construction per discussion theme can be attributed for
the most part (96.20%) to discussion theme-level factors (differences between the four assignments), for 3.26%
to differences between students within the groups, and only for a small part (0.54%) to group-level factors
(differences between the groups). This is already an important result implying that the differences between the
diverse groups and students are much smaller than the differences in individual students' levels of knowledge
construction between the different assignments. This entails that the features of the assignment will be of central
importance in the further analysis.
         To gain a    clear insight into the development   in    students' levels of  knowledge  construction from
discussion theme 1 to theme 4, the measurement occasions were added to the fixed part of the model (Model 1).
As can be seen in Table 1 a significant change in levels of knowledge construction could be determined for the
second (F² = 11.06, df = 1, p = .000), the third (F² = 13.26, df = 1, p = .000), as well as for the fourth theme (F² =
8.78, df = 1, p = .003). For these discussion assignments a significant decrease in students' mean levels of
knowledge construction is observed as compared to the first assignment.

Table 1
Summary of the model estimates for the three-level analyses of students' levels of knowledge construction

     As a next step in the analyses, explanatory variables were included in the model. In Model 2, it can be seen
that   both student    and  task  characteristics  significantly influence   students'  mean level  of  knowledge

                                                         
construction. At student level, higher individual number of postings and a positive attitude towards the learning
environment result in higher mean levels of knowledge construction. At task level, especially the complexity of
the assignments affects students' mean level of knowledge construction per theme. In particular, it appears that
the reported significant decrease in mean levels of knowledge construction from the first to the subsequent
themes disappears when correcting for task complexity. Structuring the task by assigning roles to students does
not have an overall significant impact on the mean level of knowledge construction. Students who were asked to
take up the role of `theoretician' or `moderator' did not score differently as compared to students who worked in
groups without role structuring. Students who were assigned the role of `source searcher' or `moderator' scored
significantly lower. However,    students who    had to summarize  the    discussion at various  moments   obtained
significantly higher mean levels of knowledge construction. Finally, as to the effect of group level variables, the
research findings revealed no significant impact of the intensity of the group's interaction on students' mean
levels of knowledge construction.

In order to unravel the discourse taking place in the different research conditions, additional analyses were
carried out to take a closer look at the differences in the discourse between the discussion groups with and
without roles assigned. More specifically, we focused on the following questions:
         -    Is there a difference in the proportion of task-oriented versus non-task-oriented communication
              under the two research conditions?
         -    Is there a difference in the distribution of the different levels of knowledge construction under the
              two conditions?
         -    Are there differences with regard to the changes in students' levels of knowledge construction over
              time for the different conditions?

    Chi  square   analyses were  used  to explore  potential differences  in the distributions  within the research
conditions. Mann-Whitney U-tests were used to test for differences between the role and no role condition.

Is there a difference in the proportion of task-oriented versus non-task-oriented communication under the two
conditions?
The amount of task-oriented messages far outweigh the amount of not task-oriented messages in both the role
(&2 = 992.88,  df  = 1, p  =.000) and  no  role  condition (&2  = 341.88,  df =  1,  p  =.000). By  comparing  both
conditions, using Mann-Whitney U, no significant difference can be noticed (Z = -1.45, df = 1, p = .148).

Is there a  difference  in the  distribution of  the different levels  of knowledge    construction under  the two
conditions?
To  explore   the differences  between the two   research  conditions, we  first analyzed  whether  the amount  of
messages in the five levels of communication are equally distributed in both conditions. No equal distributions
are observed for both conditions. This is confirmed by the Chi-Square analysis for both the role (&2 = 1397.24,
df = 4, p = .000) and no role condition (&2 = 470.29, df = 4, p = .000). More specifically, in both conditions
level 1 and level 3 communication types were observed to a significantly higher extent, whereas level 4 and 5
have hardly been observed.

    If we compare both research conditions using the Mann-Whitney U-test, no significant differences can be
noticed for the mean levels of knowledge construction reached under both conditions (Z = -0.23, df = 4, p = .82)
although it appears that the distribution of proportions over the five levels is not quite similar (&2 = 572.64, df =
4, p = .000). Correspondence analysis revealed that the differences are mainly found in the three higher levels
and more especially in the highest level of knowledge construction. In the role condition students more often
reached the highest level of knowledge construction, which was however at the expense of messages in level 3
and 4. No significant differences were found with regard to the percentage of messages situated in level 1 and 2.
In summary, the findings indicate that, regardless the research condition, numerous contributions were situated
at the lower levels of knowledge construction.

Are there differences in the changes over time for both conditions?
Findings reflect a certain decrease in communication reflecting higher levels of knowledge construction for both
conditions.
    In the role condition, there is an increase of level 1 knowledge construction, which was at the expense of a
decrease in messages situated at level 2 to 4. However, there is an increase in level 5 knowledge construction.
This change in proportions is significant (&2 = 51.18, df = 4, p = .000). Correspondence analysis indicated that
the changes in proportions of level 3 and 5 were not significant. However, there are significant proportion
changes for level 1, 2, and 4.

                                                         
      In the no role condition a different picture arose. There were shifts in the distribution of proportions, but
these were not similar to the changes in the role condition. Level 1 communication increased over the discussion
themes, while there was a decrease in the amount of messages situated at level 2. Clearly different as compared
to the role condition was that the communication situated at level 3 increased, while there was a complete drop
of messages in level 4 and level 5. This overall change in proportions is significant (&2 = 36.52, df = 4, p
= .000). Correspondence analysis showed that the most significant distribution changes were situated at level 2
to 4.
      In conclusion, it can be argued that there is a change in students' levels of knowledge construction over
time. However, the changes are different in both research conditions.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
      The results indicate that a large part of the overall variability in levels of knowledge construction can be
attributed to task characteristics.
      As to the impact of student characteristics, the amount of individual contributions is a significant predictor
for the level of knowledge construction. The level of knowledge construction is also significantly influenced by
the attitude towards task-based learning and the attitude towards the group discussions. Accordingly, it can be
concluded   that the first   two hypotheses     about  the impact  of   student characteristics  can  be accepted. More
intensive and active individual participation in the discussion groups is positively related to students' achieved
level of knowledge construction, as well as adopting a positive attitude towards the learning environment and
towards participating in group discussions. The third hypothesis, however, has to be rejected. No significant
differences in levels of knowledge construction were found for students with different learning styles. Students
with a deep or strategic learning style did not obtain a significantly higher level of knowledge construction
compared to students with a surface approach.
      Contrary to the results with regard to student characteristics, the hypothesis regarding the impact of group
characteristics were not corroborated. These findings can be explained by the fact that there was very little
difference  in interaction   activity  between    the discussion  groups.  This relates  to  the fact that, based on   the
previous research results, we changed the `rules' concerning the minimum participation requirements in the
discussion groups. Students were expected to contribute more messages to the discussion groups in order to
receive a high evaluation score. As a consequence, hardly significant differences between the groups could be
detected as to their level of interaction. Combining of the findings about the impact of both student and group
characteristics, makes us aware of the fact that promoting effective group discussion activity is not to be reduced
to `stimulating to contribute a large number of messages'. The fact that also a positive attitude towards the
learning environment has a significant and positive impact on student outcomes, stresses the importance of
promoting learning as an enjoyable activity (Westrom 2001).
      As to the impact of task characteristics, significant differences between the consecutive discussion themes
were found. However, the findings were not in line with the expected results. It was hypothesized that students
would reach higher levels of knowledge construction when they deal with the consecutive discussion theme
assignments.   The   results showed    rather   a significant  decrease in levels   of knowledge   construction.  Further
analysis however illustrated that this significant decrease in level of knowledge construction disappeared when
correcting for task complexity. This finding points at the critical importance of the task design and task solution
support provisions.   Task complexity appeared to be an important task characteristic. When the tasks were too
complex, the levels of knowledge construction were significantly lower. On the other hand, when the tasks are
too straightforward, students experience no challenge and the number and quality of the contributions also drop.
      As to the  additional  impact    of  assigning    roles, contrary to  our  expectations,   structuring the  task by
assigning roles to students did not have an additional impact on students' obtained main levels of knowledge
construction. These results were not in line with the positive results of role scripting found in other research
(Weinberger, 2002; Mäkitalo, Weinberger, Häkkinen, and Fischer, 2004; Jeong & Chi, 1997; Strijbos 2003).
But,  in comparing   our   research    results, we  should  take  into  account  that  these types  of scripting  are  not
completely   comparable    to the   role  structuring  that   was applied  in   the present  study.  Moreover,   also  the
dependent variable differs in these studies, which makes it difficult to compare the research results.
      Despite the fact that in the present research students' mean level of knowledge construction in the role and
no role conditions did not differ, additional analyses revealed some potentially interesting results. As to the
differences  in  the proportion     of task   versus  non-task-oriented    messages,   no significant  differences were
observed between the role and no role condition. This is not in line with other research (Strijbos et al., 2004)
where students in the role condition contributed more `task content' focused statements. However we have to
put the present findings in perspective by mentioning that an important part of these messages were inherent to
the specific role description (e.g., encouraging, planning ...).
      As stated above, regarding the levels of knowledge construction, the overall picture did not show significant
differences. At the end of the semester, the mean levels reached did not differ in both conditions. We noticed

                                                             
however, that the distribution pattern of the levels was no longer similar. In the role condition students more
often reached the highest level of knowledge construction, although this was at the expense of messages at level
3 and level 4. There were no significant differences for the proportion of lower level messages. Based on these
findings, it can  be   concluded that  even  though  students'     mean   level of  knowledge   construction in  both
conditions did not differ, the assignment of roles did have an effect on the interaction in the discussion groups.
The findings reveal that students in the role condition more often reach the highest levels, but apparently still
need a certain amount of low level postings at the start of the discussion activity to ground the rest of the
discussion.
   Apart from the fact that being part of a role-based group did not have an impact on students' mean levels of
knowledge construction, we investigated whether having a specific role assignment had an impact on the levels
of knowledge construction for individual students. We found that students who had to perform the role of
`theoretician' did not reach significantly different levels of knowledge construction as compared to students who
worked in    groups without role   structuring. Students    who   were assigned    the role of `source searcher' and
`moderator', however, scored significantly lower than the reference students in the no roles condition. Only
students who had to `summarize' the discussion obtained significantly higher levels of knowledge construction.

REFERENCES
Aviv, R. (2000). Educational Performance of ALN via Content Analysis. Journal of Asynchronous Learning
   Networks, 4 (2), 53-72.
Cifuentes, L., Murphy, K., Segur, R., & Kodali, S. (1997). Design Considerations for Computer Conferences.
   Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 30(2), 177-201.
Clark, D., Weinberger, A., Jucks, I., Spitulnik, M., & Wallace, R. (2003). Designing Effective Science Inquiry
   in  Text-Based      Computer  Supported   Collaborative       Learning Environments.     International Journal of
   Educational Policy, Research & Practice, 4 (1), 55-82.
Coleman, E. B. (1995). Learning by explaining: Fostering collaborative progressive discourse in science. In R.
   J. Beun, M. Baker, & M. Reiner (Eds.), Dialogue and instruction: Modeling interaction in intelligent
   tutoring systems (pp. 123-135). Berlin: Springer
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
   design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL? (pp. 61-91). Heerlen:
   Open Universiteit Nederland.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1995). The evolution of research on collaborative
   learning.   In   P.  Reimann  &    H. Spada      (Eds.), Learning    in  humans     and   machines:  Towards   an
   interdisciplinary learning science (pp. 189-211). Oxford: Elsevier.
Entwistle, N., Tait, H., & McCune V., (2000). Patterns of response to an approaches to studying inventory
   across contrasting groups and contexts. European Journal of Psychology of Education,15, 33-48.
Felder, R. M., Felder, G. N., Mauney, M., Hamrin, Jr., C. E., and Dietz, E. J (1995). A longitudinal study of
   engineering    student performance    and    retention.  III. Gender   Differences   in  Student Performance  and
   Attitudes. Journal of Engineering Education, 84 (2), 151.
Gunawardena,   C.   N., Lowe,   C. A., &  Anderson,    T.   (1997).  Analysis   of  a  global  online debate and  the
   development of an interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in computer
   conferencing. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17, 397-431.
Hakkarainen,   K.,  Lipponen, L.,  &   Järvelä,  S. (2002).   Epistemology      of Inquiry  and Computer-Supported
   Collaborative Learning. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall, and N. Miyake (eds.). CSCL 2: Carrying Forward the
   Conversation. Lawrence Erlbaum, 129-156.
Hakkarainen , K. &   Palonen, T. (2003). Patterns of female      and male students' participation in peer interaction in
   computer-supported learning. Computers and Education, 40 (4), 327-342.
Harasim, L., Hiltz, S., Teles, L., & Turoff, M. (1998). Learning Networks: A Field Guide to Teaching and
   Learning Online. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Hare, A.P. (1994). Types of roles in small groups: A bit of history and a current perspective. Small Group
   Reasearch, 25, 443-448.
Harper, B., Squires, D. & McDougall, A. (2000). Constructivist simulations: A new design paradigm. Journal of
   Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 9(2), 115-130.
Illera, J. (2001). Collaborative environments and task design in the university. Computers in Human Behavior,
   17(5-6), 481-493.
Jeong, H., & Chi, M.T.H. (1997). Construction of shared knowledge during collaborative learning. In R. Hall,
   N. Miyake, & N. Enyede (Eds.), Proceedings of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning '97 (pp. 124-
   128). Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Johnson, D., Johnson, R., & Holubec, E. (1998). Cooperation in the classroom. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

                                                           
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F.W. (2003). Cooperation scripts for computer-supported collaborative learning.
   In B. Wasson, R. Baggetun, U. Hoppe, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference
   on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning -CSCL 2003, COMMUNITY EVENTS-Communication
   and Interaction (pp.59-61). Bergen: InterMedia.
Kumar, V.S. (1996). Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning: Issues for research. 8th Annual Graduate
   Symposium on Computer Science, University of Saskatchewan, Canada. Retrieved August 16, 2004, from
   http://www.cs.usask.ca/grads/vsk719/academic/890/project2/project2.html
Mäkitalo, K.,Weinberger,A., Häkkinen, P., & Fischer, F. (2004). Uncertainty-reducing cooperation scripts in
   online      learning    environments.       Retrieved    July      14,    2004,       from     http://www.iwm-
   kmrc.de/workshops/sim2004/pdf_files/Makitalo_et al.pdf
O'Donnell, A. N., & Dansereau, D. F. (1992). Scripted cooperation in student dyads: A method for analyzing
   and enhancing academic learning and performance. In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz, & N. Miller, Interactions in
   cooperative groups. The theoretical anatomy of group learning (pp. 120-141). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
   University Press.
Quinn,  C.   N.   (1997)   Engaging    learning.    ITForum   Paper   #18.   Retrieved    July   12,  2004,   from
   http://itech1.coe.uga.edu/itforum/paper18/paper18.html
Rasbash, J., Browne, W., Goldstein, H., Yang, M., Plewis, I., Healy, M., Woodhouse, G., & Draper, D. (1999).
   A user's guide to MLwiN. London: Institute of Education.
Rose,  M.  A., (2002).  Cognitive dialogue,  Interaction patterns,  and Perceptions   of  Graduate Students in  an
   Online Conference Environment under Collaborative and Cooperative Structures, Indiana University.
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison, D. R., & Archer, W. (2001). Methodological Issues in the Content Analysis
   of computer conference transcripts. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 12, 8-22.
Salomon, G., & Globerson, T. (1989). When teams do not function the way they ought to. International Journal
   of Educational Research, 13 (1),89-99.
Schellens, T.,  &  Valcke,  M.    (2000). Re-engineering   conventional    university education:  Implications for
   students' learning styles. Distance Education, 21(2), 361-384.
Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (in press). Collaborative learning in asynchronous discussion groups: What about
   the impact on cognitive processing? Computers in Human Behavior.
Schellens, T, Van Keer, H., & Valcke, M. (2004). Learning in asynchronous discussion groups: A multilevel
   approach    to study the  influence of  student, group,  and task  characteristics.   Manuscript  submitted for
   publication.
Slavin, R.E. (1995). Cooperative learning: Theory, research and practice. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Spiro, R., Feltovich,  P., Jacobson,   M.  &  Coulson,   R. (1988).  Cognitive   Flexibility, Constructivism,  and
   Hypertext:   Random     Access Instruction  for Advanced  KnowledgeAcquisition      in Ill-Structured Domains.
   Retrieved September 20, 2002, from http://www.ilt.columbia.edu/ilt/papers/Spiro.html
Sternberg, R.J. (1997). Thinking styles. Cambridge University Press, NY.
Strijbos, J. W., Martens, R. L., Jochems, W. M. G., & Broers, N. J. (2004). The effect of functional roles on
   group   efficiency:  Using multilevel   modelling   and  content analysis  to investigate   computer-supported
   collaboration in small groups. Small Group Research, 35(2), 195-229.
Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive Load theory, learning difficulty and instructional design. Learning and Instruction,
   4, 295-312.
Veerman    A.,  &   Veldhuis-Diermanse,     E.  (2001).   Collaborative    learning   through  computer-mediated
   communication    in  academic   education.  In   P. Dillenbourg,   A.   Eurelings, &   K.  Hakkarainen   (Eds.),
   European Perspectives on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. Proceedings of the First European
   Conference on CSCL. Maastricht: McLuhan Institute, University of Maastricht.
Weinberger, A. (2003). Scripts for computer-supported collaborative learning. Effects of social and epistemic
   cooperation scripts on collaborative knowledge construction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Ludwig-
   Maximilians-Universität.
Weinberger, A., Reiserer, M., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2003). Facilitating collaborative knowledge
   construction in computer-mediated learning with structuring tools. In R. Bromme, F. Hesse, & H. Spada
   (Eds.), Barriers and biases in net based communication. Norwell: Kluwer.
Westrom, M. (2001). Constructivist strategies for e-Learning. Course paper prepared for the Ewha Women's
   University. Retrieved July 12, 2004, from http://www.cust.educ.ubc.ca/westrom/CSeL.htm
Workman,    M.(2004).   Performance    and  perceived   effectiveness   in computer-based     and  computer-aided
   education: do cognitive styles make a difference? Computers in Human Behavior, 20 (4), 517-534.

                                                        
