       Non-linear Dynamical Development of CSCL
                                             Communities
                       Li Sha                                                    Jan van Aalst
             Faculty of Education                                           Faculty of Education
         Simon Fraser University                                          Simon Fraser University
                    lsha@sfu.ca                                                vanaalst@sfu.ca

        Abstract.    The    goal  of this    study  was   to  explore   the dynamics     of  the  formation    and
        development      of  CSCL    communities,     which   is believed   to  reflect, to  a large  extent,    the
        interaction among learners. Two different types of CSCL communities (grade four students
        and  teacher   education)  were investigated.     The data  representing  note   reading    were analyzed
        from  a  non-linear    dynamical  system    perspective.   The  findings indicate    that the   grade  four
        data  are   best described   by  an  exponential    model,   and  the   teacher  education   data  by    an
        oscillatory    model.   We   conclude   that   the   method   we  discuss   is   potentially    useful   for
        understanding the development of reading practices in a CSCL community.

        Keywords: Knowledge building, development, non-linear dynamical system

INTRODUCTION
The notion of a learning community has received much attention in recent years, especially in research on
CSCL     (Brown     &  Campione,     1990;   Lock,    2002;  Scardamalia,   2002;   Woodruff,     1999).  Researchers    in
CSCL     may  be  interested   in how   an   online learning  community     develops   over   time.  Factors   influencing
this   development     include  the  task assigned    the  teachers'  interventions.    Another   question    is how    the
development      of the  learning   community      influences  individual   and  collective   learning   outcomes.    Such
issues can be investigated empirically. For instance, Hewitt (2003) investigated the development of threads
that reflects the interactions among online learners in terms of idea exchange. According to Hewitt, "Online
interaction is dynamic and its development is shaped by a wide variety of factors" (p. 32). Those factors
include, for instance, the needs and goals of the participants, the requirements of the course the instructor
defines (i.e. the invention imposed by the instructor), the role of the instructor, and the emergent properties
of  the  discourse    itself   (Hewitt, 2003).   In   other  words,   the   evolution    of a  learning   community      is
inextricably bound to the setting in which the discussion takes place.
     In the case of knowledge     building,   a specific   approach  in CSCL,    Bereiter   (2002)   has pointed    out the
importance of emergence. Since nonlinear dynamical models have had some success in explaining emergent
phenomena in a number of fields (Guastello, 2002; Morrison, 2002), our research program examines its use
for explaining how learning communities--strictly speaking, knowledge building communities--develop.
As   a first step in  this  direction,  this study  examines   the  trajectories of one   variable,  note reading,    in a
relatively large set of online discussions in Knowledge ForumTM. Follow-up studies will extend the picture
we can develop to other variables including variables from social network theory (Haythornthwaite, 2002).
     Stahl (2000) posits collaborative knowledge building as a social process of interacting with others, and
involving the interplay of group and personal perspectives. Knowledge that can be considered a product of
social  communication       is embedded   in  the  interaction patterns  of the  communicating      societies.   In  Stahl's
study,   the  learning   process  is modeled    as    the mutual   constitution   of   the  individual   and   the   social.
Knowledge is a socially mediated product.
     A CSCL community can be conceived of as a social network in which students are seen as nodes, and
the  interplays     between    them  occurring     in collaborative    interactions  are    treated as   social  relations
(Haythornthwaite, 2002). Social interaction is key to collaboration (Kreijns, Kirschner, & Jochems, 2002).
Thus,    research   on   collaborative  learning    requires  exploration   of   social  interactions    among    learners.
According     to  Vygotsky     (1978),  social  interaction   plays   a fundamental      role  in   the  development     of
cognition.   Within    the  framework   of   social constructivism,    learning  involves    peer interaction,   including
discussion. In other words, learning occurs in a community setting which can be described and analyzed
from   a social   network    perspective,  which    tells us  that a community      is  established  through     relation(s)
linking community members to each other, for instance, reading others' notes in this study.

                                                             
     To  study  the  development    of learning   communities      (and  its  effect  on   learning), it   is important     to
understand   the  nature  of learning  communities.     According   to   Lock   (2002),    a  community       is not   only a
product, but   also  a dynamic    process  that evolves   with   time.   As   for  the nature   of learning      community,
Jonassen,  Peck,  and    Wilson   (1999)  claimed    that learning  communities        are characterized   as    a "common
cause of mutual support and learning, by shared values and goals" (p. 118). Communication, collaboration,
interaction, and    participation  are four cornerstones     for a learning   community        framework   (Lock,      2002).
Communication       is   thought   of  as  pivotal   in   an  online   community.       Without      effective     communal
communication     there  is  no  community    (Schwier,    2001).   In   this sense,   researchers   with  interest    in  the
sustainability of   learning communities      can analyze    the relations    linking  community      members.      In  other
words, the formation and development of a learning community is manifested through revealing the change
of a relation  or a  set of  relations that links learners   to  each other.    In CSCL      approaches    like    knowledge
building (Bereiter,    &  Scardamalia,  1996,   Bereiter,  2002),   the  relations    among    community      members      are
normally established through a series of information and idea exchanges, such as reading and commenting
other students' notes.
     Questions    regarding  the   development    of learning    communities      are  essentially  about     the  dynamics
related to the formation and development of social networks in terms of their size and stability. According
to Guastello (2002), communication entails information flows between actors, who are responsible for the
development positive and negative feedback channels. This suggests that a non-linear dynamical process
underlies the formation and development of learning communities. According to a principle of non-linear
dynamical    system  theory  (NDS,     Guastello, 2002),   the   evolution   of a  non-linear   dynamical     system    is  at
some  stages   slow    and  gradual;  the slow  and   gradual    effects culminate     into   sudden  and     discontinuous
changes  of  events  and   conditions. This   principle   can   be used  to   establish    the dynamics    of    community
formation   and   development,     and the  conditions    under  which   the    non-linear   dynamical     development      of
communities unfolds, which will be explored in this study. Dynamics is the study of how variables affect
each other   over time    (van  Geert, 1997).   Philosophically,    dynamic     system     theory  is anti-reductionistic.
According to dynamic system theory, the behavior of the system is not influenced in a simply linear way
by the factors operating on within it, but is influenced in nonlinear and interdependent ways.

METHOD

Participants        and    procedures
The participants were students using online discussion in two educational settings. The first database was
created by 28 grade four students (approximately ten years old) in a school in metropolitan Vancouver. The
school was in an above-average area in terms of socioeconomic status, but the class had a typical range of
students in terms of achievement. The students had not used online discussion before but had spent several
moths developing an offline learning community. The use of online discussion was integrated closely with
other classroom activities as students studied electricity and First Nations issues in British Columbia. The
students had access to the database from several computers in the classroom and visited a computer lab two
to three times   per week.   The   second  database  was   created by    12  graduate  students    taking  a  one-semester
course on knowledge building (van Aalst & Chan, 2001). In this case, the online discussion was used to
discuss  the course's    readings; developing   an   online  community        was  especially   important     as   the course
consisted of two cohorts and the students did not all meet face-to-face. Each cohort met independently on a
weekly basis, and the course was also supported by three videoconferences.
Data    and   Measures
The  two  classes   used   a Knowledge      ForumTM   (KF)    database   to   record  how    their collective    ideas  were
developing.   KF  is   a computer-based,    communal      database that  students     develop   to  collaboratively     build
understanding    of certain  problems   (Bereiter &   Scardamalia,    1996).    Students'     collaborative   contributions
can  manifest  themselves    in  a variety  of  activities   maintaining    collections    of  notes  that represent    their
understanding of a shared problem. The database can be used to track how individual students and the class
as a whole   improve     understanding,   and how    understanding    progresses.   Students    write notes;     these  notes
can be read and responded to by others students who have access to the database. In this study we focus on
the percentage of notes that have been read per participant. This variable was measured for each day that the
databases were active. Note reading is necessary for acquiring information, exchanging ideas, and working
to collaboratively improve ideas in CSCL settings. Percentage of notes that have been read per author can,
in some sense, be conceived of as the extent to which the class can be expected to be familiar with ideas,
information, and theories posted in the database. No online learning is possible with very low amounts of

                                                           
reading each other's notes, as notes record the participants' ideas, information, comments, and so forth. In
this sense, percentage of note read by per participant, to a certain degree, represents the extent to which the
students engaged in knowledge building activities, although note reading was not the only learning activity
in which the students engaged (e.g., they also responded to notes). However, note reading is a prerequisite
for other actions.
        This study aims to preliminarily model the organizational change and development of social networks
occurring within            a CSCL             community        from       a     NDS      perspective          (Guastello,          2002).      Recent         dynamical
thinking about social networks involves the issues related their formation, development, and stability. In a
general    sense,       the  formation         and    development          of      networks           can  be  characterized           with    the        growth       of the
number       of links      in   the  network         over   time.       In this       study,   the        quantity        of note    reading      obtained             from     a
software retrieving server-log data from the KF server (the Analytic Toolkit for Knowledge Forum, ATK,
see     Burtis,  1998),            will represent          this link.      A       nonlinear            regression     model        with      Lyapunov         exponent
(Guastell, 2002) is introduced to test whether the targeted CSCL communities were undergoing a chaotic
expansion       positive           Lyapunov          exponent),         were       attraction           toward       a stable       state     (negative        Lyapunov
exponent), or were showing oscillating behavior.

Results
All the data from the two example databases were analyzed                                               through      curve       estimation     in        SPSS.11.        The
trajectories of the percentage of notes read in both databases are shown in the figure below.

        READNOTE                                                                                      READNOTE
     .6                                                                                            .4

     .5
                                                                                                   .3

     .4

                                                                                                   .2
     .3

     .2                                                                                            .1

     .1
                                                                          Observed               0.0                                                                     Observed
   0.0                                                                    Linear                                                                                         Linear

    -.1                                                                   Logarithmic             -.1                                                                    Logarithmic
        0           20          40          60          80          100                               0           20          40          60           80          100

        TIME                                                                                          TIME
                              a) Grade Four                                                                            b) Teacher Education

        For  the  grade      four    data,     both   linear    and      non-linear       regression           models        (exponential         function      models)
were calculated to fit the data. The non-linear model provided a better fit to the data than the linear model
(R-sq=.37,      F=57.39,           p=.000      compared       with       R-sq=.23,        F=29.79,          p=.000).         This    means      that       the dynamics
of  note     reading      in    this    community           had  a      fixed      point    attractor       describing            that   note     reading      vanished
exponentially. An attractor is a fundamental notion in complex system theory, and refers to states towards
which a system may evolve when starting from certain initial conditions (Guastello, 2002). In a general
sense, a fixed-point attractor makes a behavior gravitate toward a steady state or a constant value. Other
types     of attractor       include     magnetic           attractor     (fixed-point         is       a special      case      of it),     chaotic      attractor,      and
periodic or quasi-periodic attractor (Guastello, 2002).
    There    were         three    peaks in       the teacher   education             data: near        the start,     at    approximately        40       days,       and      at
approximately after 70 days. From the start to the first peak the percentage of notes grew linearly (R-sq =
.31, F=8.2, p=.012); these data could not be fit to an exponential function (p=.10). Between the first and
third     peaks  there     were     short      but   quasi-regular         oscillations,       that        is, a     limit       cycle similar     to      a   sinusoidal
wave. Between second and third peaks, there were chaotic oscillations. In this sense, the development of
this    teacher  education          database      in  terms     of      note     reading    is essentially             is non-linear         with  a      quasi-periodic
attractor    that      is an  attractor        in non-linear     dynamical             system         holding        objects     in  a   limit    cycle      around       the
attractor center (Guastello, 2002). The following pedagogical events can help us interpret the three peaks.
Approximately             3-4      weeks       after  the   beginning            of   the   course,        the       class   had    established            standards       for
participation.         Six   weeks      later,       the   students      wrote        portfolio          notes       stimulating       note    reading,        and       they

                                                                                      
stopped contributing regularly that naturally decreases the activities of reading notes (van Aalst & Chan,
2001).
    According to the above brief analyses, it can be concluded that the two sample databases represent two
different patterns of community development that should be described using different non-linear dynamical
models  (fixed-point  attractor and quasi-periodic   attractor). In any  case,  a linear model   appears  not  to be
sufficient to model the development of note reading in these communities.

DISCUSSION
To  date, there are few  studies   that examine   the development     of  CSCL    communities    from a   non-linear
dynamical system perspective. To our knowledge, this study is one of the first attempts to investigate the
development   of   CSCL   communities    this way.   Although    this was   an  exploratory study, it showed     that
nonlinear modeling described the evolution of reading in these databases better than linear modeling. One
of us (the first author) will conduct studies to examine this issue in a large set of databases, and examine
knowledge   building    design, teacher's  pedagogical    interventions,    and student  trait  variables that may
influence the different modes of development of online communities.
    This study shows that the reading data are not merely irregular curves, but form a variety of non-linear
trajectories. It is hoped that knowledge of critical points and the specific models that describe the data can
be used to provide an empirical basis for instructional strategies that can support knowledge building. The
non-linear trajectories  should not be   conceived   of sheer irregular   curves,  but   something   embracing   rich
information   related to teaching  and  learning.  However,   to  do   that, our  analyses  must  be  extended    and
include   more  dependent     variables  (e.g.,  linkages   between   notes)   and  independent    variables   (e.g.,
instructional design, the teacher's interventions, and motivation). This study has established a platform on
which  we  will introduce  the  aforementioned    variables and  student    individual variables  to develop   more
comprehensive    accounts  of  development    of  effective CSCL      communities,    linking  emergent   collective
properties of the  community    to not  only  its components     and  their interactions (e.g. students'  individual
variables), but also to external constraints (e.g. teacher's intervention). The non-linear dynamical feature of
the two targeted CSCL communities is emergent; and this means that it cannot be predicted on the onset
of collaborative learning. That is to say, philosophically, determinism in principle, but unpredictability in
practice underlies the NDS (Carver & Scheier, 1998). It only exists and arises from the interplay of internal
factors and external factors. This is a manifestation of micro-to-macro emergence from individual actions
(Sawyer,  2001).   This  goal will be   achieved  by  measuring   a   substantial number   of  CSCL   communities
from which some basic types of non-linear dynamical development would be identified. The revelation of
the dynamics    of formation  and  development    of CSCL    communities     will  be  informative of both    CSCL
designers and CSCL educators in terms of creating and sustaining CSCL communities.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by a grant to the second author from the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada. We also thank Michael Cummings (British Columbia School District 43)
and Carol Chan (The University of Hong Kong) for supplying the data we analyzed.
.

REFERENCES
Bereiter, C., &    Scardamalia, M.  (1996)    Rethinking  learning.   In D.R.   Olson, &   N.Torrance  (Eds.),   The
       handbook of education and human development: New models of learning, teaching and schooling
       (pp. 485-513). Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawernce Erlaum Associates.
Brown, A.L., & Campione, J.C. (1990). Communities of learning and thinking, or a context by any other
       name. In D. Kuhn (Ed.), Developmental perspectives on teaching and learning thinking               skills
       (Vol. 21). Contributions to human development (pp. 108-126). New York, NY: Oxford University
       Press.
Burtis, J. (1998) The analytic toolkit. The Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, The University of
       Toronto: Knowledge Building Research Team.
Carver, C. S. & Scheier, M. F. (1998). On the self-regulation of behavior. Cambridge University Press.
Guastello, S. J. (2002). Managing emergent phenomena: nonlinear dynamics in work organization. LEA,
       Publishers Mahwah, NJ.

                                                        
Haythornthwaite,     C. (2002).  Building   social networks    via computer     networks:  Creating   and sustaining
       distributed   learning   communities.     In    K.A.    Renninger    &    W.   Shumar,   Building      Virtual
       Communities: Learning and Change in Cyberspace             (pp.159-190). Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.
Hewitt,   J. (2003).  How    habitual online   practices   affect the development     of  asynchronous    discussion
       threads. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 28(1), 31-45.
Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2002). The Sociability of Computer-Supported
Collaborative
       Learning Environments. Educational Technology & Society 5(1), 8-22.
Jonassen, D.    H.,  Peck,   K. L., &  Wilson,     B.  G.  (1999). Learning     with  technology:   a  constructivist
       perspective. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Merrill.
Lock,  J. V.    (2002). Laying  the groundwork     for the development    of learning communities     within  online
       courses. The Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 3, 395-408.
Morrison, K. (2002). School leadership and complexity theory. New York, NY: Routledge Falmer.
Sawyer, R. K. (2001). Emergence in sociology: contemporary philosophy of mind and some implications
       for sociological theory. American Journal of Sociology, 107, 551-581.
Scardamalia,    M.   (2002). Collective  cognitive    responsibility  for the advancement   of  knowledge.    In B.
       Smith (ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Schwier,     R.  A.  (2001).    Catalysts,  Emphases,      and  Elements     of  Virtual   Learning   Communities:
       Implications for Research and Practice. Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 2(1), 5-18.
Stahl, G.    (2000). A  model   of collaborative knowledge-building.      In  B.   Fishman  &  O'Connor-Divelbiss
       (Eds.),   Fourth   International    Conference   of the    Learning   Science  (pp. 70-77).    Mahwah,    NJ:
       Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
van Aalst, J., & Chan, C.K.K. (2001, March) Beyond "sitting next to each other": A design experiment on
       knowledge     building   in teacher education.   In P.  Dillenbourg,     A. Eurelings,  and  K. Hakkarainen
       (Eds.),   European  perspectives    on computer-supported     collaborative   learning: Proceedings    of the
       First    European  Conference  on   Computer-Supported       Collaborative    Learning, Maastricht,    March
       22-24, 2001 (pp. 20-28). Maastricht, the Netherlands: University of Maastricht.
Van Geert, P. (1997). Determinism and nonlinear dynamic model building in development. In A. Fogel,
       M.    C.D.   Lyra &   J. Valsiner   (Eds.). Dynamics     and   indeterminism   in   development    and social
       process (pp. 13-38). Lawrence Erlbaum Association, Publishers, Mahwah, NJ.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes.
          Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Woodruff, E. (1999). Concerning the cohesive nature of CSCL communities. In C. Hoadley (Ed.),
          Proceedings of Computer support for collaborative learning. Designing new media for a new
          millennium: Collaborative technology for learning, education, and training (pp. 677-680). Palo
          Alto, CA: Stanford University.

                                                          
