Why All CSL is CL: Distributed Mind and the Future
  of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning

          David Williamson Shaffer                                         Katherine A. Clinton
  Department of Educational Psychology                        Department of Curriculum and Instruction
    University of Wiscomsin-Madison                               University of Wisconsin-Madison
             dws@education.wisc.edu                                         kaclinton@wisc.edu

     Abstract. In this paper, we argue that this distinction between CSCL and HCI is based on a
     particular understanding of the relationship between humans and computers--and more generally
     between humans and their tools in activity systems. We draw on work by Shaffer and Kaput
     (1999),   Clark    (2003), and   Latour  (1996a;  1996b;   1996c)   to conduct  a  thought  experiment,
     extending the analytical reach of activity theory (Nardi, 1996b), mediated action (Wertsch, 1998)
     and distributed cognition (Pea, 1993) by adopting a stronger form of the concepts of distribution
     and mediation in the context of cognitive activity. For rhetorical purposes, we posit this stronger
     form of the distribution of intelligence across persons and objects as a theory of distributed mind.
     Our purpose in describing a theory of distributed mind as an extension of (but not replacement
     for)    extant sociocultural theories on   this 10th anniversary   of  the International Conference on
     Computer Supported Collaborative Learning is to problematize for the field its current focus on
     human collaboration as supported by computers. We are concerned that a field focusing on the
     interactions   of  humans   will  overlook the  ways  in  which    meaningful cognitive  (and  therefore
     pedagogical) activity is distributed among human and non-human agents within activity systems.
     We argue that all computer-supported learning is fundamentally collaborative--whether or not the
     computer is supporting the interaction of persons in the learning process. The consequences of
     such a move are a call for a tighter integration of the fields of CSCL and HCI, and a more
     powerful framework to help guide pedagogical choices in an age marked by rapid expansion of
     powerful cognitive technologies.

     Keywords: Sociocultural theories, activity systems, distributed mind, virtual culture

INTRODUCTION
Over the last decade, work in computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) has focused predominantly on
ways in which computational media make possible new modes of interaction between people in the pursuit of
understanding. That   is, work  on  CSCL   has  focused   on  how  computers    support human   collaboration. Over
roughly the same period of time, work on human computer interaction (HCI) has focused on ways in which
people communicate with computers and other computational devices in the pursuit of meaningful goals--
including the development of understanding.
  In this paper, we argue that this distinction between CSCL and HCI is based on a particular understanding of
the relationship between humans and computers--and more generally between humans and their tools in activity
systems. We draw on work by Shaffer and Kaput (1999), Clark (2003), and Latour (1996a; 1996b; 1996c) to
conduct a thought experiment, extending the analytical reach of activity theory (Nardi, 1996b), mediated action
(Wertsch, 1998)     and distributed  cognition  (Pea, 1993)    by adopting   a  stronger form   of the concepts  of
distribution  and mediation  in  the  context  of cognitive   activity. We  suggest that  new  computational   tools
problematize the concept of thought within current sociocultural theories by challenging the traditional position
of privilege that humans occupy in sociocultural analyses. For rhetorical purposes, we posit this stronger form of
the distribution of intelligence across persons and objects as a theory of distributed mind.
  Our purpose in describing a theory of distributed mind as an extension of (but not replacement for) extant
sociocultural theories  on  this  10th anniversary   of   the International  Conference   on  Computer   Supported
Collaborative Learning is to problematize for the field its current focus on human collaboration as supported by
computers. In an era of increasingly powerful computational games, simulations, and the virtual worlds they
create, we are concerned that a field focusing on the interactions of humans will overlook the ways in which
meaningful cognitive (and therefore pedagogical) activity is distributed among human and non-human agents

                                                          
within activity systems. We argue that all computer-supported learning is fundamentally collaborative--whether
or not the computer is supporting the interaction of persons in thelearning process.
   The consequences of such a move are a call for a tighter integration of the fields of CSCL and HCI, and a more
powerful framework to help guide pedagogical choices in an age marked by rapid expansion of powerful cognitive
technologies.

BACKGROUND

The dilemma of action
To illustrate the   issue at hand,  we  begin with  a contradiction.   In  Mind   As   Action, Wertsch   (1998) offers a
historical review of research on human action, describing a moment in Kenneth Burke's theorizing when Burke
contrasts the actions  of  persons  with the  "sheer  `motions'   of `things'"   (p. 12). Burke  claims  that he is "not
pronouncing on the metaphysics of this controversy," for "the distinction between things moving and persons
acting is but an illusion." However, Burke adds: "Illusion or not, the human race cannot possibly get along with
itself on the basis of any other intuition" (p. 13). For Burke, humans need to remain at the center of activity
because it is too disconcerting to think otherwise.
   Computation media problematize this basic intuition because modern computers--and equipment controlled
by computers --act independently in ways that traditional tools do not. Thought and action are no longer the
sole property of humans: computers and other digital tools exhibit significant kinds of thinking and important
forms of  independent  activity. They create a variety of situations in which people      clearly think with rather than
using tools.
   In what follows, we argue that although existing sociocultural theories of cognition assign an essential role to
objects in their frameworks for studying action, in a sense, Burke's center still holds. Computational media thus
provide both a means and a motive to push beyond current theory. We ground this claim about the significance
of computational media in understanding thought using the theory of virtual culture.

The evolution of virtual culture

A number of theorists, including Dewey        (1991), Clark  (2003), and  Bateson    (1972) have  written about  the  co-
evolution  of tools,  culture  and cognition through  which,   as Donald   (1991) suggests, "the individual mind has
long since  ceased  to be  definable in  any meaningful   way  within  its confining   biological membrane"    (p.  359).
Building on   a large body   of prior work on the development     of  writing  (Schmandt-Besserat,   1978, 1992,   1994),
Donald argues that with the development of extended societies within a mythic culture, the record -keeping needs
of commerce and astronomy led to the creation of external symbol systems, of which mathematical notations were
probably  the first (see  also Kaput   & Roschelle,   1998). Donald   suggests   that these external records  led  to the
development a theoretic culture based on written symbols and paradigmatic thought characteristic of scientific
disciplines. DiSessa (2000) describes historically powerful representational and inscriptional tools such as writing
and mathematical notation as infrastructural. In a theoretic culture, such tools play a leading role in cognitive
activity and thus in formal education. Schooling in a theoretic culture focuses on learning to access parts of the
cultural record and manipulate them through writing and mathematical notation (Donald, 1991).
   Writing and mathematical notations are, of course, static representational systems, and therefore thinking in a
theoretic culture can  be  reasonably   characterized as  the  result of  human   agency    mediated by   cultural tools.
Computational media, however, are inherently dynamic representations (Kaput, 1986, 1992, 1996a, 1996b; Kaput &
Shaffer, 2002; Papert, 1993, 1996; Shaffer & Kaput, 1999), and thus suggest a different relationship between tool
and person. Building on Donald's framework, Shaffer and Kaput (1999) describe computational media as a new
transformative tool, one in the process of creating a new cognitive culture. They argue that just as theoretic
inscription  systems  such as  writing and mathematical  notation    externalize human    memory, computational    media
make it possible to externalize well-formed algorithms. That is, computers make it possible to create artifacts that
take a particular form of thinking (understanding that can be expressed in the form of a finite state algorithm) and
allow it to be carried out independent of any person. Computation thus makes it possible to develop simulations
that dynamically enact and reenact parts of the way we understand our world. Shaffer and Kaput argue that if
written symbols led to a theoretic culture based on external symbolic storage, then computational media are in the
process of creating a virtual culture based on the externalization of symbolic processing.

Theories of Mediational Means, Activity Theory, and Distributed Cognition
A  broad  range   of  recent   work  in  psychology   and    anthropology  supports    the  basic contention   that   the
relationships among thought, action, and technology are essential in understanding learning. This body of work

                                                         
examines the problems with analyzing thought and action from the perspective of an individual without taking
into account the context of tools and social interactions in which thinking and acting take place. In addressing
this concern with context, theories of mediation means, activity theory, and distributed cognition in particular
have attempted to grapple with the role of technology in thinking:
    Each of   these  theories   begins by   positing that   activity necessarily takes place in the context of       mediating
tools. Wertsch (1998), argues that thinking always emerges through action with mediational means--that is, with
tools --and thus learning is not the acquisition of isolated skills that transfer to from one context to another, but
rather the  mastery     and     appropriation   of  cultural tools.   In activity theory,   this premise    is represented   by
Vygotsky's    (1978)  model     of mediated  action,  which  relates  subject, object,   and mediating   artifact (Engestrom,
1999). In distributed cognition, Norman (1993) describes a similar framework for analysis as an equation, with the
system of activity composed of a person and an artifact. There are important distinctions in how these theories
frame the issue. But they all suggest that the appropriate unit of analysis for thought and action is the interaction
of people and tools in social context, rather than the level of either persons or tools in isolation.
    One important issue these theories address is the relationship between artifact and person within this unit of
analysis. Activity theory proposes explicit linkages among individual actors, tools, confederates, and the norms
of action within a social context (Engestrom, 1999). In so doing, it provides a descriptive framework for clarifying
the unity of consciousness and activity by positing that consciousness is located in practice, which is, in turn,
embedded    in   an  historically -developed    social  matrix of people   and   artifacts.  Distributed cognition    similarly
proposes that knowledge resides in people, in tools, and in cultural settings in which people interact with tools
without being locatable exclusively in the heads of individual persons or in the design of specific artifacts; that is,
the parts of the system have knowledge, but the system as a whole is more knowledgeable than the sum of its
parts (Hutchins, 1995). Distributed cognition analyzes the persistence of knowledge in such systems, both in the
form of physical artifacts and in the processes through which the system perpetuates its norms and functions
(Nardi, 1996a).
    However,     all of these    theories  posit an  asymmetrical     relationship between     persons   and    artifacts. This
distinction is explicit in the case of activity theory, which identifies three levels of means as operation, action,
and   activity, with the  corresponding    ends  of  instrumental    conditions,  goal , and motive  (Engestrom, 1999). The
later (motive) is ascribed      only  to human   beings  (Kaptelinin, 1996; Nardi, 1996a), and thus the        structure of the
highest level in the operation/action/activity framework is by definition determined by the human agents in the
system. In distributed cognition, the asymmetry is less explicitly drawn. Both humans and artifacts are referred to
as  agents in   the  system. However,     theorists  of dis tributed cognition  such as   Solomon,  Perkins,    and  Globerson
(1991) make the distinction between the things a person can achieve with a tool, and the effects of that tool on his
or her thinking   in  other  contexts--that is,     without the tool. While  Pea   (1993) rejects this formulation, he does
assert that "the primary sense of distributed intelligence arises from thinking of people in action," and adds in a
footnote, "I take the work of Leont'ev on activity theory as arguing forcibly for the centrality of people-in-action,
activity systems, as units of analysis for deepening our understanding of thinking" (p. 49). And elsewhere: "I use
the phrase `distributed intelligence' rather than `distributed cognition,' because people, not designed objects,
`do' cognition" (p.50). Wertsch's conception of the relationship of persons to objects is implied in his construal
of mediated action as meaning "agent-acting-with-mediational-means." Wertsch (1998) explains, for example, that
"the task of a sociocultural approach is to explicate the relationships between human action, on one hand, and
the cultural,   ins titutional, and  historical contexts  in which   this action  occurs,   on the other"   (p. 24). From   the
standpoint of these frameworks, activity systems are something to be analyzed by focusing on human action.
Each thus reinscribes Burke's center: it is people who are do the acting.
    The problem this poses from the point of view of virtual culture is that when we use the general category of
human action to analyze activity, focusing on the person using the tool obscures the active role tools play. This
may not have posed a significant problem in analyzing the static inscriptional systems of a theoretic culture. But
in  a virtual   culture   based    on the  offloading   of   symbolic    processing, we     may  need    to end--or    at  least
reconceptualize--the      analytic   privilege  we  accord   humans   in the process   of thinking  and  acting.  In  the  next
section we describe work by Latour as a basis for orienting to objects and humans as more genuinely equivalent
participants in activity systems--and thus, by extension, in cognitive activity.

Latour's translation model of action
Latour (1996b; 2000) describes how objects, by virtue of their being in the world in some form (physical artifacts
in the physical world and informational artifacts which are represented in speech, text, or in action on a computer
screen)   push  back   in their    interactions with humans.   A  thought,   once  instantiated  in an   object,  is no longer
exactly that thought, for it now has an independent existence in the world. It is a something situated in the world.
We    can fold  ourselves   into   an object,   but the object always    expresses our    thoughts, values,    intentions,  and

                                                              
norms with its own "timings, tempos, and properties" (1996a, p. 268)--that is, in its own particular form. Latour
gives  the example     of  delegating    to a wooden    fence  the  task  of  containing  sheep.   He  asks,   "Are the sheep
interacting with me with when they bump their muzzles against the rough pine planks?" And answers, "Yes, but
they are interacting with a me that is, thanks to the fence, disengaged, delegated, translated, and multiplied. There
is indeed a complete actor who is henceforth added to the social world of sheep, although it is one which has
characteristics totally different from those of [human] bodies" (1996a, p. 239). The fence enacts Latour's intention
to keep the sheep all together in one place to make sure that none wander off. His action is folded into the nature
of the fence; but if one looks for a "mind" in this situation, it is as mu ch in the head of Latour, who is now freed
up to read a book, as it is in the fence that enacts a particular way of thinking (keep the sheep together), a way of
valuing (although they might not like it much, it is more important for sheep to be penned up than for them to
roam free), and a way of interacting (now the sheep interact with the fence rather than with Latour). The relation
between    humans   and   technology     is thus  best  conceived   not  as  humans   using   objects, but rather   as humans
interacting with and t hrough objects.
   From this perspective, action has no point of origin; rather action is a moment of translation in which actants
(things and people) come together to share in action, which is mutually distributed between them. Latour argues
that "to act is  to mediate another's action" (1996a, p. 237). Both humans and objects mediate, and one can                only
proceed  to action     by mediating  another's    action. As   a result, this conception   of action does  not  grant  analytic
priority to humans, since action is a moment of mutual mediation between actants, "no one of which," Latour
explains,  "ever,   is exactly  the  cause  or the  consequence     of its  associates"  (1996a, p.  237). In  developing   the
concept  of distributed    mind,  we   take   as  a premise  for  our  thought   experiment   that persons    and artifacts are
equivalent actants in this sense: persons and artifacts engage in mutual mediation, and the actions that result are
not ascribable more to one than the other.

FROM TOOLS AND THOUGHTS TO TOOLFORTHOUGHTS

A virtual cognitive ontology
Latour's model of action reorganizes our thinking about cognition by challenging the idea that humans have a
privileged position in action. Seeing action as an association of multiple mediating actants pushes us out of the
western anthropological schema which, Latour (1996a) suggests, "always forces the recognition of a subject and
an object, a competence and a performance, a potentiality and an actuality" (p. 237). If objects were only the
reified  intents or concretized     designs   of  their makers,  it would   make    sense to  orient to  them,  as  Pea (1993)
suggests,  as things   that have  intelligence    but   cannot do   cognition. The structuring effects     of objects designed
to shape action (and thus also thought) would be principally relevant to our understandings of activity. Yet, as is
often  noted, objects   have a  way  of  exceeding    or changing   the  designs  of their makers    (Postman, 1993; Tenner,
1997). To the extent that a tool expresses desires, intentions, and meanings, the desires, intentions, and meanings
that the tool enacts are never precisely those of any single individual. A tool has its own characteristics and
properties that shape action in ways that are influenced by, but not reducible to, the initial inputs of its designers
and users.
   Instead,   we    suggest  that   just as   tools  are  externalizations    of human    designs,   thoughts   are similarly
internalizations of our actions with tools --both physical tools, such as Latour's fence, cultural tools, such as
language, and social tools, such as the system of property rights that makes it possible to Latour to erect a fence
on "his" land around "his" sheep. All thoughts are connected to tools, and all tools are connected to thoughts:
every time we consider a thought (since it is an internalization of action with a tool) it is inextricably linked to a
tool, and every time we consider a tool (since it is an externalization of a thought) it is inextricably connected with
a thought.  In   this  view, tools   are  not  distinct  from  thoughts;    rather, both  are  poles  in  the  back and    forth
movement between tool and thought. The reciprocal relation between tool and thought exists in both. We thus
suggest that rather than seeing tools as static thoughts --objects distinct from human subjects--we grant tools
and thoughts the same ontological status. That is, we posit that tools and thoughts are fundamentally the same
kind  of thing.  Put   another  way, the    concept  of persons  and   objects as   equivalent actants   removes   Vygotsky's
(1978) distinction  between     sign and    tool. Vygotsky   argues    that both are mediators of    activity, but since signs
orient  internally  and   tools orient externally,   "the  nature   of the  means   they use  cannot   be  the same"   (p. 55).
Positing symmetry between persons and artifacts argues that all activity is simultaneously internal and external,
and that the processes involved are therefore not ontologically distinct--different in specific properties, perhaps,
but not in their fundamental nature.

                                                               
Toolforthoughts defined
In this ontology, then, there are no tools without thinking, and there is no thinking without tools. There are only
toolforthoughts, which represent the reciprocal relation between tools and thoughts that exists in both. When we
say  that something    is   a tool for thought    (as  separate  words) this     might   suggest    that thought   is the broader
category and that tools are something that help people think. Or it might imply that tool is the broader framework
and persons are agents who use both thoughts and physical artifacts as tools. To avoid these difficulties, we
connect   the  nouns   tool   and thought   in  order   to suggest   how   toolforthoughts    are   the outcome  of a process  of
tools existing in a reciprocal relation with thoughts.
    Whether    they are   internalizations  of   social  interaction    (Vygotsky,     1978), or  externalizations  of  cognitive
processes    (Shaffer &   Kaput,   1999),  toolforthoughts     are   templates  for action:   reifications  of patterns of social
action that arise from an ongoing historical dialectic between tool and thought.. We refer to these reifications as
templates because they have a particularity to their form. This particularity does not ensure that toolforthoughts
enact the social organizations that their inventers intend--a toolforthought is a social pattern, and no one would
expect that intent is equivalent to outcome in a social setting. The particularity of a toolforthought does imply,
however, that when a toolforthought participates in action, the action is inflected by the pattern of the template:
some actions, while perhaps still possible, are less likely to emerge than others; other actions, while perhaps not
inevitable, are more likely to emerge. Toolforthoughts collaborate in some ways better than other ways, creating a
set of constraints and affordances for any toolforthought (Gibson, 1986; Norman, 1993). Any action that unfolds
with a toolforthought unfolds in some particular way, rather than in another way; thus all toolforthoughts are
inherently ideological. As Postman (1993) argued, every tool implies "a predisposition to construct the world as
one thing rather than the other, to value one thing over another" (p. 13).

Toolforthoughts as objects of study

As understood in the context of theoretic culture, tools and thoughts divide the space of mediation and activity:
as an artifact, a tool mediates but does not act; as an agent, a person has thoughts, but does not mediate. The
construct of toolforthought, in contrast, preserves the unity of action and mediation. Toolforthoughts are the
cognitive instantiation of Latour's mutually mediating mediators. Toolforthoughts neither act nor are acted upon;
rather, they interact to produce a model of thinking that goes beyond current conceptions of mediated action,
activity systems, and distributions of intelligence or cognition. In this model, biological cognition itself is a form
of mediation,   with  the   same  ontological    status as that of   other mediators,   and   thinking,  in the words   of Latour
(1996c),  involves  "constantly   shifting from   one   medium     to the  other," with  work   divided   between  "actors  in the
setting, either humans or non -humans" (p. 57).
    We   refer to this   as a   theory of  distributed  mind, and we suggest that while          extant theories, such   as actor
network theory, activity theory, and theories of mediational means and distributed cognition contain elements of
this theoretical   stance,    a theory  of distributed     mind is   distinct  in  its explicit emphasis    on  the ontological
equivalence of tools and thoughts --and their linkage in the concept of toolforthought as the fundamental unit of
analysis for cognition. In such a framework, the appropriate unit of analysis is not a system comprised of human
beings and tools, but rather       systemic effects of individual toolforthoughts          and the particular forms of social
interaction   they  foster.   For  each   toolforthought,    the   task   is to  understand     its particular  constraints  and
affordances --and     to  uncover     how  the  linkages   between     the   two  participate   in  particular  kinds   of social
interactions at the expense of others.

EXAMPLES

Toolforthoughts in mathematics
Not long ago, solving many mathematical problems necessarily meant representing them in algebraic notation and
solving a system of equations. For example, the motion of a ball after it is thrown was determined by representing
the  motion   with  equations    xt = x0 + vxot and yt  = y0 + vy ot ­ ½gt 2. The    same problem    can   now  be solved  with a
variety   of new   quantitative   modeling      toolforthoughts.   Papert,   for  example   describes    how   even very   young
students can use a similar process to solve complex problems of projectile motion by creating a simulation in a
LOGO microworld       (Papert,   1980).   Such   methods provide a range          of techniques     for solving interesting and
important problems that cannot be addressed in the traditional mathematics curriculum.
    The point that new tools open new avenues for solving problems has been made many times before (see, for
example, Kaput, 1986; 1992; Papert, 1980, 1993, 1996; Resnick, 1991, 1994a, 1994b; Shaffer & Kaput, 1999; Shaffer
& Resnick, 1999). However, the concept of toolforthoughts changes our understanding of the implications of this
expansion. One might defend the primacy of algebra in the curriculum by arguing that only when using algebra

                                                               
are  students   really   doing, and thus really      understanding,    mathematics;      it is the  spreadsheet,    or modeling
environment that is solving the problem when a student uses a computer. But this argument is only sustainable
when cognition is taken to be a certain kind of action that can only take place in certain kinds of activities--in
this case   something    happening     in the  head   that  is  only   manifest   in symbolic     manipulation.     If we  define
mathematics as computation using particular techniques then, indeed, when these become externalized in a new
tool, the original endpoint of instruction has been taken over by the tool.
    The  theory    of  distributed   mind,  however,    focuses     on th e   outcomes   of  interacting   toolforthoughts.     It
emphasizes how new tools lead to new kinds of actions, and thus to new modes of thought. In this view, the
reason for introducing new technologies into the classroom is not to recreate existing activities, but rather to
allow  more     compelling    possibilities   that   new   toolforthoughts     provide.     Because   there   are   no    thoughts
independent of tools (or tools devoid of thought), intelligence is always the collaboration of toolforthoughts.
Pedagogy    does   sacrifice  understanding    is when   a  toolforthought    is being   used  to do  the  thinking    (a type  of
action) that is already folded into it. However, the understanding being sacrificed is not what has been folded
into the toolforthought.      That understanding     is still  present but  has  be en   relocated.  The  understanding    being
sacrificed is the understanding that comes from actions that are only possible with the aid of the toolforthought.
Using  a calculator   to add  2+2, does   not sacrifice  the   ability to add. That  capacity  is  still present in  the person-
calculator system. What is sacrificed is the understanding that would come from working with the calculator to do
something we cannot do with pencil and paper alone.
    In other words, it is not new toolforthoughts that potentially diminish understanding, but rather curricula--or,
more precisely, a poor match between toolforthought and activity. Thus, Pea's (1993) suggestion that we have to
balance between "deeper understanding" and "engaging in meaningful whole-task problem solving" (p. 74) is a
dilemma    that only   arises from   a particular  way   of thinking   about   technology,   cognition,   and learning.    In  the
theory  of  distributed   mind,  all thinking  is  a tool-thought    combination.    Understanding       mathematics    does   not
depend on mastering traditional mathematical toolforthoughts. It means being able to interact with a suite of
powerful toolforthoughts to accomplish meaningful mathematical ends.
    From this perspective, algebra is not inherently more powerful than other mathematical modeling systems,
other than the power it has by virtue of its place in the historical development of mathematics. It may be more
powerful. But now that case needs to be made through an analysis of its constraints and affordances, and their
resulting social consequences. It is not enough that algebra has traditionally been a dominant toolforthought,
because algebra has also traditionally disempowered a wide range of students--and many important problems are
beyond the scope of traditional algebraic techniques. New toolforthoughts potentially let more students work
with complex mathematical relationships than the mathematics curriculum of theoretic culture (Kaput & Shaffer,
2002;  Papert,  1980).   These   new   possibilities for  mathematical     understanding     depend   not  on  mastery     of the
traditional forms     of theoretic   culture, but  rather   on  learning   to  collaborate  with   a system   of  mathematical
toolforthoughts to achieve meaningful ends.

Toolforthoughts in literacy
Bolter (1991) describes a writing space as the interplay of writing materials and techniques of inscription used to
produce  literacy  objects.   Not  surprisingly,   paper    is the  dominant     writing material  in a   theoretic  culture, and
symbolic text is the dominant technique of inscription. Theoretic writing spaces thus emphasize print literacy, and
theoretic schooling emphasizes the production and consumption of symbolic text as a primary literacy activity.
That is, school focuses on learning to read and write words on paper.
    Writing  in  a virtual  culture,   however,   increasingly   means    collaborating     with a  range  of toolforthoughts:
artifacts that represent new and expanded access to traditional fo rms of writing (the Web), but also modes of
communication that were not previously available (interactive multimedia), or were available but not in the form of
writing technologies (immersive role playing simulations). Forms of representation that are not considered writing
in a theoretic culture--for example, movement through space and situational gestures that are all but unwritable
in pen and ink--are critical elements of writing in virtual media such as videogames.
    The basic cognitive engine of virtual culture is the externalization of symbolic processing: the instantiation of
dynamic    transformations    in new   toolforthoughts.   These  externalizations    in  virtual  worlds   make   it   possible to
extend and recombine physical forces and responses such as gravity, agility, and location, to create new ways of
being in the world. In videogames and other computational spaces, we "read" concepts in more experiential
(Norman,    1993), more   embodied     ways    (Gee, 2003).    This experiential   aspect   of virtual   writing  sp aces  makes
possible new ways of knowing and new modes of understanding. In a theoretic culture it is possible to conceive
of literacy as an interaction between tool and person: between the text and the reader or writer. However, new
forms of reading and writing such as we find in videogames and other simulations require a degree of projection
(or inhabitance) that makes it increasingly difficult to analytically separate person from tool. Indeed, what is the

                                                               
ubiquitous avatar  if  not a  representation  of   the  tight coupling  between   computationally    literate  person  and
computational literacy object?
  The potential consequences of this increased embodiment are profound. In theoretic culture, writing is used
to create a world on paper (Olson, 1994). Understanding a world on paper requires experience of the real-world
contexts to which the text refers (Glenberg, Gutierrez, Levin, Japuntich, & Kaschak, in press). In virtual culture,
writing both creates a world on the computer and provides the experiences needed to understand that world. In
video games and other computational spaces, we have the potential to dwell in the virtual world through a new
form of direct experience. As a result, the lengthy cognitive apprenticeship in the dominant symbolic systems of
theoretic culture are no longer required to have meaningful experiences in complex cognitive domains. Papert
(1980) famously suggested that computers make it possible to learn mathematics by living in Mathland as one can
learn French by moving to France. Similarly, more people can learn French by playing a massively multiplayer
online computer game conducted in French. Learning in digital worlds means developing an understanding of the
world from the inside, for it is through one's own action in digital worlds that they take on meaning. In other
words, virtual literacy makes existing forms more widely accessible at the same time it gives us access to new
worlds--social, conceptual, and material.
  Digital worlds thus support a view of learning which foregrounds having particular kinds of experiences and
accomplishing    meaningful     ends.  We    evaluate     toolforthoughts    in  virtual  literacy   by  the   interactive,
communicative, interpretive, and expressive ends that students can accomplish in collaboration with them. Think,
for a moment, of students who come to know Hamlet through multimedia projects (Murray, 1999)--or some day
perhaps through a Prince of Denmark video game. These students may not be facile at translating words reprinted
from  Shakespeare's   Folio  or  Quarto  into   a personally-relevant   interpretation    of the dilemmas   that  face  the
troubled prince. But that was, after all, not Shakespeare's intent in writing the play. Hamlet was writtento be seen,
not read. More to the point: from experiencing the play through a range of literacy toolforthoughts, more students
will be  able to interact  with  the  themes  of   Hamlet,    the nuances    of Shakespeare's    dramatic  skill, and   the
relationship between performance and interpretation that the play represents.

Video games as toolforthoughts
We close this section with a specific example that exemplifies the power of new toolforthoughts as interactive
learning environments, and the challenges they propose to traditional notions of CSCL. Full Spectrum Warrior
(Pandemic  Studios, for  PC   and  Xbox)  is  a   video  game  based   on  a U.S.  Army   training  simulation.   But Full
Spectrum Warrior  is  not  a mere  first-person shooter   in  which the player   blows up    everything on the screen.  To
survive and win the game, the player has to learn to think and act like a modern professional soldier. (For a more
detailed discussion of the game, see Gee, in press.)
  In  Full Spectrum    Warrior,  the  player uses  the    buttons on   the controller to  give orders   to two squads   of
soldiers, as well as to consult a GPS device, radio for support, and communicate with rear area commanders. The
Instruction Manual that comes with the game make it clear from the outset that players must take on the values,
identities, and ways of thinking of a professional soldier to play the game successfully: "Everything about your
squad," the manual explains, "is the result of careful planning and years of experience on the battlefield. Respect
that experience, soldier, since it's what will keep your soldiers alive" (p. 2).
  In  the  game,  that experience--the    skills  and   knowledge   of  professional  military   expertise--is distributed
between the virtual soldiers and the real-world player. The soldiers in the player's squads have been trained in
movement   formations;   the  role of the player   is  to select  the best  position  for them   on the field. The  virtual
characters (the soldiers) know part of the task (various movement formations) and the player knows another part
(when and where to engage in such formations). This kind of distribution holds for every aspect of military
knowledge in the game. However, the knowledge that is distributed between virtual soldiers and real-world player
in this game is not a set of inert facts; what is distributed are the values, skills, practices, and (yes) facts that
constitute authentic military professio nal practice. This simulation of the social context of knowing allows players
to act as if in concert with (artificially intelligent) others, even within the single player context of the game.
  In  so doing,  Full Spectrum   Warrior  shows    how    games   take advantage of situated   learning environments. In
games as in real life, people must be able to build meanings on the spot as they navigate their contexts. In Full
Spectrum Warrior, players learn about suppression fire through the concrete experiences they have had while
playing. These experiences give a working definition of suppression fire, to be sure. But they also let a player
come to understand how the idea applies in different contexts, what it has to do with solving particular kinds of
problems,  and how  it relates  to other  practices   in  the domain,  such  as  the injunction  against   shooting while
moving.
  Video games thus make it possible to "learn by doing" on a grand scale--but not just by doing any old thing,
wandering  around   in a   rich computer  environment      to  learn  without   any  guidance.   The fruitful  patterns or

                                                           
generalizations in any domain are the ones that are best recognized by those who already know how to look at
the domain and know how complex variables in the domain interrelate with each other. In Full Spectrum Warrior
the player is immersed in activity, values, and ways of seeing. But the player is guided and supported by the
knowledge built into the virtual soldiers and the weapons, equipment, and environments in the game.

DISCUSSION: COLLABORATIVE LEARNING IN A VIRTUAL C ULTURE
We began this essay by arguing that current thinking and theorizing about tools is based on an assumption
about agency: that humans have it and tools don't. As a thought experiment, we replaced this postulate with an
alternative   borrowed   from   Latour:   that  neither  tools  nor  humans    have   agency    in the traditional  sense;  rather
action always emerges from the collaboration of mutually mediating actants, which can be human or non-human.
That is, we posited an ontological equivalence between interactivity and intra activity in thinking. Positing such
equivalence, we argue, requires creating a new analytic category of toolforthoughts: a view from virtual culture of
the relationship between technology and cognitive activity. For rhetorical purposes we describe this as a theory
of distributed   mind.   However,    we   want    to  emphasize     that our goal  is  not to  supplant  existing   sociocultural
theories of cognition, nor to recreate actor network theory, but to extend these theories to account more robustly
for thought and action in an era of new computational toolforthoughts.
   A theory of distributed mind extends current thinking about CSCL in two ways. First, if tools and persons are
equivalent actants, then thinking and acting always mean learning to collaborate with valued toolforthoughts.
This means that in a very important sense, all computer -supported activity is inherently collaborative activity. In
an age of powerful computational toolforthoughts, this is not merely a rhetorical claim, as the example of Full
Spectrum  Warrior    shows      so vividly. We    are constantly    in collaboration   with  valued   toolforthoughts,   and   even
toolforthoughts    designed     to support   human-to-human      collaboration    are, in fact, examples    of human-computer -
human interaction rather than computer-supported collaboration.
   The second point, which follows from this first, is that as it enters its second decade of formal existence, the
field of CSCL may need to broaden its mandate to focus more directly on the ends of human-computer-human
intera ction  rather than   its current  emphasis     on the   means of    using  computational     toolforthoughts     to support
human collaboration.
   Our current educational system writ large is grounded in an assumption that thinking is something that goes
on inside the head of a person using tools, and that what matters, in the end, is the thinking and not the using of
the tools. This view privileges the use of abstract formalisms and the classes of problems those formalisms were
developed     to solve --neither    of  which   have    been empowering      historically  for  students   from   less advantaged
backgrounds. Building on work of sociocultural theorists, CSCL has expanded this view of cognition by focusing
on things students can accomplish in collaboration with other students in computer-mediated social settings. But
as we argue above, this step, though important, may not be sufficient.
   In a theoretic culture marked by a relative paucity of powerful toolforthoughts, the most significant of which
were   static inscriptional    systems,   the goal    of educat ion    was  to master  existing    cultural tools.  Accordingly,
sociocultural theories have emphasized, generally,             the development    and use    of infrastructural   tools    (diSessa,
2000), such as traditional mathematical notations and print literacies, within relatively stable (albeit evolving)
cultures of   practice.  In  a  time of   rapid and   fundamental      technological   change   it is  easier  to see  that which
toolfort houghts   are  valued in    this   sense is  inherently    ideological.  As   diSessa     (2000) argues, tools become
infrastructural   when   they   support   a nexus    of uses   that are  seen  as valuable   and   necessary   in a given   social
context --a move that always depends on the size and power of the social niches they serve. By conceptualizing
tools as participants in, rather than merely mediators of, cognition (and contrariwise by conceptualizing persons
as mediators     rather than   agents), a   theory   of  distributed   mind  prepares  us  for  a  virtual culture  marked     by a
multiplicity  of  cognitive     toolforthoughts.   It   provides perspective    on   the  inevitable   panic   that arises  in our
theoretic frame of mind when young people begin using new and more powerful toolforthoughts: the panic that
our children are no longer learning how to think. A theory of distributed mind foregrounds instead consideration
of the kinds of actions we want students performing: Should they answer problems that computers can now
easily solve?    Or  should    they be  working      on  problems   that  have  not   yet  been solved,    but that    can now   be
approached in collaboration with a combination of able peers and new toolforthoughts? The question we ask
about new toolforthoughts can no longer be: "Will these tools help students to collaboratively learn traditional
mathematical,    scientific, social, historical,  and    print literacies?"  Rather,   we  have to  ask:   "Who   will  be  able  to
collaborate with these toolforthoughts, and what will they be able to accomplish?"
   A theory of distributed mind reminds us to be wary of the naturalistic fallacy of mistaking what is for what
ought to be. The particular set technologies we have inherited--pens, papers, books--does not define a fixed
and immutable realm of what it cognitively possible or desirable. So pedagogical choices are not, as Pea (1993)
suggests,   about   balan cing     deep understanding     and  engaging    tasks.  Nor   are they   about   deciding   whether    to

                                                                
emphasize "solo performance" (with or without toolforthoughts) or work "in collaboration with others." Rather,
learning is always  collaborative. Learning  always means     doing particular kinds  of things in collaboration with
particular  kinds of toolforthoughts. Therefore    all meaningful   actions with     toolforthoughts can  lead  to an
experience of deep understanding. What matters are the actions we value--a value defined in relation to our
understanding of the things worth doing and issues worth addressing with a given set of toolforthoughts. This
decidedly   preliminary   examination of  a  theory    of distributed  mind   thus   suggests that   new  educational
toolforthoughts cannot be evaluated in isolation; rather, they need to be understood as fundamentally changing
how we think. In particular, the perspective of toolforthoughts highlights the extent to which all thinking is a
collaborative enterprise, and therefore all learning--particularly  computer-supported     learning --is collaborative
learning. Examining toolforthoughts in a virtual culture thus raises profound questions: How will we decide what
activities we value?  What  frameworks   will   we use    to weigh  the constraints   and  affordances of  competing
toolforthoughts? And, as we move into the second decade of work in CSCL, how can we conceptualize computer-
supported collaboration as being more than merely computer-supported human collaboration?
  Eventually,   of course,  these  questions must  be  developed    in such a  way   as to be addressed   by specific
hypotheses that can be subjected to empirical study. Our goal here has been to provide an ontological argument
for the value of such questions to the CSCL community--and to suggest that the effort of addressing the m will
be advance our understanding of the role computational media can and should play in collaborative learning.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the many colleagues who provided comments and suggestions on earlier drafts
of this paper, particularly Jay Lemke, Bonnie Nardi, and Jim Gee. We would also like to thank the many students
of the Tools for Thought seminars at Harvard and the University of Wisconsin-Madison, whose insights over
the years helped shape these ideas. This work was supported in part a Spencer Foundation/National Academy of
Education Postdoctoral Fellowship, a grant from the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation, and by a National
Science  Foundation   Faculty Early   Career Development      Award    (REC-0347000).    Any  opinions,  findin gs, or
conclusions expressed in this paper are our own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies,
cooperating institutions, peers, or colleagues.

REFERENCES
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of mind. New York: Ballantine.
Bolter, J. D. (1991). Writing space: The computer, hypertext, and the history of writing . Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum
         Associates.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-born cyborgs : minds, technologies, and the future of human intelligence. Oxford ; New
         York: Oxford University Press.
diSessa, A. A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind : three stages in the evolution of culture and cognition.
         Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Engestrom, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y. Engestrom, R. Miettinen &
         R.-L. Punamaki (Eds.), Perspectives on Activity Theory (pp. 19-38). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
         University Press.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gee, J. P. (in press). What will a state of the art video game look like? Innovate.
Gibson, J. J. (1986). The ecological approach to visual perception. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Glenberg, A. M., Gutierrez, T., Levin, J. R., Japuntich, S., & Kaschak, M. P. (in press). Activity and imagined
         activity can enhance young children's reading comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology.
Hickman, L. A. (1991). John Dewey's Pragmatic Technology. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kaptelinin, V. (1996). Computer-mediated activity: Functional organs in social and developmental contexts. In B.
         A. Nardi (Ed.), Context and consciousness : Activity theory and human -computer interaction (pp. xiii,
         400). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Kaput, J. J. (1986). Information technology and mathematics: opening new representational windows. The Journal
         of Mathematical Behavior, 5 (2), 187-207.
Kaput, J. J. (1992). Technology and Mathematics Education. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of research on
         mathematics teaching and learning. New York: Maxwell Macmillan International.
Kaput, J. J. (1996a). Overcoming physicality and the eternal present: cybernetic manipulatives. In R. S. J. Mason
         (Ed.), Technology and Visualization in Mathematics Education (pp. 161­177). London: Springer-Verlag.

                                                          
Kaput, J. J. (1996b). Technology, curriculum and representation: Rethinking the foundations and the future. In W.
       Doerfler & e. al. (Eds.), Schriftenreihe Didaktik der Mathematik, Trends und Perspektiven. Vienna:
       Hoelder-Pichler-Tempsky.
Kaput, J. J., & Roschelle, J. (1998). The mathematics of change and variation from a millennial perspective: new
       content, new context. In C. Hoyles & R. Noss (Eds.), Mathematics for a new millenium. London:
       Springer Verlag.
Kaput, J. J., & Shaffer, D. W. (2002). On the development of human representational competence from an
       evolutionary point of view: from episodic to virtual culture. In K. Gravemeijer, R. Lehrer, B. van Oers & L.
       Verschaffel (Eds.), Symbolizing, Modeling and Tool Use in Mathematics Education. Dordrecht, the
       Netherlands: Kluwar Academic Press.
Latour, B. (1996a). On interobjectivity. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 3(4).
Latour, B. (1996b). Pursuing the discussion of interobjectivity with a few friends. Mind, Culture, and Activity,
       3(4).
Latour, B. (1996c). Review of Cognition in the Wild. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 3(1).
Latour, B. (2000). When things strike back: A possible contribution of 'science studies' to the social sciences.
       British Journal of Sociology, 51 (1).
Murray, J. (1999). Hamlet on the Holodeck: The future of narrative in Cyberspace. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Nardi, B. A. (1996a). Activity theory and human-computer interaction. In B. A. Nardi (Ed.), Context and
       consciousness : Activity theory and human-computer interaction (pp. xiii, 400). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
       Press.
Nardi, B. A. (Ed.). (1996b). Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human-computer interaction .
       Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Norman, D. A. (1993). Things that make us smart : Defending human attributes in the age of the machine.
       Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Olson, D. R. (1994). The world on paper. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Papert, S. (1993). The children's machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. New York: Basic Books.
Papert, S. (1996). The connected family: Bridging the digital generation gap . Atlanta, GA: Longstreet Press.
Pea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
       Cognitions: Psychological and Educational Considerations. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Postman, N. (1993). Technopoly: the surrender of culture to technology . New York: Vintage Books.
Resnick, M. (1991). Overcoming the centralized mindset: towards an understanding of emergent phenomena. In I.
       Harel & S. Papert (Eds.), Constructionism . Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Resnick, M. (1994a). Learning about life. Artificial Life, 1(1/2).
Resnick, M. (1994b). Turtles, termites, and traffic jams: Explorations in massively parallel microworlds.
       Cambridge: MIT Press.
Salomon, G., Perkins, D., & Globerson, T. (1991). Partners in cognition: Extending human intelligence with
       intelligent technologies. Educational Researcher, 30 (3), 2-9.
Schmandt-Besserat, D. (1978). The earliest precursor of writing. Scientific American, 238.
Schmandt-Besserat, D. (1992). Before Writing. Austin: Univ. of Texas Press.
Schmandt-Besserat, D. (1994). Before numerals. Visible Language, 18.
Shaffer, D. W., & Kaput, J. J. (1999). Mathematics and virtual culture: an evolutionary perspective on technology
       and mathematics. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 37 , 97-119.
Shaffer, D. W., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thick authenticity: New media and authentic learning. Journal of
       Interactive Learning Research, 10(2), 195-215.
Tenner, E. (1997). Why things bite back : technology and the revenge of unintended consequences (1st Vintage
       pbk. ed.). New York: Vintage Books.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.

                                                     
