         Understanding                       Computer                 Mediated                 Social
                    Experience:                Implications                  for        CSCL
                                   Social Computing Research Group
                         School of Information Science & Learning Technologies
                                      University of Missouri-Columbia
                                             laffeyj@missouri.edu

      Abstract. A group of 9 graduate students and one faculty member formed an extra-curricular study
      group to explore the social nature of online learning. Following a review of literature and adopting
      Strauss's (1993) framework for coming to understand social activity, the group collected and
      analyzed interview reports of experiences of social learning and online systems. The results include
      five  categories   of responses:   1)  task engagement,     2)  social   engagement,      3)  environment
      engagement,    4)  goal  or motivation and  5) role of  expert.  The   paper   presents  the  positive  and
      negative statements about social engagement       and   the role   of  expert  in  gaming    and   learning
      experiences and in online and face-to-face experiences.

      Keywords:       online   learning, face-to-face  learning,  networked     multiplayer     games,     social
      engagement, role of the expert

INTRODUCTION
Situativity theories emphasize the social nature of cognition and        learning  (Barab    &  Duffy,   2000;  Brown,
Collins, &   Duguid,   1989;   Resnick,  1987).   Lave and others    (Lave,   1988;  Lave    &  Wenger,    1991)  using
anthropological   approaches   have shown   that meaning  and   identity are  constructed    from   social interactions.
Wenger's Social Theory of Learning (Wenger, 1998) argues that we learn through participation in activities and
that knowledge can be best understood as our ability to contribute to valued practices. Participating in a social
unit provides meaning to experiences and activity, and provides shared perspectives and resources for sustaining
engagement in activity. Thus the social nature of experience provides motivation for engagement, leads to joint
enterprise, and shapes what is learned.
  Online learning    is a growing   part of  higher  education, both  as    distance learning   and as supplements   to
traditional coursework.   Simultaneously   with  the increase in  use  of   asynchronous     instruction,  technological
capabilities for enabling new social mechanisms for participation and contribution via the Internet are advancing.
However, most course management tools and implementations of online learning focus on information exchange
and fail to support the interactive and social processes    of  teaching    and learning.    Online  learning  is  often
criticized by students as lacking the vitality and spontaneity of the face-to-face classroom. Understanding how
students experience online learning, how they participate and contribute, and how to best enable participation in
online learning are key challenges for the development of online learning systems and practices that will support
collaborative and social learning.
  This   study seeks  to build new   knowledge   about how  students  participate    in online  learning  and how  they
experience the social nature of computer mediated environments (Dourish, 2001). Following Strauss's guidance
(1993) for how to formulate, elaborate and present a "theory of action," the work presented in this paper is an
early step  in formulating  a  theory of  online  interaction (or social    computing)    in  education.   For Strauss,
individual practices and meanings are defined by the social worlds in which they take place. Strauss's work and
other social interactionists (Dewey, 1934 & 1938; Goffman, 1967; Mead, 1938) argue for understanding how
participants experience their social world and their collective activities.
  This paper presents results from interviews about the experience of playing networked multiplayer games,
participating  as a student in online learning courses, and   participating  as a  student   in face-to-face  traditional
classrooms. Networked multiplayer games represent online social activity with learning outcomes but without
explicit educational objectives. Online learning systems represent online social activity with explicit educational
objectives. And, traditional courses represent face-to-face social activity with explicit educational objectives. We
reasoned that  by   examining  and  comparing   online learning  with  networked     games,   which  are  recognized as
highly engaging, we would develop insights about how participation is developed and sustained. Similarly we
reasoned that by examining and comparing online learning with face-to-face learning, for which instructors and
students have     many  models    and substantial  experience,   we  would     develop   insights   about  how    social
environments are used to facilitate learning. Thus, the purpose of examining these three domains of social
activity was to identify important dimensions of how technology mediates social experience and how the social
nature of activity motivates participation and supports learning.

                                                         
LITERATURE             REVIEW
Research   has shown   that effective  teachers  have a number  of pedagogical approaches     to help  students    socially
construct knowledge through discourse and collaboration in face-to-face classrooms (Kumpulainen                &   Wray,
2002; Lemke,     1990; Rogoff,    1990).  Rovai   (2002)  compared   seven   traditional face-to-face courses  and  seven
online university courses delivered by a typical course management system. He found no differences in sense of
community     (including spirit,  trust, interaction  and learning)  between   the  groups,  but discriminant    analysis
showed student perceptions of the importance of learning, thinking critically in the course, safety and acceptance
were  higher  in the  online   courses,  whereas  student  perceptions of   friendship,  group  identity, connectedness,
similarity of  learner needs,  and absence    of confusion were   higher in  the traditional courses.  Pérez-Prado and
Thirunarayanan (2002) also explored students' perceptions of learning experiences by comparing an online and a
face-to-face section of the same university course. Students in both sections indicated that interacting with peers
fortified the learning process and made learning more enjoyable;         but only  students  in  the  face-to-face section
indicated that they were affectively stimulated by certain class activities and interactions. Swan's (2002) research
showed students participating in online discussions strove to increase social presence by using text-based verbal
immediacy behaviors to reduce the psychological distance they felt in the online course. Her findings also
indicated  student satisfaction,   perceived learning,    perceived  interaction with the    instructor,  and   perceived
interaction with peers were highly interrelated.     That is, the more interaction students believed  they  had with  the
instructor and   other students,  the more   they were  satisfied with their course, and  the  more   they thought   they
learned. Additionally,   students'    social ability has  been identified   as an   important   attribute for supporting
meaningful interactions in online learning environments (Laffey et. al., 2005). In Laffey et al.'s study, students
perception of their social ability was found to differ across course types: primarily self-paced, teacher guided
instruction, and collaborative interactions with peers.
  Several studies have examined the social side of networked multiplayer gaming (e.g., Choi & Kim, 2004;
Ducheneaut     & Moore,     2004a;  Ducheneaut     &  Moore,   2004b;  Steinkuehler,     2004).  These    research efforts
highlight the importance of the social dimension of gaming and the social skills of game players for developing
customer loyalty with games. Steinkuehler (2004) found that game players learned a new game and developed
their expertise through interaction with more knowledgeable and skilled game players. In addition, Ducheneaut
and Moore (2004b) found that social interactions were further encouraged by the use of buddy lists among game
players. Social interactions in networked gaming environments are experienced as immediate and intuitive. For
instance, game players received immediate feedback about their performance from other players and the system to
improve their gaming skills (Steinkuehler, 2004). In addition, they are also socialized in the game (Ducheneaut
& Moore, 2004b). Players learned how to effectively communicate and collaborate with other players by using
different communication tools in order to accomplish game tasks.

METHODOLOGY
The sample included 18 subjects in a higher education setting who were expected to have experience with
gaming and courses. The demographic information for participants is shown in Table 1.

Table 1: Demography of Participants
                                                                                            Experience with
Gender     n   %      Age      n  %      Background   n   %        Status        n   %           mode           n    %
Male       13  72    20-24     6  33    American      9   50  Undergraduate      2   11   Exp with all modes    12   67
Female     5   28    25-29     4  22    Inter-national9   50  Graduate           14  78   Exp with F2F andonline courses317
                     30-32     8  45                          Employees          2   11   Exp with F2Fcourse & games211
                                                                                          Exp with games        1    5
Total      18  100           18   100                 18  100                    18 100                         18  100

  Interviews     were  conducted   via  telephone, face-to-face,  or electronic  messaging.  The  interview   was   semi-
structured and included 21 questions designed to elicit participant's experiences in networked multiplayer games,
online learning, and face-to-face classrooms and to gather subjects' perspectives on similarities and differences
among those experiences. Sample interview items include: 1) Tell me about the experience and what it was like
in the game (or course); 2) How did you interact with other people in the game (or course)?; and 3) Do you see
similarities or differences between courses and games? In each mode subjects were prompted to think about their
favorite game    or course  to discuss.  All interviews  were  transcribed  and  imported  into  Nvivo    for coding and
categorizing   student  experiences.     Five  researchers reached   consensus    about  the  coding   scheme      through
negotiation followed by examining the valence of the statements and counting its frequency based on categories
in each mode.

                                                            
RESULTS
Table 2 shows the 5 categories used to code and cluster the interview statements made by respondents. The first
number represents the frequency of statements and the second number, in parenthesis, indicates how many of the
18 subjects made a statement that fits in the category. Due to page limitations, only the results categorized as
social engagement and the role of expert will be discussed in this paper.

Table 2: Codes and Categories of Interview Statements
                        Experience in NetworkedMultiplayerGame Experience in Online            Experience in Face-to-FaceCourseCourse
     Category            Positive          Negative         Positive          Negative          Positive         Negative
                       Statements       Statements         Statements         Statements       Statements       Statements
                          (No. of          (No. of            (No. of          (No. of           (No. of           (No. of
                        Subjects)          Subjects)        Subjects)         Subjects)        Subjects)         Subjects)
Task Engagement            22 (10)            7 (5)            19 (13)            3 (3)           10 (7)            8 (8)
      SocialEngagement     10 (6)             5 (3)            6 (6)              13 (7)          9 (7)             3 (3)
   EnvironmentEngagement   7 (6)              8 (8)            6 (6)              6 (6)           1 (1)             3 (3)
      Goal orMotivation    7 (7)              1 (1)            3 (3)              2 (2)           5 (5)             0 (0)
 Role of Expert            1 (1)              0 (0)            4 (4)              3 (3)           11 (6)            1 (1)

Social     Engagement
Respondent    descriptions   of  gaming    experiences    included    numerous     comments      about   the    enjoyment   and
excitement of its social nature both as a competitive and as a collaborative effort. Collaboration was experienced
as a key and   natural part  of the  activity.  For   example,   some     of  the respondents   described   the  experience   of
collaborating with others in gaming:
       "It was fun to win  a game  regardless,   but  what  was  really fun   was  when  you   worked  together  to overcome   a
       substantial  challenge."
       "If I work with other and beat Diablo, I feel someone can share the excitement with me."
       "It's different kind of fun when playing with friends. It's like picnic with other friends vs. eating by yourself."
   Competition with others was dynamic and challenging, but since the stakes are low, in the sense that one
can always start over once he/she loses the game, there is not too much pressure and thus the game could be
enjoyed. For instance, respondents mentioned:
       "The games are kind of optional, and for fun, but class is mandatory. I can quit the game at anytime, but I have
       to study in the classroom."
       "The game is for fun, you can lose in the game and still be happy about the experience."
   Respondent     descriptions   of  online   courses   show   that  their   experiences   were   highly  dependent     on    the
instructor. Instructors' course design, guidance and style, and frequency of responses to discussions influenced
how  students  felt about  the  course.    Additionally   the  sense   of  presence of   others  was   an important     attribute
related to an  online course  being   considered    good   or  bad.  When     students   received timely  feedback     from   the
instructor or peers in online discussions they appreciated and enjoyed the experience. Some sample comments
are:
       "There  were   always other   students online   at the  same time   to ask  questions   or talk about    the assignment
       together."
       "In the discussion, like a real class  discussion,  we  gave feedback  to  others and said `yes  you are  right, you   did
       good job' or `I don't think that I agree with you, you are wrong, or you miss some points'."
   However, as expressed by our respondents, confusion, miscommunication, delay, and lack of a sense of
presence are substantial aspects of the social life of online learning. Respondents indicated that they benefited
from  having    more   time   to  think    deeper   when    they  post    their   ideas.   However,    delays   in   responses,
misunderstandings caused by the lack of gestures and facial expressions, and unclear text-based information
tended  to increase their  level  of  frustration  in  online  learning.   Note   that  in table  2 the   number    of  negative
comments   and  the number    of  respondents   making     negative  comments      about   the social  engagement    of  online
courses was substantially greater than the other two modes. Some examples of respondent comments are:
       "If you don't get quality feedback it makes for a horrible online course."
       "Students  cannot  see the  instructor,  there's   more chance   of mis-communication      than talking  face-to-face.  It
       takes much   more  energy  for  the student  to make   clear a  question,  especially when   he is still at the  stage of
       learning to ask the correct question in the course"
   Respondent descriptions of their face-to-face classes indicated that the social experience was stimulating and
gratifying. The classroom atmosphere included social presence as well as pressure to perform. Respondents felt
that the pressure to perform was both a bad thing and a good thing. For example, students reported:

                                                              
       "Since this is the face-to-face class, I can feel the learning atmosphere in the classroom.          Sometimes, I   might  be
       "idle" (lost my mind) in the class; however, when feeling my peers are so         eagerly   joining   the discussion,   I will
       feel guilty and will get myself back right away."
       "The   best way for  me to    learn is  when   I have  an  emotion    flowing  through     me... like happiness,     sadness,
       embarrassed, excited. I think it is easier for that to happen in a real classroom with other people.
       "I do better when I am under pressure."
   In contrast, other respondents described concerns for what others might think about them:
       "Sometimes   I   have a   hard   time  to understand   my  classmates    during    the  group     discussion.  People   from
       different  countries  have   different accents.  In  the  group  discussion,   it is not   polite to  express   that I  don't
       understand what s/he tried to say and I am not able to have help from my instructor."
       "Some times you are just not comfortable with your level of understanding compared to the whiz kids."

Role   of   Expert
In online games the game players experience experts as a natural part of the activity. Whether the expert is
competitive or cooperative with the subject one can learn from the more experienced players:
       "I like to get help when playing games, that means you can play better and go to the high levels more easily."
   In online and face-to-face courses the instructor's role is critical for guidance, motivation and feedback. For
example, here is a positive and a negative response related to the instructor's role in online courses:
       Positive   response:  "The instructor who teaches in this      class  usually  gives   feedback   and grades   very  quickly.
       Immediate feedback from peers or instructors can help me shape or correct my thoughts."
       Negative response: "The quality of        the on-line course   depends   on  how   much responsibility    the instructor   is
       willing to take. On-line   course   is like business, if  you  cannot   learn much from    the  instructor,  it's a  waste of
       money and time."
   The frequency of positive and negative responses in Table 2 for the role of the expert indicates that the role
of the instructor is experienced as more problematic in online courses. One contrast that was noted between face-
to-face and online instructions was that in online courses instructors are expected to be highly engaged and active
during the times when students are engaged, while the instructors in face-to-face classes seemed to need only be
engaged during the class time period. Another distinction was that in face-to-face classes respondents often and
easily experience the instructor's enthusiasm and ability to make the course and content come to life. Students
find that the face-to-face instructor can motivate them and help them stay engaged in the learning activity. Some
informants described their feelings about the instructors:
    "I really enjoyed going   to it. The  instructor  used  real life examples   and  anecdotes    about   what  you  can   do
    with your new found engineering knowledge into the lecture. It helped engage you."
    "The most    attractive thing   is the instructors'   teaching    style and  attitude.  I  could  feel  the  instructors'
    enthusiasm   through his    excellent lecture."

CONCLUSION
As stated in the introduction the use of online learning continues to grow, and while not presented in this paper,
our respondents found task engagement benefits in online learning. However, the characterization of the social
nature of online learning found in this study suggests it may miss opportunities for social learning and have
hurdles for   collaborative  activity.  In contrast,    our findings  show     that game    players  experience    the   game  as  a
sufficient environment      for the  game  and   that the  social nature    of the  game    is a  substantial    part of the   game
experience. The game is a custom environment well crafted to support the synchronous social experiences of
collaboration and competition. One caution in interpreting our data is to keep in mind that interviews may elicit
certain representations of the experience whereas observation or other approaches may highlight different aspects
of the experience. For example, Steinkuehler's (2004) report about her experience of a game vividly depicts the
role of an expert in socializing and apprenticing a novice player, whereas in our interviews those characterizations
seem to be blended into more general terms of collaboration. Similar to the sufficiency of the social aspects of
gaming, instructors in the face-to-face       classroom     seem  able  to  provide   a  social   atmosphere     through    personal
enthusiasm and strategies to bring the content to life. Instructors in traditional settings seem well practiced and
resourceful in making the topic and social context a more deeply felt experience than is provided by online text
environments. The asynchronous nature of most of the online learning experiences may require new tools and
strategies to support the coordination, continuity and richness experienced in games and face-to-face classes.
   Our social computing research group plans to further examine the data to make sense of how the task, social
context and environment are integrated into the experience of engagement. We plan to extend our data collection
through additional interviews and potentially more ethnographic as well as sociological research efforts. Keeping
in mind  that our  efforts   to build   a  theory  of action  for online    learning  are   still quite  rudimentary,      Strauss's
(1993) guidance suggests that we need both to build explicit descriptions of action while also making sense of
the broader social worlds in which those actions take place. The meanings of actions are formed in the social
world and interactions generate new meanings and symbols as well as alter and maintain old ones.

                                                                
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are members of the social computing research group and include Moon-Heum Cho, Yu-chia Hsu,
Xinxin  Huang,   Bosung    Kim, Guan     Yu Lin, Pei-Ju   Liu,  Demei   Shen,   I-Chun    Tsai, Chia-chi   Yang  and    Dr.
James M. Laffey.

REFERENCES
Barab, S. A., &   Duffy, T. (2000).  From   practice fields to communities of   practice. In D.  H.   Jonassen, & S.    M.
      Land,   (Eds.), Theoretical    foundations of   learning  environments    (pp.  25-56).   Hillsdale, NJ:  Lawrence
      Erlbaum Associates.
Brown,   J., Collins,  A., &   Duguid,   P.  (1989).  Situated  cognition   and  the  culture of   learning. Educational
      Researcher, 18, 1, 32-42.
Choi, D., & Kim, J. (2004). Why people continue to play online games: In search of critical design factors to
      increase customer loyalty to online contents. CyberPychology & Behavior, 7, 1, 11-24.
Dewey, J. (1934). Art as experience. New      York: Minton, Balch & Company.
Dewey, J. (1934). Experience and education. New York: Macmillan.
Dourish, P. (2001). Where the action is: The foundations of embodied interaction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ducheneaut,   N.,  &  Moore,   R. J.  (2004a). The   social side  of gaming:    a  study  of  interaction  patterns in   a
      massively    multiplayer    online game.   Paper   presented   at the annual    meeting   of Computer-Supported
      Cooperative Work. Chicago, IL.
Ducheneaut,   N.,  &   Moore,  R.  J. (2004b,    April). Gaining   more     than   experience   points: Learning  social
      behavior    in multiplayer  computer   games.  Paper  presented   at  the annual  meeting    of Computer    Human
      Interface   Workshop on Social Learning Through Gaming, Vienna, Austria.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction ritual: Essays on face-to-face behavior. New York: Pantheon Books.
Kumpulainen,     K., & Wray,   D. (2002).   Classroom    interaction and    social learning.  From    theory to practice.
      London, Routledge-Falmer.
Laffey,  M.  J., Lin, Y., Lin, G., Liu,  P.,  Shen,  D., &  Espinosa    L.  (2005, April). Assessing    social  ability in
      online     learning environments.   Paper  to  be  presented at   the annual  meeting   of American    Educational
      Research Association, Montreal, Canada.
Lave, J.  (1988).  Cognition   in practice:  Mind,   mathematics   and   culture   in everyday  life. Cambridge,   U.K.:
      Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J., &   Wenger,  E.  (1991).   Situated learning:   Legitimate    peripheral    participation.  Cambridge,   U.K.:
      Cambridge University Press.
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language learning and values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Pérez-Prado, A., & Thirunarayanan, M. (2002). A qualitative comparison of online and classroom-based sections
      of a course: Exploring student perspectives. Educational Media International, 39, 2, 195-202.
Resnick, L. (1987). Learning in school and out. Educational Researcher, 16, 9, 13-20.
Rogoff,  B.  (1990).  Apprenticeship  in  thinking:  Cognitive   development    in social  context.   New  York:  Oxford
      University Press.
Rovai, A. P. (2002). A preliminary look at the structural differences of higher education classroom communities
      in traditional and ALN Courses. The Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 6, 1, 41-56.
Strauss, A. (1993). Continual permutations of action. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2004, June). Learning in massively multiplayer online games. Paper presented at the annual
      meeting of International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS), Los Angeles CA.
Swan, K. (2002). Building learning communities in online courses: The importance of interaction. Education
      Communication and Information, 2, 1, 23­49.
Wenger,   E. (1998).  Communities     of practice:  Learning,   meaning    and  identity. Cambridge,    UK:    Cambridge
      University Press.

                                                          
