 A Pilot Study of Computer Supported Learning by
                      Constructing Instruction Notes
                      and Peer Expository Instruction

  Emily Ching1, Chih-Ti Chen2, Chih-Yueh Chou3, Yi-Chan Deng2, Tak-Wai Chan1
 Graduate Institute of Network Learning Technology1, Department of Computer Science &
                   Information Engineering2, National Central University, Taiwan
       Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Yuan Ze University, Taiwan3
    smileming@lst.ncu.edu.tw, chihtichen@lst.ncu.edu.tw, cychou@saturn.yzu.edu.tw,
                             ycdeng@cl.ncu.edu.tw, chan@lst.ncu.edu.tw

       Abstract.   Learning  by  teaching  has    been  extensively  studied  in education    and psychology
       research. However, there has been relatively less effort in this research avenue in CSCL research.
       Computer supported learning by teaching, as a genus of CSCL activities, is expected to draw more
       attention in the future. In this pilot study, we propose a model of computer supported learning by
       teaching that involves peer tutors in preparing their instruction notes and teaching their peer tutees
       verbally. Collaborative   learning   is  incorporated  in   our pedagogical    design.  As  an   initial
       investigation and for future improvement of our design, we conducted two experimental trials in a
       graduate-level course. This paper discusses the design of this model and reports our findings from
       the experimental trials.

       Keywords:   computer     supported learning   by  teaching, computer   supported  peer  tutoring, peer
       teaching, reciprocal peer tutoring, learning by teaching

INTRODUCTION
Students  teaching students, or  peer  tutoring,  is a pedagogical  strategy  studied extensively  in  the education
research. It has been found     that having  students   teach each  other  increases  their achievement    at  various
educational levels (Cohen et al., 1982; Falchikov, 2001; Rohrbeck et al., 2003). Several studies have further
shown that tutors academically profit more than their tutees, and the gains are not only from the teaching
activity, but also from the pure expectation of a later teaching demand (Bargh & Schul, 1980; Benware & Deci,
1984).
  Chan (2004) indicates that teaching represents a repertoire of activities consisting of learning about the
materials, composing teaching materials, conducting face-to-face teaching, monitoring learner's work, assessing
learner's learning outcomes     and  affective status, and reviewing    their own    teaching process.  Learning   by
teaching can be of varied forms, and when peer tutors are involved in different teaching activities, they would
learn in different depths and with different perspectives (Chan, 2004). A group of international researchers
envision  that a   computing    device  will   be as   indispensable   as a   pencil for a    student in   the  future
(www.G1on1.org).    Given   such  an  inevitable  trend, Chan  points  out  that the intention of  a  comprehensive
Computer Supported Learning By Teaching (csLBT) model is to have peer tutors cover the teaching activities as
many as possible by the supports of one-on-one (1:1) educational computing classroom where every student has
a computing device with wireless communication support.
  There have been various efforts in designing intra-class peer tutoring, but mainly for "monitoring learner's
work" activity; that is, having peer tutors monitor and give immediate feedback or help when tutees are doing
exercises, for example, Class-Wide Peer Tutoring (Greenwood et al., 1989), Reciprocal Peer Tutoring (Fantuzzo
et al., 1992), and ASK to THINK-TEL WHY (King, 1997). These approaches are similar in the way that they
conduct reciprocal tutoring by asking tutees questions which are either structuralized or provided from the class
teacher and are held in the situation that both tutors and tutees have read or been taught about the target subject.
  This pilot study proposes a model of csLBT which addresses on learning by constructing instruction notes
and peer expository instruction. The proposed model involves students in three teaching activities--learning
about the materials, composing teaching materials, and conducting face-to-face teaching--by the supports of 1:1
educational computing classroom. Collaborative learning plays a crucial element in our pedagogical design.
Two experimental trials were conducted in a graduate-level course to explore (a) how this model can motivate

                                                          
tutors to learn, (b) what and when tutors and tutees would benefit from the model, and (c) how much students
would prefer this model to be used in their courses regularly.

MODEL AND SYSTEM DESIGN
There are three phases in the proposed csLBT model. The first two phases are related to learning by teaching
and the last phase is to complement the first two phases with instructor-led discussion.

Preparation phase
This phase consists of four sub-phases: (1) Learning about the materials. The class instructor prepares materials
for two different topics, then arranges the class into two groups and assigns each group to study a topic for
preparing to teach the other group. This design is for every student to has equal chance of learning by teaching.
With the intention of explaining  to others, students would    pay more  efforts in their individual learning. (2)
Constructing individual instruction notes. Every student has to compose instruction notes after studying the
assigned material and submit to the csLBT system. This step facilitates tutors to identify and organize main
ideas, and shapes their thoughts concretely. (3) Peer assessment. Peers in the same group assess each other's
instruction notes anonymously. Not only this step can release the teacher from grading works, but also provide
tutors the chance to reflect on their own products. (4) Collaborating for common instruction notes. Instead of
using individually designed instruction notes to teach, students are paired in the same group and each pair has to
"merge" their notes into a common one for their later teaching. The sub-phase is designed for facilitating tutors
to explain their own rationales, coordinate and integrate alternative perspectives, and produce a better instruction
note than they have down individually. Figure 1 shows a system to support these sub-phases.

  Figure 1    System design of the preparation phase           Figure 2 The interaction model during the peerteaching phase with the supports of 1:1 educational
                                                                           computing classroom

Peer teaching phase
This phase consists of two sub-phases: (1) Conducting expository instruction. As demonstrated in Figure 2, A
teaches C and B teaches D where C and D are from the other group. A and B are teaching with their common
instruction notes and helping each other. The one-on-one tutoring design is for augmenting each student's
benefits by the intensive interactions. And the design of two tutor-tutee pairs as a group helps discussion when
alternative perspectives are needed. (2)   Answering  questions  and group  discussion.   Every student  answers
questions distributed by the class instructor and then A, B, C and D, as a small group, share and discuss their
answers. During this phase, students interact with each other face to face with the supports of 1:1 educational
computing   classroom where   all students are equipped  with   wireless-enabled  laptops  or Tablet  PCs. These
devices allow students for accessing and presenting learning materials and the common instruction notes, and
sharing and revising the answers in the second sub-phases.

Instructor-led discussion phase
The class instructor explains the answers of the questions in the peer teaching phase and gives complementary
instruction if needed. With the supports of 1:1 educational computing classroom, the instructor can view all
reported answers and then adjust her explanations and complementary instruction. She can also present some
selected student answers and hence enrich the class discussion. We expect the answering questions and group

                                                        
discussion sub-phase and instructor-led discussion phase are especially important for the peer tutees as these
phases verify the qualities of peer tutoring and their own learning and provide the second chance to be taught.

EXPERIMENTAL TRIALS AND INITIAL INVESTIGATIONS
Students enrolled in or auditing a graduate-level seminar course on "Intelligent Tutoring Systems" participated
in these  experimental trials.  A  total of 26  graduate students,  including seven  doctoral  students  and two
postdoctoral students, participated in the first trial, and half of them taught the other half. In the second trial, 22
students in the class, including six doctoral students, participated owing to absence of four students. Those who
were tutees in the first trial acted as tutors in the second trial. Participants were grouped and paired randomly.
No incentives, such as increasing grades or passing exams, were given for their participation so that we can see
how the model itself can motivate students.
    The preparation phase took participants two weeks before the peer teaching phase. In each trial, both peer
teaching phase and the instructor-led discussion phase were held in a three-hour class meeting. The conducting
expository instruction sub-phase took one and half hours, the answering questions and group discussion sub-
phase took one hour, and the class instructor led a whole class discussion about the questions and provided topic
review in the rest class time.
    The prototype of csLBT system was supported by two existed systems. EduX (Chang et al., 2003) supports
activities in the preparation phase via Internet. Digital Classroom Environment (DCE) (Deng et al., 2004)
supports the other two phases and every participant is equipped with a wireless enabled Tablet PC. The major
functions  supported  by DCE     are questions  distribution, individual answers reporting  and storage,  sharing
reported answers among the small group members, and viewing all the reported answers--a function for the
class instructor. Figure 3 is a screen shot of DCE drawing panel functioning in the share mode--all group
members' answers are displayed in the small boxes in the bottom and can be displayed in the bigger box for
shared workspace   or  legibility by  clicking one of those   small boxes.   Any modification  will  be displayed
synchronously. Figure 4 depicts members in a small group revisiting the materials after finding the differences
among their answers via the share mode of DCE.

Figure 3  A student using DCE (share mode) to share           Figure 4 Small group members in their learning
      and discuss answers with other members.                          during the discussion session
    After the experimental trials, 12 participants were interviewed about what they learnt and what had driven
them to learn in each sub-phase. All the interviews were tape-recorded. Some selected feedbacks were excerpted
in Table 1.
                       Table 1    Some feedbacks from participants during the interviews
Sub-phases                                          Excerpts from the interviews
1-1 Learning         "...If you can't teach yourself, how can you teach others? So I tried my best to understand
about the            the assigned material." (motivation for full comprehension)
materials              "When I have to teach somebody, I have to make sure the ideas I get from the assigned
                     material are `really' what the material means, so that my tutee won't get wrong ideas
                     because of me, or I'll be very sorry..." (commitment to teach correctly)
1-2 Constructing     "Besides the slides [instruction notes] shown on the laptop, I additionally provided more
individual           detailed summaries in my instruction scripts..." (paying more efforts)
instruction notes      "As we were going to compose the notes for others to learn, so I structured my notes so
                     that they are composed of several sessions." (creating ways for organizing knowledge)
1-3 Peer             "The assessing   rubrics  should have    been  provided earlier...because they  could have
Assessment           served as a guide for composing my own instruction notes."
1-4                  "We found the content [some concepts] was talking about the same things, although their

                                                         
Collaborating for     terminology or perspectives were different. So we put them together and linked with the
the common            similar concepts mentioned in the previous classes..." (linking and integrating ideas)
instruction notes      "We arranged them [instruction notes] chronologically, talking about the origins, the
                      evolution, and   the  problems      it was   facing..." (re-sequencing    according    to a certain
                      structure)
                      "These are talking about functions and usages, and those are talking about solutions..."
                      (categorizing topics)
                       "I   really enjoyed    the collaboration     with my   partner   for working    out  our  common
                      instruction notes. It's not just like labor division--the usual way we use for tasks like
                      group reports. This is a real collaboration." (positive affective outcomes and intellectual
                      collaboration)
2-1  Conducting       "My tutee asked something I couldn't explain according what I learnt, then I revisited the
expository            original   material, and    then    I  realized I  had   misunderstood     that  part."   (repairing
instruction           knowledge)
                       "My tutee asked a question that I couldn't answer. We checked the paper together and
                      found it was mentioned in the paper." (finding missing knowledge)
                      "After I provided further elaboration for an idea that my tutee found confusing, my tutee
                      kept nodding    and  saying    `I got   it!' And  that  made   me  feel   so great...  "  (sense of
                      achievement)
                      In the views of peer tutees:
                      "I was fully concentrated during the whole process. Because, you know, how can you be
                      distracted when you're the only person whom somebody is looking at and talking to?"
                      (social obligation and hence concentration)
                      "I asked every question emerged from my mind when my tutor was teaching. Although he
                      was teaching me, I felt we were more like partners and we were discussing. I usually don't
                      ask  many  questions    in the  class   because   they  might  be regarded    as silly questions."
                      (individualized instruction)
2-2  Answering        "The  main   sense   of achievement      came   from   when   my  tutee   answered   the  questions
Questions and         correctly--that meant my teaching worked..." (sense of achievement)
group discussion       "I felt sorry when the tutees had no ideas about the answers--I missed mentioning that
                      part." "I think that tutors learn more in such activities...It seemed that my tutee couldn't
                      digest what I had taught because he failed to answer so many questions..." (frustration
                      because the tutor could not tutor his tutee well enough)
                      In the views of peer tutees:
                       "My     tutor taught   me  a   lot of  things, and  those  things were    scattered   in my  brain
                      unorganized. Answering the questions helped me categorize the knowledge I had just been
                      told, knowing what belongs to what..."
3 Instructor-led      In the views of peer tutees:
discussion             "Explanations    from     the  instructor   were  very  important,   because    there  were   some
                      questions even my peer tutor was not sure about the answers. And I also would like to
                      learn more from the perspectives of the instructor as well as the other small groups."
                      "The instructor's explanation was well-organized, so I got a clearer picture about the
                      topic my tutor taught me."
    Besides the interviews, participants were requested to fill in a questionnaire asking them to rank the value of
each sub-phase    for their learning,  from      both   perspectives  of  the  tutor and    the tutee. From     the tutor's
perspectives, participants ranked the learning about the materials phase the highest, the constructing individual
instruction notes and collaborating for the common instruction notes as the second, then the last three sub-
phases but in the order of conducting expository instruction, instructor-led discussion, and answering questions
and group discussion, and assessing peers' instruction notes as the last. From the tutee's views, however, the
ranks of the last three sub-phases (in-class sub-phases) are reversed, that is, instructor-led discussion phase the
highest, then answering questions and group discussion, and conducting expository instruction as the last.
    Another item in the questionnaire is how often the student wishes to use this model in a course. Only five
percent of participants wished to use it every time the class meets. 55 percent of participants agreed that this
model can be used about half of the times the class meets. 35 percent of participants preferred using it less than
half of the course. No one wished not to use this model in any class. Five percent of participants left this item
unanswered. In the interviews, participants explained that although this model facilitated learning, the preparing
phase was time-consuming for tutors.

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORKS
Many positive impacts on peer tutors' learning, both in affective and cognitive domains, are found from the
interviews.  They   were   motivated   to  study  carefully    and  thoroughly  because   of  the  commitment     to teach
                                                              
correctly and to help others. This kind of intention to comprehend, as Brown (1988) suspected, may be the
critical reason that makes the "reciprocal teaching" strategy successful. They sensed satisfaction when clearing their
tutees' confusions up and helping them answer the instructor's questions correctly. They cared about how their tutees
learnt. Higher-level cognitive gains, e.g. actively linking, integrating, organizing the knowledge they learnt,
mainly came from the phase of merging two different instruction notes--just as one interviewee said: "It is the
real collaboration." By teaching others, misunderstandings were repaired and knowledge was consolidated.
Moreover, positive learning attitudes were also elicited because tutors have intensive interactions with their
partners and tutees. We also find that, despite age and seniority differences, the efforts that peer tutors paid for
preparing teaching were not affected by whom they were going to teach, although they felt pressured when their
tutees are more senior, for example, doctoral students.
  From the interviews with tutees and their questionnaires, however, we found that peer tutees would not have
been satisfied if they had just been being taught by peer expository instruction. After being tutored, tutees found
that they are more eager for having the opportunity of actively organizing the knowledge just newly learnt and
treasure the instructor's inputs in the last phase as this ensures and enriches what they learnt. This finding
supports our   expectation that the two  designs,  answering  questions and   group  discussion sub-phase  and
instructor-led discussion, will be especially important for tutees' learning. Nevertheless, it also suggests that a
basic tutoring training can and should be supported by the system, or students may not know how to perform an
effective instruction. Hence, scaffolding mechanisms supporting peer tutors for their preparation and teaching
processes are essential for the csLBT system and will be one of our future works. Another future work of this
research is to engage tutees both in the preparation and peer teaching phases, instead of being tutored passively.
  Generally speaking, this pilot study suggests that by involving students in composing instruction notes and
teaching their peers, graduate  students can learn actively  and both tutors  and tutees are immersed  in  such
learning context, even though there is no incentive provided. Therefore, further development is worthwhile for
building more useful tools and scaffoldings for this csLBT. However, there are some issues that have to be
seriously considered when designing such a system. First, the works for tutors in the preparation phase are time
consuming. Second, the class instructor may concern about student's tutoring quality. He is sure what he said is
right in the class though he does not know whether students understand or not. But in the proposed csLBT
model, he is not fully confident whether student tutors can correctly teach the materials. Finally, the learning
chances may be unequal between peer tutors and peer tutees since peer tutors may gain more than their tutees.
Some carefully designed experiments comparing the learning effects of csLBT for graduate students and other
common teaching strategies should also be conducted.

REFERENCES
Bargh J. A., & Schul Y. ( 1980) On the cognitive benefits of teaching. Journal of Educational Psychology, 72,
     5, 593-604.
Benware  C.  A., &  Deci   E. L. (1984)  Quality  of learning with an  active versus  passive motivational set.
     American Educational Research Journal, 21, 4, 755-765.
Brown, A. L. (1988). Motivation to learn and understand: On taking charge of one's own learning. Cognition
     and Instruction, 5, 4, 311-321.
Chan, T. W. (2004) Computer supported learning by teaching. Unpublished paper submitted to CSCL2005.
Cohen, P.A.; Kulik, J.A.; Kulik, C.L.C. (1982) Educational outcomes of tutoring: a meta-analysis of findings.
     American Educational Research Journal, 19, 237-248.
Chang, L. J., Yang, J. C., Deng, Y. C., & Chan, T. W. (2003) EduXs: multilayer educational services platforms.
     Computers & Education, 41, 1, 1-18.
Deng, Y. C., Chang, L. J., Chang, S. B. & Chan, T. W. (2004). DC-1: Support of Digital Classroom Learning
     Environment with Wireless devices. Unpublished paper submitted to Journal of Innovations in Education
     and Training International.
Falchikov, N. (2001) Learning together: Peer tutoring in higher education. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Fantuzzo, J. W., King, J. A., & Heller, L. R. (1992) Effects of reciprocal peer tutoring on mathematics and
     school adjustment: A component analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 3, 331-339.
Greenwood, C. R., Delquadri, J., & Hall, R. V. (1989) Longitudinal effects of classwide peer tutoring. Journal
     of Educational Psychology, 81,371-383.
King, A. (1997) ASK to THINK-TEL WHY: A model of transactive peer tutoring for scaffolding higher level
     complex learning. Educational Psychology, 32, 4, 221-235
Rohrbeck, C. A., Ginsburg-Block, M. D., Fantuzzo, J. W., & Miller, T. R. (2003) Peer-Assisted Learning
     Interventions    With  Elementary   School Students:  A  Meta-Analytic   Review. Journal   of Educational
     Psychology, 95, 2, 240-257.

                                                        
