How         Can       We        Use       Hypervideo                  Design          Projects             to
Construct Knowledge in University Courses?

            Elmar Stahl                            Carmen Zahn                           Matthias Finke
  Psychological Institute III             Knowledge Media Research                Computer Graphics Center,
   University of Muenster                      Center, Tuebingen                           Darmstadt
 stahlel@psy.uni-muenster.de                 c.zahn@iwm-kmrc.de                        mfinke@zgdv.de

        Abstract. In this paper a course concept based on collaborative construction of hypervideos is
        presented. The course concept integrates a) hypervideo technology development, b) research on
        learning with hypervideo systems, and c) the application of research on knowledge acquisition by
        writing texts or hypertexts to hypervideos. We demonstrate how collaborative construction of
        hypervideo can support knowledge transforming processes (see Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987;
        Stahl & Bromme, 2004) in university courses of psychology students. In the first part of the paper
        a hypervideo system that enables collaborative design activities by users is discussed. Afterwards
        the course concept is presented in detail. Evaluation results are consistent with our assumptions.
        The course concept showed to be successful and well appreciated by the students.

        Keywords: Collaborative hypervideo design, knowledge transforming, hypervideo.

INTRODUCTION
Hypervideo is defined as video based hypermedia that combines non-linear information structuring and dynamic
audio-visual information presentations (videos presenting realistic images or animations). In hypervideos, video
information is linked with different kinds of additional information (like written or spoken texts, pictures, or
further videos).  Users  can  mouse-click on  sensitive regions  within  the   videos to access  the additional
information  (see figure 1). One  main  difference between sensitive   regions in a hypervideo   and links  in a
hypertext is that the sensitive regions have spatial and temporal characteristics.  This  allows highlighting  a
specific object or person within the video for a predefined timeframe. The main difference between videos in
traditional hypertexts and hypervideos lies in the importance attributed to the video itself. In hypertexts videos
are often illustrative and optional. In hypervideos, video sequences form the "backbone of the system" (Zahn,
Schwan & Barquero, 2002). Thus, videos and the additional information elements are interwoven in ways that
videos can be viewed interactively and navigated in non-linear order.
  Defining hypervideo-links in a video sequence enables an author to refer to a specific object / person within
the video by providing additional information. We have extended this concept by developing a cooperative
hypervideo system that supports the collaborative authoring of hypervideo systems where group members can
share their ideas (Zahn & Finke, 2003). The system provides specific facilities to jointly elaborate on video
materials and to change a hypervideo presentation according to the development of knowledge present in any
group. In this sense hypervideo can be defined as dynamic information space (DIS), which can be changed and
extended  as a basis  to share  knowledge  and to   communicate.  The   dynamic   information space  integrates
interactive videos, additional information and communication.

                                        Figure 1: Concept of hypervideo
Our human computer interface concept is based on a view model. The model allocates separate views within the
graphical user interface to access certain parts of the dynamic information space in form of the different node

                                                       
types within the DIS: Video nodes are video sequences with sensitive regions which are presented in the video
view. The existence of a sensitive region is announced by its visualization within the video display. Since it
might be disturbing in some learning situations, the user is in charge to initialize the visualization process of
sensitive regions. Hypervideo-links can be activated by clicking on the corresponding sensitive region with a
mouse  pointer.  Furthermore,    the  video  view   allows  users  to generate   own    sensitive regions.  Additional
information are presented in a separate view and can be of different media types like texts, images, animations,
audio recordings, etc. It is possible to link multiple nodes with additional information to one sensitive region
within our system. Communication nodes describe the conversation between users and are therefore highly
contextualized. The communication view presents the group conversation in form of text based dialogs (chat). A
dialog is always related to an object in the video or to a specific information node. In addition, a fourth view is
introduced that enables the disclosure of the hypervideo-structure in order to support user orientation within the
graphical user interface. The arrangement of all node types within the structure is visualized in a text-based
manner. Users can browse the navigation view and activate hypervideo-links, which will lead to the presentation
of the content in the associated views.
    These facilities, in turn, can be utilized in formal educational contexts such as projects at university, as will
be described in the following paragraphs.

COLLABORATIVE HYPERVIDEO DESIGN
During the last years a growing number of courses in hypermedia production have been offered in schools and
universities that focus on students' collaborative design of multimedia. It can be assumed form the constructivist
perspective of situated cognition (e.g. Jacobson & Spiro, 1995) that such courses allow to create a learning
context, which incorporates important features to foster deeper understanding and knowledge transfer: Students
have to solve the realistic and authentic problem of how to present a topic within their hypermedia in an
appropriate  way.  They    are engaged   in an active   and constructive    process of  learning, and because   of the
complexity of the task, that can only be solved in collaboration, they are challenged to articulate and negotiate
meaning with their fellow students.
    However, the production of hypermedia is a highly complex task: It is not easy to maintain the balance
between thinking about the content to be processed and thinking about design features of hypermedia (Dillon,
2002). Accordingly, problems that arise in such projects include that either too much attention is paid to the
design of hypermedia while the contents are only included with `copy & paste' (Bereiter, 2002). Or that students
present the contents in a way that is inappropriate for the format of hypermedia. A consequence of both cases is
that students develop a superficial comprehension of the subject matter presented by their products. Therefore it
seems necessary to find an appropriate balance to encourage reflection on the contents on the one hand and
reflection about the hypervideo design on the other. This assumption is made in analogy to ideas from research
on writing traditional text and hypertext. Concerning text production, Bereiter and Scardamalia (1987) propose
that writing can  only  contribute    to knowledge   acquisition  when    a text is formulated    within a continuous
interaction between content-related knowledge (on the topic addressed in the text) and rhetorical knowledge (on
the  design of the   text, the anticipated  audience,   the genre, etc.). This   problem-oriented   procedure   (called
knowledge    transforming)   requires authors  to  reflect  on and extend    their  own knowledge    about  the topic.
Concerning hypertext writing, Stahl and Bromme (2004) used the knowledge-transforming model as a heuristic
to examine conditions and processes of learning by constructing hypertexts and to develop a course program for
university  courses, respectively. They     argued that constructing  hypertexts    places special constraints  on the
design of the documents through the features of hypertext, the nodes, the links and the multi-linear structure. As
they described  in   detail, the processes  of writing  nodes,   selecting  appropriate  links,   planning the overall
structure and flexible ways of reading might result in deeper knowledge about the concepts within a subject
matter, a deeper comprehension of semantic structures within the subject matter and to a more flexible use of
this new knowledge.
    In designing hypervideos, the rhetorical and design knowledge that can be acquired by learners is even more
broadly defined than it is with writing hypertext (Zahn, Schwan, & Barquero, 2002). It is additionally important
to consider which symbol system is appropriate for which kind of information, which information should be
presented as dynamic information in the videos and which is better suited to be presented as static information in
additional text nodes. Further on, the new link type of sensitive regions within videos determines new kinds of
decisions about the setting of links and the design of an overall hypervideo structure. We assume that these
reflections should contribute to an appropriate situational model of the contents to be processed (in sense of
Kintsch, 1998). And this, in turn, should help students to understand the respective topic more deeply and to be
able use it more flexible in transfer situations.
    We ran a series of regular university courses about "learning with new media" at the University of Muenster,
Germany to examine whether the complex task of designing hypervideos could be managed by the students and

                                                           
to test, which instructional help the students needed. These courses will be described in more detail in the next
paragraphs.

HYPERVIDEO DESIGN IN REGULAR UNIVERSITY COURSES
The courses in hypervideo design are part of the psychology masters program (diploma) at the University of
Muenster. They are offered as courses on e-learning. 10 to 16 students participate in each course. The topics of
the hypervideos produced  within the courses   were `techniques    of presentation and moderation'   in the    first
course and a parallel course at the University of Linz, Austria (lectured by Stephan Schwan), `information
system about  study  of psychology   at the  University  of Muenster'    in  the second    course, and  `conflict
management' in the third course (this course is still running). The hypervideos have to be designed from scratch,
i.e. students have to plan all the video materials and the additional information, to write storyboards and text
nodes, to film and to edit the videos and to integrate the different video and additional nodes in a coherent
hypervideo structure. A screenshot of one of the students' hypervideos is shown in figure 2.

                          Figure 2: Hypervideo about ,techniques of moderation'
As a heuristic to structure our (second and third) courses of hypervideo design we relied on the course program
for hypertext writing developed by Stahl and Bromme (2004), which is based on results from their studies on
writing hypertext in secondary schools and several experiments on knowledge acquisition by writing hypertext
(e.g. Bromme & Stahl, 2002, 2005, Stahl, 2001). The program of Stahl & Bromme (2004) consists of five
instructional units to teach university students how to use the features of hypertext consciously. Each unit covers
one aspect, which have to be dealt with during writing hypertext:

1. Unit: Developing a basic understanding of hypervideo design. First of all, students have to understand what
hypervideos are. Knowledge about texts and genres is important for text comprehension (e.g. Hayes, 1996) and
text production (e.g. Kellogg, 1994). For the new medium `hypervideo' students have no schemas about such
regularities, and might rely on more familiar ­ but inappropriate - media formats. To familiarize students with
the idea of hypervideos, we shot a `concept map video' that visualized the planning phases of the video nodes
and the additional material (see figure 3). This video enabled students to plan, produce and revise their materials
using the hypervideo  system  from the  very   beginning of their   design work.   Further on, a   possibility for
discussions was embedded in the concept map videos with help of the integrated chat-tool explained above.
Students were able to comment and discuss their ideas, exposés and storyboards within the hypervideo system
(figure 3). The possibility to work with the hypervideo software from the very beginning substantially enhanced
students understanding of hypervideo. They developed a concrete mental model of their own hypervideo, and
the materials could be successively exchanged with further versions, until the hypervideo was ready.

2. Unit: Producing video nodes and text nodes with additional information. Secondly, students have to decide
which contents they want to include in their hypervideo and to design the video and additional nodes. The
important issue that students have to   decide is: Which  symbol      system is appropriate  for which  kind    of
information? With help of the `concept map video' (figure 3) we asked students' to plan the video nodes and the

                                                       
additional material within a series of three steps: They had to develop main ideas, exposes and storyboards for
the videos before we allowed them to shoot the films. Parallel to this they were asked to develop their ideas,
exposes and concrete nodes for the additional material. For the additional material we asked the students to
consider two general principals that we adapted from node design within hypermedia (e.g. Gerdes, 1997): Each
node should only contain the necessary amount of information that refers directly to the specific video content.
Further on, each text node must be comprehensible without reading further nodes. We asked students to design
their additional material with these principles in mind.

 Figure 3: Concept map video: Left side: Students are able to integrate their ideas, exposes and videos from the
          beginning; right side: An embedded chat-tool enables them to discuss and review their material

3. Unit: Organizing an overall structure of the hypervideo. During the third unit, Stahl and Bromme (2004)
asked their students to discuss the macrostructure (in sense of Kintsch, 1998) of the contents. Thus, the aim of
this unit is to foster students' comprehension of the semantic structure. To design an overall structure for their
hypervideos students had to plan the structure of each of these single hypervideos (one video and the relevant
additional information) and how to structure all single hypervideos within an overall hypervideo. To plan the
single hypervideos  mainly  refers to plan how  to  link   the information  within  the videos with the  relevant
additional material and to decide, if references to other videos should be included. For planning the overall
structure we  asked the   students to construct a   concept    map   presenting the relations between all single
hypervideos and the nodes with additional material.

4. Unit: Considering multiple perspectives in the hypervideos. During the fourth unit, the students are asked to
consider different user perspectives and to present multiple ways of navigation. This idea is based on Cognitive
Flexibility Theory (CFT, see, e.g. Jacobson & Spiro, 1995). CFT deals with how knowledge about a complex
("ill-structured") domain can be acquired in a way that ensures its flexible use. The goal is to stimulate learning
transfer and to avoid `inert knowledge', that is, knowledge a learner can reproduce, but fails to apply in new
situations (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987). If authors are asked to take different user perspectives into account,
knowledge might be acquired in a way that supports its flexible application. Concerning hypervideo design
multiple perspectives can be included on different levels. First of all, it is possible to communicate perspectives
through the videos, e.g. in a hypervideo about communication strategies it might be useful to present the same
scene  from  different camera perspectives  or  to  show    parallel videos that differ in some  aspects. In the
cooperative hypervideo system it is also possible to link different additional information to one sensitive region
in the video. Therefore it is possible to interpret the same scene in a video from different perspectives. On the
level of the overall structure that connects all single hypervideos (see unit 3) students can plan different guided
tours or different structural overviews for audiences with different perspectives. Therefore, hypervideo offers
many possibilities to reflect about and include multiple perspectives.

5. Unit: Planning and setting of sensitive regions and links. During the fifth unit, students are asked to discuss
the sensitive regions to be placed in their hypervideos and the links within the additional information units.
Links have two important and closely related functions: they enable the user to navigate within the hypertext and
they represent the semantic relations between the node contents. Therefore the selection of offered links has a
great influence on navigation (e.g. Wright, 1993) and on comprehension of the contents (e.g. Gray, 1995).
Consequently, we assume that linking nodes is a sensitive task that should result in a deeper processing of the

                                                         
information content. We try to enhance the awareness and comprehension of semantic relations by asking our
students to justify each link that they want to set. Students have to discuss, which kind of semantic relation they
want to express by a link, and why this relation might be important in the context of this particular node.

It is important to note that each unit might result in revisions of the material developed so far. Therefore the
process  of hypervideo    design   should  be seen   as a   circular process,  even    if the units  are   arranged in  an
instructional sequence.

EVALUATION OF THE COURSES
Up  to  know    we have   little empirical evidence    about  the   effects of the instructional     units on knowledge
acquisition by hypervideo design. Stahl & Bromme (2004) had developed the units as a result of their studies in
six different school classes, their series of five experiments about effects of different instructions on hypertext
writing and their own courses on hypertext writing with university students. Therefore it is reasonable to assume
that the course design might be beneficial to support knowledge transformation in courses on hypervideo design
as well.
    Nevertheless we were able to run short evaluations of the courses by analyzing the design process and the
products together with the students using interviews, questionnaires and group discussions. Comparing the first
courses (in Münster and Linz) with the second course gave first confirmations of our assumptions. We had used
the instructional program only during the second course. In the first courses the students had more freedom to
decide for themselves how to organize their work. We found strong differences in the products of these courses
that confirmed the appropriateness of the instructional units. The hypervideos of the first two courses included 5
hypervideos and 16 additional texts (Linz) and 8 hypervideos with 37 additional texts and 2 additional videos
(Münster). The hypervideo of the second course was significantly larger with 14 hypervideos, 9 additional
videos and 195 additional texts. Further on, the hypervideos of the second course included - on average -
significantly more sensitive regions then those of the first courses, F (1, 27) = 4.13, p = .05 (first courses: M =
3.85, SD = 2.12; second courses: M = 6.67, SD = 4.38). The approximate time of the hypervideos in the second
course was on average significantly shorter than in the first courses, F (1, 27) = 25. 05, p < .01 (first courses: M
= 301.39   sec.,  SD  =  87.71;   second  courses:   M  =   143.71   sec., SD  =  75.92).  Qualitative   analyses   of the
hypervideos confirmed these differences. The hypervideos of the students in Linz looked like instructional films.
All relevant   information  was    given  in the  videos    and  all additional   information  seemed      unimportant  to
understand the videos. In the first course in Münster it was the opposite way around. In half of the videos all
relevant contents were given in the additional information and the hypervideos themselves seemed unimportant.
In contrast, the product of the second course looked like a real "hyper-"video.
    It seemed   that the  students  within   the first courses   were  not   able to   develop    an appropriate  idea  of
hypervideos: They compared hypervideos either with traditional instructional films or with traditional hypertext.
This resulted in planning activities which focused either too much on the videos, or the main focus was given to
the additional material (see unit 1). This also led to significantly longer videos (unit 2) and less links between
videos and additional information (unit 5). Further on, the hypervideos of the first course were "stand-alone"
videos compared to the hypervideos of the second course that were integrated in an overall structure (unit 3)
with multiple possibilities to navigate though the information space (unit 4).
    The group discussion and the interviews with the students of the first course also revealed that they differed
in their opinion about the learning outcome about the topic and the design of learning environments. From these
results and our observations during the courses it seems doubtable that the anticipated knowledge transforming
processes occurred. In contrast it can be concluded from interviews with the students of the second course, their
products  and   a special designed   questionnaire,    that they gained    substantial experiences    with  the design  of
learning environments and complex project work. They also gained a deeper understanding about the topics to
be presented. To give an example, students of the second course completed a questionnaire with different items
concerning their judgments of knowledge acquisition in the course. Each item had to be rated on a 5-point scale
from 1 = `I completely disagree' to 5 = `I completely agree'. Students assessed that the collaborative design of
hypervideo fostered their active knowledge acquisition about the topic to be presented (M = 4.28, SD = 1.11),
their knowledge about designing learning environments (M = 4.71, SD = 0.49), and their knowledge about
cooperative project work (M = 4.85, SD = 0.38). They also rated the quality of their hypervideo on a German
spectrum of school notes (with 1 = very good to 5 = insufficient) as `very good' (M = 1.29, SD = 0.48). We
further presented their hypervideo to another course on learning with new media (n = 16) that was not involved
in the design process. The students rated the quality of the hypervideo as `good' (M = 2.00, SD = 0.73). From
such   results and the informal   feedback   of  the students,   we  might  conclude   that   the anticipated knowledge
transforming processes occurred. These results of the evaluations can only be seen as first hints, but they support
our assumptions about the necessity of a didactical concept like our instructional program.

                                                            
CONCLUSION
  We can conclude that it is possible to integrate the complex task of hypervideo design into regular university
courses. But it seems highly important to structure the task for the students. The knowledge transforming model
gives a useful recognition of the need for balance in orienting learners to focus on the hypervideo design and
learning contents of the hypervideo. We used the five units of the instructional program from Stahl and Bromme
to teach the students gradually how to deal with the features of hypervideo. It was no problem to adopt it to the
specific demands of hypervideos.
  Nevertheless, the experiences within the courses should only be seen as a starting point for experimental
research on the affordances and benefits of learning with hypervideos. A lot of open questions appeared. Thus,
concerning future perspectives, the experiences within these field studies will be used to conduct a series of
controlled experiments to investigate selected aspects of collaborative hypervideo design in laboratory learning
settings.

REFERENCES
Bereiter, C.  (2002). Emergent versus    presentational hypertext. In R.  Bromme,   &   E. Stahl  (Eds.), Writing
      hypertext and learning. Conceptual and empirical approaches. Advances in learning and instruction
      series (pp. 73-78). Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bromme, R., & Stahl, E. (2002). Learning by producing hypertext from reader perspectives: Cognitive flexibiliy
      theory reconsidered. In R. Bromme, & E. Stahl (Eds.), Writing hypertext and learning. Conceptual and
      empirical approaches (pp. 39-61). Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Bromme,    R. &  Stahl, E. (2005). Is a  hypertext a book   or a   space? The  impact   of different introductory
      metaphors on hypertext construction. Computers & Education, 44 (2), 115-133
Dillon, A. (2002). Writing as design: Hypermedia and the shape of information space. In R. Bromme, & E. Stahl
      (Eds.), Writing hypertext and learning. Conceptual and empirical approaches. Advances in learning and
      instruction series (pp. 63-72). Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Gerdes, H. (1997). Lernen mit Text und Hypertext [Learning with text and hypertext]. Berlin: Pabst.
Gray, S. H. (1995). Linear coherence and relevance: Logic in computer-human `conversations´. Journal of
      Pragmatics, 23, 627-647.
Hayes, J. R. (1996). A new framework for understanding cognition and affect in writing. In C. M. Levy & S.
      Ransdell (Eds.), The science of writing. Theories, methods, individual differences, and applications (pp.
      1-27). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Jacobson, M. J., & Spiro, R. J. (1995). Hypertext learning environments, cognitive flexibility, and the transfer of
      complex knowledge: An empirical investigation. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 12(4),
      301-333.
Kellogg, R. T. (1994). The psychology of writing. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, E. (2001). Hyper - Text - Schreiben. Die Auswirkungen verschiedener Instruktionen auf Lernprozesse
      beim    Schreiben  von Hypertext   [Hyper-Text-Writing.   Effects   of different instructions  on   learning
      processes during writing hypertexts]. Münster: Waxmann
Stahl, E., & Bromme, R. (2004). Learning by writing hypertext: A research based design of university courses in
      writing hypertext. . In G. Rijlaarsdam (Series Ed.) and Rijlaarsdam, G., Van den Bergh, H., & Couzijn,
      M. (Vol. Eds.), Studies in writing, Volume 14, Effective learning and teaching of writing, 2nd edition, (pp
      547-560). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wright, P. (1993). To jump or not to jump: Strategy selection while reading electronic texts. In C. McKnight, A.
      Dillon, & J. Richardson (Eds.), Hypertext: A psychological perspective (pp. 137-152). New York: Ellis
      Horwood.
Zahn, C.   (2003).  Wissenskommunikation    mit  Hypervideos   -   Untersuchungen   zum    Design   nicht-linearer
      Informationsstrukturen   für   audiovisuelle  Medien   [Knowledge      communication   with   hypervideo -
      investigating the design of nonlinear information structures in audiovisual media]. Muenster, New York,
      München; Berlin: Waxmann.
Zahn, C., & Finke, M. (2003) Collaborative knowledge building based on hyperlinked video. Paper presented at
          the CSCL, Bergen/Norway.
Zahn, C., Schwan, S., & Barquero, B. (2002). "Authoring hypervideos: Design for learning and learning by
      design",  In: R:  Bromme,    &  E. Stahl, Writing  Hypertext  and   Learning: Conceptual    and   Empirical
      Approaches. Oxford: Elsevier Science.

                                                        
