  +FGPVKH[KPI 2GGT +PVGTCEVKQP 2CVVGTPU CPF 4GNCVGF
             8CTKCDNGU +P %QOOWPKV[$CUGF .GCTPKPIG
                      Heejeon Suh, Myunghee Kang, Kyungae Moon, Howook Jang
             Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Republic of Korea
          hjsuh@etri.re.kr, mhkang@ewha.ac.kr, kamoon@etri.re.kr, hwjang@etri.re.kr

       Abstract. The purpose of this study was to investigate patterns of peer interactions and to identify
       the  relationships   of peer   interactions with   learner characteristics and  learning outcome    in
       community-based learning. The participants were 24 middle school students joined in an online
       learning community for a week. Two patterns of peer interactions such as in-degree and out-degree
       centrality were identified. Students with high intra-personal or verbal-linguistic intelligence were
       related to high in-degree centrality, while students with high interpersonal intelligence or prior
       knowledge were related to high out-degree centrality. That means "self smart" or "word smart"
       students were popular and played knowledge broker's roles in their community. On the other hand,
       "social smart" students or "high prior knowledge" students were open and friendly activators and
       delivered vast    information. Moreover,    higher peer  interactions were  related to better learning
       outcome. These results indicated that peer interactions were important intervening variables to
       enhance learning effect.

       Keywords: Community-based learning, peer interaction, learner characteristics, social network
       analysis

+0641&7%6+10
With the rapid development of a knowledge-based society, it is of growing importance to create knowledge
through collaboration with others beyond the individual. Recently, with the expansion of online communities,
community-based learning has brought new learning methods where learners form communities around common
objectives and create knowledge through interaction with other members (Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999; Palloff &
Pratt, 1999; Rovai, 2003; Wilson & Ryder, 1998). However, research in community-based learning has been
limited to conceptual and macroscopic studies such as the process of learning community development.
  Therefore, we need to identify peer interaction patterns and relationships among the variables that promote
peer interactions and learning effects in community-based learning. Thus, the purpose of this study was to
investigate  patterns of  peer  interactions and   to identify the  relationships of  peer interactions with  learner
characteristics and learning outcome in community-based learning. The contribution of this study may provide
practical guidelines for designing and operating strategies to enhance the effect of community-based learning.

6*'14'6+%#. $#%-)4170&

%QOOWPKV[$CUGF .GCTPKPI
General collaborative learning describes an instructional approach in which students work together in small
groups to accomplish a common learning goal. Collaborative learning is based on these principles: (1) Tasks are
carefully  designed   to be suitable  for group    work.  (2) There is  positive  interdependence. (3)  Students are
individually  accountable    for  learning   and   participation.  (4)  Attention  and  class  time   are  given  to
interpersonal/collaborative skill building. (5) The role of the teacher changes from being "an instructor" to "a
guide or a facilitator" (Johnson & Johnson, 1999). On the other hand, community-based learning is a learner-
centered approach and based on the principles of collaborative knowledge construction and learning community.
Students within the learning community set up common goals, generate ideas collaboratively, and share their
production (Wilson & Ryder, 1998).
  The process of community-based learning consists of five phases (figure 1). (1) Common goals assignment
phase: students set up common goals and tune up member's demands and interests. (2) Group rules forming
phase: students  make    group  rules and  distribute  roles  among  members.    (3) Assignment  recognition  phase:
students recognize the problem of individual interests and experiences and carry out inquiry through discourse.
(4) Collaborative accomplishment phase: students accomplish various collaborative activities such as intra-group
and inter-group collaboration and interact with external specialist. (5) Production generation phase: students
generate and share final production and also carry out peer evaluation and subsequent activity (Palloff & Pratt,
1999). Table 1 indicates five components of community-based learning environment include in collaborative

                                                          
learning, social interaction, planning & reflection, knowledge base, and evaluation & compensation (Kang &
Byun, 2001; Stahl, 2000).
                                                            Table 1. Five components of community-based
                                                                          learning environment
   Phase 1. Assign Common Goals                  Dimension                   Description                        Function
   Phase 2. Form Group Rules                   CollaborativeLearningExchange opinions and  interactwith members during group workdiscussion, whiteboard,group workplace,communication tools, etc.
                                                    Social       Informal    communication    and     free-board,  announcement,
                                                   Interaction   recreation                           Q/A, etc.
   Phase 3. Recognize AssignmentPhase 4. Accomplish CollaborationsPlanning &ReflectionIdentify personal and group goal,plantimescheduleforproject,divide member' roles, and reflectreflectionnote,schedule,goal/ role specification, etc.
                                                                 learning   process
   Phase 5. Generate Production                  KnowledgeBase   Share and Store learning resourcesand productse-library, mybase, teambase
      Figure 1. The process ofcommunity-based learningEvaluation &CompensationPeerevaluation,instructorevaluation,internal/externalcompensationevaluation rubrics, commentform, avatar-point, etc.

.GCTPGT %JCTCEVGTKUVKEU 2TKQT -PQYNGFIG                    6JTGG 2GTUQPCN +PVGNNKIGPEGU
This study included four learner characteristics: Prior knowledge, verbal-linguistic intelligence, interpersonal
intelligence, and   intra-personal    intelligence.   The  reason    why  they   were  selected   that   students   need   to    have
abilities to  learn through   knowledge       sharing,     dialogical   conversation     skills, self-regulation        ability,     and
interpersonal skills for enhancing student's learning effect in an online learning community (Bielaczyc & Collins,
1999; Jonassen & Land, 2000; Palloff & Pratt, 1999; Stahl, 2000).
  Prior knowledge means that the individual already has knowledge regarding the problem or assignment. By
reviewing previous literature, prior knowledge greatly affects the accomplishment process and achievement.
Gardner's theory of multiple intelligences applied within K-12 and higher education research and practices and
also described  the  way   of learning     styles  (Gardner,     1999).   According    to  a multiple    intelligence    approach,
students with high verbal-linguistic intelligence (`word smart') learn best through language including speaking,
writing, reading, and listening and have high achievement and good communication skills. Student with high
interpersonal intelligence (`social smart') learn best through interaction with other people such as discussions,
cooperative work, or social activities and enhance a friendly atmosphere and cohesiveness in groups. Students
with high intra-personal intelligence (`self smart') learn best through meta-cognitive practices such as awareness
of their feelings, self-reflection, thinking processes, and their own strengths and weaknesses. Self-smart students
are good at end-goal setting, goal pursuing, and process assessment (Armstrong, 1994; Gardner, 1999).

+PVGTCEVKQP #PCN[UKU 5QEKCN 0GVYQTM #PCN[UKU
Social network   analysis  is a       sociological research    tool.  We    can schematize    social    structure   to  a network
composed of the link that connects a node to a node (node: participant, link: relation). Up to date, social network
analysis appeared to apply a useful tool for analyzing participant interaction in the e-learning (Haythornthwaite,
2002;  Palonen  &   Hakkarainen,       2000). It   provided    a new   kind   of in-depth    information    on    communication
relations, power relations, participant's role, and so on. Degree centrality of social network analysis was used as
an instrument for analyzing the participant's interaction level and direction in this study.

+PFGITGG %GPVTCNKV[        1WVFGITGG %GPVTCNKV[
Degree centrality indicates the density of relationships between participants in a network and is presented by in-
degree centrality and out-degree centrality (Figure 2).

                  A's In-degree Centrality =                          A's Out-degree Centrality =
                          In-degree of A's connection                       Out-degree of A's connection
                               Participants-1                                       Participants-1
                                          Figure 2. Formulas of degree centrality

  In-degree    centrality means       the degree   of relations  that behavior      A receives   the   message     from   others     in
communication situations. Students with high in-degree centrality have more interactive activities for receiving
information or comments from others. They are popular students or knowledge broker in their community.
  On the other hand, out-degree centrality means the degree of relations that behavior A sends the message
toward others in communication situations. Students with high out-degree centrality are more active in providing

                                                                
information to others in discussion or providing comments to other's opinions. They prefer to link open and
friendly human relations to many participants and have important role to delivery information and data in their
community.

/'6*1&1.1);
The subjects of this study were 24 first and second year middle school students joined in an online learning
community operated by N company. The students accomplished a task that examined Greek-Roman mythology
for one week. Based on a literature review of the process in community-based learning and previous studies on
group interactions variables, a research model consisted of the input, process, and output variables: the input
variables were four learner characteristics such as prior knowledge and three intelligences (verbal-linguistics,
interpersonal, and intra-personal); the process variables involved two interactions such as in-degree centrality
and out-degree centrality); the output variable was individual achievement.
  The research instruments used in conducting the experiment were community-based learning environments, a
learning task, prior   knowledge   test (Spearman-Brown       formula    / r =   .66), multiple intelligence  test (verbal-
linguistic / interpersonal / intra-personal intelligence) (Cronbach's alpha = .67~.85) (Moon et al., 2001, adapted
by Shearer, 1996), interaction analysis tools (social network analysis), and achievement evaluation rubrics (Wen,
1998). Data was gathered for a week and analyzed by social network analysis on interaction pattern using
Netminer  2.0  tool and  path  analysis  of learner     characteristics, peer  interaction,  and  learning  outcome.   Path
coefficients were used as standardized regression coefficients (beta).

4'57.65

2GGT +PVGTCEVKQP 2CVVGTPU 7UKPI 5QEKCN 0GVYQTM #PCN[UKU

+PFGITGG EGPVTCNKV[ QH RGGT KPVGTCEVKQP
Figure 3 indicates that students s20(f), s17(f), s2(m), s3(f), s6(m), and s9(f) had higher in-degree centrality of
interaction and positioned toward the center of the in-degree centrality circle. They received information or
comments from others actively and were popular students and knowledge brokers in their community.

               Figure 3. Social network analysis graph                   Figure 4. Social network analysis graph
                         on in-degree centrality                                  on out-degree centrality
           s: student,  t: mentor,  (f): female,  (m): male          s: student,  t: mentor,  (f): female,  (m): male
           Attributes: Verbal-linguistic intelligence                Attributes : Prior knowledge
           G : high (80~100 score)  G : middle (60-79 score)         G : high (90~100score)   G : middle (60~89 score)
            : low (1~59 score)       : mentor                         : low    (1~59 score)     : mentor

  On the side of individual attributes, highly intrapersonal intelligent students (s2(m), s9(f), s17(f), etc.) or high
verbal-linguistic intelligent students (s2(m), s9(f), s17(f), s20(f), etc.) (figure 3) had higher in-degree centrality.
In addition, s2(m) and s20(f) students were not only high intrapersonal and verbal-linguistic intelligence but also
high prior knowledge students. On the side of relational property, middle and high intrapersonal or verbal-
linguistic students dominated in-degree interaction within this learning community. Furthermore, s3(f), s9(f), and
s20(f) students interacted with mentors (t2, t4, t5) as well as peers actively.

                                                             
1WVFGITGG EGPVTCNKV[ QH RGGT KPVGTCEVKQP
  Figure  4 indicates    that students    s20(f),  s18(m), s2(m),      and s17(f) had   higher out-degree   centrality     of
interaction and positioned toward the center of the out-degree centrality circle. They actively participated and
provided information and comments to other's opinions actively. They also linked human relations to many
participants and have important roles in delivering information and data in their community.
  On the side of individual attributes, middle and high interpersonal intelligent students (s2(m), 17(f), 20(f),
etc.) or middle and high prior knowledge students (s2(m), s17(f), s18(m), s20(f), etc.) (figure 4) had higher out-
degree centrality. On    the  side   of relational property,     middle  and  high  interpersonal  intelligence       or prior
knowledge students dominate interaction within this learning community. Moreover, students s2(m), s18(m) and
s20(f) interacted with mentors (t2, t4, t5) actively
  Meanwhile, two mentors (t2, t5) appeared to have high out-degree centrality. They connected with many
students and provided students with guidance and information. In particular, students s2(m), s17(f), and s20(f)
were higher out-degree centrality as well as higher in-degree centrality. The correlation of in-degree centrality
and out-degree centrality was high (Kentall's tau  =.796, p < .05, n = 24). However, students receiving many
messages were not necessarily providing many comments to others.

4GNCVKQPUJKRU COQPI .GCTPGT %JCTCEVGTKUVKEU 2GGT +PVGTCEVKQPU CPF .GCTPKPI QWVEQOG 7UKPI
2CVJ #PCN[UKU
The results of path analysis (table 2) indicate that first, variables of learner characteristics affecting high in-
degree centrality were intra-personal intelligence ( = .396) and verbal-linguistic intelligence ( = .235) more
than prior knowledge and interpersonal intelligence. Conversely, variables of learner characteristics affecting
interactions of high out-degree centrality were interpersonal intelligence ( = .286) and prior knowledge (
= .230) more than verbal-linguistic and intra-personal intelligence.

                                Table 2. Path coefficients among variables (n = 24)
                                                                 Dependent Variables
          Independent Variables                        In-degree                        Out-degree
                                             Peer            Learning             Peer           Learning
                                          interactions       outcome           interactions      outcome
            prior knowledge                 -.111                .367             .230             .301
        verbal-linguistic intelligence       .235                .189             -.019            .220
         interpersonal intelligence         -.263                -.093            .286             -.189
         intra-personal intelligence         .396                -.099            -.083            -.034
            peer interactions                                    .115                              .232

  Second, prior knowledge ( = .367(in-degree),  = .301(out-degree)) and verbal-linguistic intelligence (
= .189(in-degree),  = .220(out-degree)) among learner characteristics were related to learning outcome when in-
degree and out-degree centrality mediated. Finally, the path coefficients for in-degree and out-degree interaction
direct effect on learning outcome were .115(in-degree) and .232(out-degree). The effect on learning outcome of
out-degree interaction was higher than that of in-degree interaction.

    Figure 5: Path analysis of learning outcome                        Figure 6: Path analysis of learning outcome
          intervened by in-degree centrality                               intervened by out-degree centrality
        positive effect        negative effect  e1/e3 : error to learning outcome   e2/e4 : error to peer interaction

                                                            
%10%.75+105
There are two conclusions. First, students with high intra-personal and verbal-linguistic intelligence were related
to high in-degree centrality, while students with high interpersonal intelligence and prior knowledge were related
to high out-degree centrality. In other words, "self smart" and "word smart" students were reflectors and good
communicators in the learning process. These students were popular and played knowledge broker's roles in
their community. On the other hand, "social smart" students and "high prior knowledge" students were open and
friendly activators and delivered vast information in the learning community (Rovai, 2003).
  Second,  prior   knowledge and  verbal-linguistic  intelligence among   learner characteristics   were related to
learning outcome. Also, higher peer interactions were related to better learning outcome. These results indicated
that peer interactions were important intervening variables that enhanced learning effects beyond the functional
role of communication in community-based learning. Furthermore, higher peer interaction in an online learning
community, as a knowledge network, may affect intangible outputs such as cohesiveness, trust, and sense of
community as well as tangible outputs such as learning achievement and problem solving (Wen, 1998).
  A limitation of this study was that the sample size was very small, reducing verification of the study. Twenty-
four middle school students took part in the study. Thus it is required to obtain a larger sample size in extended
period of time for future research. In addition, this study is needed to use not only quantitative analysis such as
social network analysis but also qualitative methods such as interviews, questionnaires and message analysis for
analyzing in-depth learner interaction patterns.
  The implications of this study include that degree centrality of SNA is able to used as a measuring method
for analyzing peer interactions in collaborative learning activities. Moreover, the result of relationships of peer
interactions with learner characteristics and learning outcome may provide guidelines for developing learner
model and collaborative supported mentoring agents in CSCL.

4'('4'0%'5

Armstrong, T. (1994) Multiple intelligences in the classroom. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
Bielaczyc, K. & Collins, A. (1999) Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educational
       practice. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models (volume II): A new paradigm
       of instructional theory (pp. 269-292). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gardner, H. (1999) Multiple intelligence reframed. N.Y: Basic Books.
Haythornthwaite, C. (2002) Building social networks via computer networks: creating and sustaining distributed
       learning communities. In K. A. Renninger & W. Shumar (Eds.), Building virtual communities: Learning
       and change in cyberspace (pp. 159190). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, D. W. & Johnson, R. T. (1999). Structuring academic controversy. In S. Sharan (ed.) Handbook of
       cooperative learning methods. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
Kang, M. H. & Byun, P. H. (2001) A conceptual framework for a web-based knowledge construction support
       system. Educational Technology, 41, 1, 48-53.
Moon, Y. L., Ryue, S. H., Kim, H. J., & Kim S. B. (2001). Measuring Multiple Intelligence in Korea. The S.N.U.
       Journal of Education Research, 2001, 1, 1-71.
Palloff, R. M. & Pratt, K. (1999) Building learning communities in cyberspace: Effective strategies for the online
       classroom. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass Inc.
Palonen, T. & Hakkarainen, K. (2000) Patterns of interaction in computer-supported learning: A social network
       analysis. In B.  Fishman &    S. O'Connor-Divelbiss     (Eds.), Proceedings   of the  Fourth  International
       Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 334-339). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. http://www.umich.edu/~icls
       /proceedings/pdf/Palonen.pdf
Rovai, A. P. (2003)   Relationships  of communicator    style, personality-based  learning   style, and  classroom
       community among online graduate students. Internet and Higher Education, 6, 347-363.
Shearer, C. B. (1996) The MIDAS: A guide to assessment and education for the multiple intelligences. Columbus,
    Ohio: Greydon PressU
Stahl, G. (2000) A model of collaborative knowledge-building. In B. Fishman & S. O'Connor-Divelbiss (Eds.),
       Proceedings of the fourth international conference of the learning sciences (pp. 70-77). Mahwah, NJ:
       Erlbaum.
Wen,   Hui-Min.  (1998) The  effects oftask structure  on group    process  and   quality of group   product  in  a
       cooperative  project-based learning   environment.  Unpublished     doctorial dissertation.   Florida State
       University.
Wilson, B. G. & Ryder, M. (1998) Distributed learning communities: An alternative to designed instructional
       systems. http://www.cudenver.edu/~bwilson/dlc.html.

                                                        
