       Technology                      Affordances                      for        Intersubjective
              Learning: A Thematic Agenda for CSCL

                                                Daniel D. Suthers
                            Department of Information and Computer Sciences
                                                University of Hawai`i
                                                suthers@hawaii.edu

       Abstract. After a brief survey of epistemologies of collaborative learning and forms of computer
       support   for  that  learning, the study   of   technology    affordances for    intersubjective   learning    is
       proposed as a thematic agenda      for   CSCL.    A   fusion  of  experimental,    ethnomethodological       and
       design    methodologies     is  proposed    in  support    of   this  agenda.    A    working     definition   of
       intersubjective learning as joint composition of interpretations of a dynamically evolving context
       is provided, along with an outline for analysis under this definition.

       Keywords: CSCL research agenda, interactional practices, representational guidance

INTRODUCTION
The primary purpose of this paper is to propose a thematic agenda for the second decade of Computer Supported
Collaborative Learning (CSCL).        Koschmann (2002) has characterized            CSCL   as   the study    of "practices   of
meaning-making     in   the context of joint  activity and  the ways    in  which    these practices  are    mediated  through
designed artifacts."  I accept  but   elaborate on  this   definition, and   organize   my    presentation   accordingly.   The
proposal is motivated by an overview of various concepts of "collaborative learning" in terms of their underlying
epistemologies,   and   the different forms  of "computer    support"    explored   by  practitioners    for these  notions  of
learning. I then present my view of where the "soul" of CSCL lies within the diversity of this "body" of work.
My presentation is analytic rather than empirical, making a case for what should be the thematic focus of CSCL
based on identification of those problems in the nexus of computer mediation and collaborative learning that are
our special concern.

EPISTEMOLOGIES                  FOR      COLLABORATIVE                   LEARNING
Any complete CSCL        research   agenda   will be   based   on  assumptions,      implicit   or explicit,  concerning    the
question   of what   it means   to learn  in collaborative   settings.   If we   define   learning    to mean   gaining     new
knowledge, then this is an epistemological question. For purposes of brief exposition, the epistemologies will
be presented in terms of their most distinguishing commitments, so are necessarily oversimplified.
    A knowledge-communication          epistemology    (Wenger,    1987)    is common      in  the  CSCL      literature  (e.g.,
Bromme,    Hesse   &    Spada,  2005).  Knowledge      communication      is   "the  ability  to cause   and/or  support    the
acquisition   of one's  knowledge   by someone    else,  via a restricted   set  of communication      operations"    (Wenger,
1987, p. 7). Under    this  epistemology,  CSCL    research  examines     how    to more  effectively present   knowledge    in
some   medium,    or    how  to  otherwise   ensure   that communications        can "cause   and/or   support"    the   desired
acquisition of knowledge.    However,    many   authors  in  CSCL    place   greater emphasis    on epistemologies     that  are
more constructivist and more interactional.
    A constructivist epistemology (Piaget, 1976; von Glaserfeld, 1995) emphasizes the agency of the individual
learner in the learning process.    Learning  can  only    happen  through     the  learner's efforts to  make  sense    of the
world, although a    mentor  might    arrange for the  learner  to   have   rich yet problematic    experiences    in  order to
accelerate the change process. Computer support for such experiences includes simulations and "microworlds"
(Rieber, 2004). CSCL researchers rarely take this view to its solipsistic extreme. Instead, constructivism takes
the form   of "collaborative    knowledge    construction"   (Stahl,   2000),    implying    an  interactional  constructivist
epistemology.
    An interactional epistemology suggests that we examine how interactions between people lead to learning.
Many   CSCL    authors   (e.g., Baker, Hansen,    Joiner   & Traum.    1999;     Rummel    &   Spada,    2005;  van   Der Pol,
Admiraal   &  Simons,    2003)  build  their interactionalism   on   the  metaphor    of  "common     ground"   from     Clark's
contribution  theory    (Clark  &  Brennan,   1991).   Pfister (2005)   proposes     that  adding   knowledge    to   common
ground "is  the  gist of cooperative   learning:  going  from   unshared    to   shared information."    See  Koschmann      &
LeBaron (2003) for a critique of the concept of "common ground."
    A more    radically interactional  epistemology,   which    I shall  call  intersubjective   learning,   goes  beyond    an
information sharing conception of collaborative learning in two ways: it can be about sharing interpretations as

                                                             
well as information, and     these interpretations    can be    jointly created  through interaction,     in addition    to being
formed by individuals before they are offered to the group. Intersubjectivity is to be understood in a participatory
sense,  and   may  involve   disagreement      as  well  as  simple  sharing   of   information   (Matusov,      1996).  In  this
epistemology, learning is not only accomplished through the interactions of the participants, but also consists of
those interactions (Koschmann et al., 2005).
    Social theories of learning all incorporate interactional epistemologies, but vary from merely placing learning
in a social context to making commitments to intrinsically social (and hence intersubjective) epistemologies. A
social-as-context view might maintain that learning remains fundamentally a process within individual minds,
yet this process   can be enhanced     through     contacts  with  other minds.   Cognitive   dissonance     theory   (Festinger,
1957) and socio-cognitive conflict theory (Doise & Mungy, 1984) can be read this way. Developmental learning
through  social  interaction  can   be understood     as the  internalization  of   interpersonal   processes   as  intrapersonal
processes (Vygotsky, 1978). A participatory epistemology conceives of individual learning as a process of
becoming a member of a community by acquiring that community's cultural practices and world-view through
"legitimate   peripheral  participation"    (Lave    &  Wenger,    1991).   In this  view,   "learning is   an  integral part  of
generative   social  practice  in the  lived-in    world"   (Lave  &    Wenger,   1991,   p. 35)--a    process   that constructs
personal   identity,  but also  entwines    individual    learning  with  group    learning.  Although       social systems   are
organized to replicate themselves, they can "learn" when            local innovations    undertaken    in response    to internal
tensions and external disturbances redistribute activity across the system (Cole & Engeström, 1993). The new
practices can   be reflected  in  concomitant      creation  of  novel  artifacts that   support and   help  to   replicate these
practices (Wartofsky, 1979).
    Another   social  epistemology     is knowledge     building,  which  should    not  be  confused   with    the superficially
similar knowledge construction. Knowledge building is a collective version of Scardamalia and Bereiter's (1991)
intentional learning--the "deliberate effort to increase the cultural capital [of a society]" (http://ikit.org/kb.html,
accessed April 2005). The essential difference between knowledge building and other forms of learning is that
members of a knowledge building community through their own collective agency expand the boundaries of
their knowledge by periodically reflecting on the limits of their understanding and choosing actions that address
these limitations.  As Cole   &  Engeström     (1993)    put it, deliberate transcendence    of  an activity   structure requires
that participants reflectively identify what they want to transcend.
    For  the purposes  of  this  paper,   I will use  collaborative     learning  to encompass    all  socially   contextualized
forms of learning. The other phrases are layered in the following manner: knowledge construction recognizes that
individuals create their world view rather than just receiving it preformed from others; collaborative knowledge
construction more specifically locates this meaning-making in a group context; intersubjective learning further
specifies that the process of meaning-making is itself constituted of social interactions; and knowledge building
requires that this group-based meaning-making is being done intentionally.

CS:    COMPUTER              "SUPPORT"               OR     MEDIATION
Let us  now   add   computers    to the   mix.   In  what   ways   can  we  bring   technology   to  bear    on the  problem   of
supporting collaborative learning, as it is variously conceived? This section identifies three major ways in which
technology    can  be applied  to support      collaborative learning:   as medium,      constraint, and    resource. The    prior
discussion   is relevant  because   our   choice   of  an epistemology      of collaborative    learning  can    affect  how  we
approach the design of computer mediation and what questions we ask in our research. For example, under a
knowledge-communication          model,   we   might   think  about  the  information     technologies    we  are   designing  as
communication channels, focusing on the ease with which one can move information and interpretations of that
information   between     participants.   Under    an  intersubjective    learning   model,   we  might     design   information
technologies as forums within which new ideas can be discovered and evaluated. However, it is also possible to
support collaboration without making any particular commitment to a theory of collaborative learning. I begin
with this epistemologically minimalist approach.

Technology         as  Medium
People often resort to computer-mediated communication (CMC) as a substitute for face-to-face interaction in
order   to make     communication       possible     between     people  at   different   locations    (synchronous      distance
communication) or at different times (asynchronous communication). It is not surprising that face-to-face (FTF)
communication     would then   be taken     as the standard  against    which  CMC    is  evaluated  (Olson    &  Olson,    2000).
Research   in this tradition tries to improve     the bandwidth    and  multimodality     of CMC     technology     and  fine-tune
its design to match the characteristics of FTF. For example, gaze and gesture are demonstrably vital cues in FTF
interaction, so some researchers study how to arrange cameras such that the remote image of a person gives a
more   accurate   indication  of  what    they   are  looking   or pointing   at  (e.g., Kato et  al., 2001).   Although     FTF
interaction  has great value, we should     not assume that     online replication  of   FTF learning  is a  goal of  CSCL,   for
four reasons.
    First, CSCL does not necessarily replace FTF interaction. Computational artifacts can also augment spoken
and gestural communication between co-present collaborators (Roschelle, 1994; Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003),

                                                                
and  be embedded      in classrooms   where    much  of  the   interaction  is FTF   (Lingnau,  Hoppe     & Mannhaupt,      2003;
Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991; Toth, Suthers & Lesgold, 2002).
   Second,      although further  progress can    be made,     ultimately  the  goal of  replicating    FTF   interaction   online
may  not  be    achievable.  "Distance   matters"   (Olson  &   Olson,   2000)   in  many   subtle    ways  when    collaborating
through technology. Even with extremely high bandwidth communication in multiple modalities, advantages of
spatial co-location will be difficult to replicate online, such as access to implicit contextual information, gaze
and gesture as cues for identifying deictic referents, and the use of space to organize ideas and coordinate action.
   Third,    it is not sufficient for  CSCL    to  merely   replicate  FTF  interaction.  As   Pfister  (2005)   puts it "even   if
virtual reality is achieved ... genuine learning discourse is not supported. It is completely up to the participants
... how to structure the   learning  process." Rather than leaving efficient      learning up to   the  learners, CSCL      has  an
obligation to design technology that supports effective collaborative learning. In order                      to  do   so,   some
commitment to an epistemology of effective collaborative learning is necessary.
   Fourth,   CSCL      can explore   the advantages     of going  "beyond      being there"  (Holland     and Stornetta,    1992):
ways in which CMC is actually better than FTF. An obvious example is that CMC "turns communication into
substance" (Dillenbourg, 2005), providing additional resources for learning. The record of communication and
shared representations that are manipulated during communication provide a shared persistent information base
that enables the community of collaborators to reflect and act on its own state of understanding--to reinterpret,
find connections between, refine and expand information and ideas explored over time.
   Research that focuses primarily       on   supporting   collaboration   through   CMC    is not   at the center  of  CSCL     in
that it does    not   necessarily directly  address   issues   of learning.    However,  nor   is such    research  peripheral   to
CSCL. Indeed, understanding the unique affordances for collaboration offered by technology is as foundational
to CSCL as understanding learning. (In this paper, "affordances" is used in Norman's (1999) sense of "perceived
affordances.) Much further work is needed to answer questions such as: What strategies do people use to manage
collaboration via written and other artifact-mediated means? How are the affordances of various media (including
information technologies) appropriated to carry out these strategies?            How    then   can we    design  our  CMC     and
CSCL    environments      to provide   those   affordances     with  the most   natural  match    to  required   communication
strategies? (Dwyer & Suthers, 2005).

Technology          as   Constraint
Information technologies, as well as other technologies such as paper based instructional materials, are often
applied   to education   as  means   to  limit the  options  available   to learners. Although     it sounds  negative,     this is
sometimes a useful strategy.
   Properly     applied,   constraints  on activity  can   resolve   a   paradox  of  collaborative     learning.  Collaboration
imposes   an    additional task  on  the learners:   in addition  to   choosing   actions  within    the  problem   domain    and
attending to what they are learning from those actions, they must also manage interpersonal relations and group
functioning (Whitworth, Gallupe & McQueen, 2000). Learning may be reduced if less cognitive resources are
dedicated    to the   learning task. However,     if learners  can   help  each  other  with   different  parts  of the  learning
activity, collaboration    can  reduce   task load   and   can increase  learning   effectiveness  through    activities that    are
more  difficult    to do alone, such   as argumentation,     explanation    and  reflection  (Andriessen,     Baker   &  Suthers,
2003; Slavin, 1995). To resolve this paradox, instructional technology is often designed to structure part of the
collaborative learning activity, "offloading" work onto the technology so that learners can focus their cognitive
and social resources on other relevant aspects of the learning activity. The technology support can take different
forms, such as full automatization of the offloaded task, constraining actions to reduce                    the   need   to  make
decisions and the risk of errors while executing the task, or non-mandatory guides such as coaching agents or
representational      guidance.   Whatever     form   it takes,   this   support  might    be   subsequently      removed     (the
"scaffolding" "fades" in this mixed metaphor) as learners internalize the guidance it provided.
   Technology       constraints can  also  be  used  to  enforce  a  learning  agenda.   Analysis    of the learning    task may
reveal prerequisites, or uncover difficulties that are best left for after fundamental skills are learned. Then,
guidance  is    applied  via any  of  the  methods    previously    listed  (automatization,   interface  constraints,   coaches,
representational guidance) to ensure that skills are acquired in an optimal order. The choice of what parts of the
task are "scaffolded" and when and how "fading" occurs can be an effective use of technology to implement a
learning agenda. Similarly, constraints can be used to enforce a collaboration protocol, perhaps even one based
on  an  epistemological      commitment       as to  what  constitutes    effective  learning   through     collaboration    (e.g.,
Weinberger, Reiserer, Ertl, Fischer & Mandl, 2005) For example, several researchers have identified collections
of conversational moves that they believe are necessary for an effective learning dialogue, and implemented these
moves as mandatory sentence openers in a communication interface (e.g., Baker & Lund, 1997).

Technology          as   Resource
Finally,  we    can   view   technology as     a resource to      be  drawn    upon   to  support     the process   of   learning
collaboratively. CMC environments record communication in a persistent medium that can support reflection
and  interpretation.   Disciplinary   representations    such  as models,      simulations and    visualizations   also  serve   as
resources    for   conversation.  Rather  than   being   vehicles   for  communicating     expert    knowledge,     they become

                                                                
objects about which learners engage in sense-making conversations (Roschelle, 1994) and can be designed to
lead to productive conversation. Another example of how technology can serve as a resource for collaborative
learning is technologies that foster group awareness (e.g., Erickson et al. 2002). The mere awareness that others
are present  and  will  evaluate one's    actions  may    influence  one's  choice   of    actions. Information      about  the
attentional status   of group members     and their attitudes   towards previously     proposed    ideas    may influence   the
actions of individuals in the group. Visualizations of conflict or agreement between members may lead to further
argumentation or reaching of consensus.
    There is some overlap between technology as medium, constraint (or guide), and resource. Consider shared
representations such as argumentation and modeling tools. Collaborators may feel some obligation to discuss
proposed or just-taken actions on shared representations with their partners. The potential for action offered by
the representational notation will influence the actions that are discussed; thus the representation guides
conversations towards those ideas motivating the afforded actions (Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003). Also, jointly
constructed representations become imbued with meanings for the participants by virtue of having been produced
through a process of negotiation. These representational         constituents then  enable    easy  reference   to  prior  ideas
with  deictic reference   (through  gesture   or   language),    or  by direct   manipulation      (Suthers,    Girardeau,   &
Hundhausen, 2003). The expressive and indexical affordances of a representational medium will affect its value
as a resource through these processes.

A   THEMATIC            AGENDA        FOR     CSCL
Building  on  the foregoing   account   of epistemologies     of and  forms   of computer     support   for   learning,  I now
propose and make the case for the research agenda with which we should begin the next decade of CSCL.

What    To   Study?
The Interactional Accomplishment of Intersubjective Learning
Koschmann's definition of CSCL as being concerned with the "practices of meaning-making in the context of
joint activity" can   be  understood  under   many     of the epistemologies     previously    discussed.    Like   the  Hindu
parable in  which   several blind men feel an    elephant   and  each  describe  it differently,    all are  describing    some
aspect of the truth. However, the question we face is how to most productively focus our research efforts: which
aspect of the elephant do we now most need to understand?
    The aspect    of collaborative  learning  that  is least  understood   is what   I have   been  calling    intersubjective
learning.  As   previously   discussed, this is  learning  that  is not only  accomplished      interactionally     but is also
constituted of the interactions between participants. Following Garfinkel, Koschmann et al. (2005) argue for the
study of "member's methods" of meaning making: "how participants in such [instructional] settings actually go
about  doing  learning"   (emphasis   in   original).  In addition  to  understanding   how     the cognitive   processes    of
participants  are influenced  by social   interaction, we   need to  understand   how   learning    events    themselves   take
place in the interactions between participants. The study of joint meaning making is currently not prominent as
a topic of study in our field: it is difficult to find research publications within CSCL that directly address this
epistemology. Even where process data (rather than outcome data) is examined in detail, the analysis is typically
undertaken according to coding categories that count features that are essentially proxies for the phenomenon of
interest rather than seeking to uncover those phenomena directly.
    A few   studies   published  in   the  CSCL    literature   have  addressed   this  problem     directly,   for  example,
Koschmann et al. (2003), Koschmann et al.        (2005), Roschelle (1994),    and   Stahl   (in press).  Koschmann's       work
has generally focused on participants' methods of problematization: identifying a situation as problematic and
requiring further analysis, possibly leading to a change of conception. This research is only the beginning. We
also need to identify methods for resolving the problematized issue. I speculate that these will include methods
for exploring interpretations (argumentation) and negotiating an interpretation that is sufficient to meet the task
demands (achieving a working consensus).
    Stahl (in press) argues that small groups are the most fruitful unit of study, for two reasons. Most simply,
small groups    are  where   members'   methods    for intersubjective  learning    can be  observed.      Groups   of  several
members    allow  the   full range of social  interactions    to play  out, but  are   not  so  large   for  participants   and
researchers alike lose track of what is going on. More compellingly, small groups lie at the boundary of and
mediate between individuals and a community. The knowledge building that takes place within small groups
becomes "internalized by their members as individual learning and externalized in their communities as
certifiable knowledge"     (Stahl, in press).   However,    small   groups  should  not    be  the  only     social granularity
studied. Analysis    of large-scale changes     in communities      and organizations      may  lead    to   understanding   of
emergent social learning phenomena as well as elucidate the role of embedded groups in driving these changes.
    The study of the interactional accomplishment of intersubjective learning gives rise to interesting questions
that are among the most challenging facing any social-behavioral science, and even touches upon our nature as
conscious   beings.  Do   cognitive phenomena      exist  transpersonally?    How   is  it possible     for  learning,  usually
conceived of as   a  cognitive  function,  to be   distributed   across people   and   artifacts?  How   can   we   understand
knowledge    as accomplished    practice  rather than  as a substance   or even  predisposition?    Yet    I would   not   leave
individual learning behind. In support of this research agenda, cognitivists can ask: What is the relationship of

                                                             
the  change   process   we call "individual   learning"   to that individual's  participation    in socially accomplished
learning?
Technology Affordances for Intersubjective Learning
The second half of Koschmann's definition of the          domain    of CSCL    is   "the  ways   in which   these  practices
[meaning-making in the context of joint activity] are mediated through designed artifacts." Computer support for
intersubjective meaning making is what makes our field unique. Other fields have investigated computer support
for collaboration, intersubjective meaning making, and computer support for other models of learning such as
knowledge-communication and constructivism. What form of support is most fruitful for CSCL research?
    I propose   that  the  technology   side   of the   CSCL    agenda   should   focus   on   the  design   and  study   of
fundamentally social technologies that are informed by the affordances and limitations of those technologies.
CSCL     systems   should   be    fundamentally    social    because   interactional   and     especially  intersubjective
epistemologies    of learning   require this.  To be  fundamentally     social  means     that the  technology   should   be
designed specifically to mediate and encourage social acts that constitute group learning and lead to individual
learning. To be informed by the affordances and limitations of a technology means that the design attempts to
leverage the unique opportunities provided by the technology rather than replicating support for learning that
could be done through other means, or (worse) trying to force the technology to be something for which it is not
well suited.
    There are many ways in which a technology can be used to implement support for collaborative learning that
are not intrinsic to the technology itself. For example, consider the scripting of interactions (e.g., Weinberger et
al., 2005). We might study the effects of asking a group to go through phases of collaboration, or script the
interaction at a finer grain, providing protocols for making and evaluating proposals. These interventions could
just  as well be done with  paper,   or even verbal   instructions. There are   clear  advantages    to  using information
technology, such as support for distance interaction and automated prompting, but the primary variable being
studied is not itself a property of information technology (see also Dillenbourg, 2002). Such research is valuable
and can be embraced within CSCL, but is not at the core of the proposed agenda.
    More intrinsic to information technology         as a  topic  of   study is   the  generalized question    of  how    the
affordances of information technology can be appropriated to support intersubjective learning in action. What is
unique to information technology that can potentially fill this role?
    The computational medium is reconfigurable. Representations are dynamic: It is easy to move things around
and undo actions. It is easy to replicate those actions elsewhere: one can bridge time and space. These features
make information technology attractive as a "communication channel," but we should exploit technology for its
potential to make new interactions possible, not try to force it to replicate face-to-faced interaction.
    CMC environments "turn communication into substance" (Dillenbourg, 2005). A record of activity as well
as product can be kept, replayed, and even modified. We should explore the potential of the persistent record of
interaction and collaboration as a resource for intersubjective learning.
    Computational    media    can  analyze  workspace     state and  interaction  sequences,    and  reconfigure   itself or
generate  prompts    according   to features  of either.  We  should   explore  the   potential of  adaptive media  as    an
influence   on the course   of  intersubjective   processes.  We    need not   anthropomorphize      the  medium   to  take
advantage of its ability to prompt, analyze and selectively respond.
    Human communication and use of representational resources for this communication is highly flexible: we
cannot "fix" meanings or even specify communicative functions (Dwyer              &    Suthers,  2005).   Informed by   this
fact, CSCL research should identify the perceived affordances of computational media, and explore how these
affordances are appropriated by collaborators and how they influence the course of that collaboration. We then
design technologies that offer collections of affordances through which participants can interactionally engage in
learning with flexible forms of guidance.

How      To Study    It?
I consider   this question  in  terms   of the major    methodological   traditions    of CSCL     and  a specific analytic
approach that is motivated by an operational definition of intersubjective learning.
A Call for Methodological Fusion
CSCL can presently be characterized as consisting of three methodological traditions: experimental, descriptive
(e.g., ethnomethodological), and iterative design.
    Many    empirical   studies follow  the dominant    experimental paradigm      that   compares   an   intervention to  a
control  condition   in terms  of one  or  more   variables  (e.g., Baker &    Lund,   1997;   Rummel     &  Spada, 2005;
Suthers   & Hundhausen,    2003;    Van Der   Pol et al., 2003;   Weinberger   et al., 2005).   Data analysis  in  most   of
these studies  is undertaken    by  "coding   and counting:"    interactions are  categorized   and/or  learning  outcomes
measured, and group means are compared through statistical methods in order to draw generalizable conclusions
about the effects of the manipulated variables on aggregate (average) group behavior. As discussed previously,
typical studies do not directly analyze the accomplishment of intersubjective learning. Such an analysis must
examine the structure and intention of specific cases of interaction rather than count and aggregate behavioral
categories.

                                                             
   The ethnomethodological tradition, exemplified in CSCL by Roschelle (1994), Koschmann et al. (2003) and
Koschmann,    et  al. (2005),   is more   suited  for  such   case analyses.    Video    or transcripts   of  learners    or  other
members of the community are studied to uncover the methods by which participants accomplish learning. The
approach is data-driven, seeking to discover patterns in the data rather than imposing theoretical categories. The
analysis is often   microanalytic,  examining     brief episodes   in   great detail. Descriptive     methodologies       are well
suited to existentially quantified claims (e.g., that a community sometimes engages in a given practice). Yet, as
scientists and   designers   we  would   like to  make     causal generalizations    about   the  effects   of  design    choices.
Descriptive  methodologies      are less  suited   for  claiming   that  an  intervention   has   an  effect,   the   province    of
experimental methodology.
   The traditional analysis methods of experimental psychology miss the methods through which learning is
accomplished--intersubjective        meaning     making--but       this  does   not  imply   that   we    should      all become
ethnomethodologists.      Rather,   the   foregoing     considerations      suggest   that   we     explore     hybrid    research
methodologies, drawing upon the strengths of both (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004). Experimental designs can
continue to compare interventions, but the comparisons would be made in terms of microanalyses of how the
features  of information   technology    influence and     are appropriated     for members' methods         of joint     meaning-
making.    Conceptually,     the   process   analysis   changes    from     "coding   and    counting"     to   "exploring     and
understanding" ways in which design variables influence support for meaning-making. Such analyses are time
intensive: we should explore instrumentation of our learning environments and automated visualization and
querying of interaction logs as research aids. Traditional analyses, especially measures of learning outcomes but
also "coding and counting," might also be retained to obtain quick indicators of where more detailed analyses
are merited, thereby focusing the detail work.
   The   iterative  design   tradition is exemplified      by Fischer    &  Ostwald   (2005),    Lingnau,    et   al. (2003)   and
Guzdial   et al.  (1997).  Driven   by   the  dialectic    between    theory  and    informal   observations      and     engaging
stakeholders in the process, design-oriented researchers          continuously      improve   artifacts   intended    to  mediate
learning and   collaboration.    Their research is     not  necessarily   qualitative    or  quantitative,   but    may   also    be
"quisitive" (Goldman, Crosby, Swan & Shea, 2004). Exploring design is a valuable component of the overall
CSCL    portfolio of  research   strategies. It is  not enough     to just   observe  people's    behaviors    and    describe   the
contingencies of these behaviors with respect to technology affordances. We are trying to uncover the potential
affordances of information technologies, so need to explore the "space" of possible designs, pushing into new
areas and   identifying  promising   features   that   should  receive    further study     under  the   other  methodological
traditions. Designers also need to conduct microanalysis of collaborative learning with and through technology
in order  to identify  the affordances    of  designed     artifacts that  seem   to be  correlated   with    effective   learning
episodes. Yet the marriage need not relegate descriptive methodologies to roles subservient to "design as usual."
A conversation between the theoretical        assumptions of    ethnomethodology         and those    of  design  can   lead  to  a
"technomethodology" that changes the very objectives of design (Button & Dourish, 1996).
   A  potential  limitation  of  descriptive  methodologies     should    be  noted.  If we  focus    on  finding     examples    of
how members accomplish effective learning, we may miss abundant examples of how they also fail to do so.
Yet in order to find that something is not there, we need to have an idea of what we are looking for. A purely
data-driven  approach    that derives  but   never  applies   theory  won't   be  adequate.     Descriptive    methods       can  be
modified to address this need. Common patterns found in successful learning episodes subsequently become the
theoretical categories we look for elsewhere, and perhaps do not find in instances of unsuccessful collaboration.
Having   identified  where   the successful   methods      were   not applied,    we  can    then  examine      the   situation   to
determine what contingency was missing or responsible. Care should be taken, however, to make sure that in
finding case examples where the interactional accomplishment of learning              is    absent  we   do  not  fail    to notice
where something     else  of value  to  the  participants   is being    accomplished!       For example,     establishment     and
maintenance of individual and group identity are also worthwhile accomplishments as far as the participants are
concerned (Whitworth et al., 2000), and indeed are a form of learning.
Eclectic Analysis of Composition of Interpretations
In the proposal under consideration, researchers from all methodological traditions will include microanalyses in
their toolbox. Although methods for microanalysis of conversation are well developed, how do we conduct such
an analysis of computer-mediated collaboration? In this final section I describe a framework that I am developing
and  so far  have found   to be  useful.  This  discussion    draws   on an  analysis of    participant's  manipulations      of  a
shared workspace during synchronous online collaboration in order to determine whether and how such actions
can be  understood as accomplishing collaborative knowledge construction                 (Suthers,    2005).    I begin      with a
tentative definition that I use to guide the work.
   Knowledge construction is        (and  is evidenced     by)  the   composition    of  interpretations     of   a   dynamically
changing   context.  "Interpretations"  are  acts  that create and   modify   ideational    entities. Ideational    entities  exist
when  evoked   in  human   cognitive   and   social  activity,  and   may    also be  "represented"    when     the   interlocutors
sharing a medium interpret the inscriptions in the medium as evoking such ideas. An act of interpretation may
take the  form   of predications,   commentary,     restatements,     or expressions     of  attitude  (for  example),       enacted
verbally,  gesturally, or  through  manipulations       of representations.   "Composition"      is   the cumulative      effect  of
interpretive acts  on those  ideational   entities: each   interpretive  act in a sequence   acts   on   the ideation     resulting
from the previous interpretive act, analogous to composition of functions in mathematics. (Since the ideational

                                                              
entities form part of the context, this is one way the context changes.) Collaborative knowledge construction
(including intersubjective learning)     takes place when    multiple    participants  contribute  to    this composition    of
interpretations. The important point is that the joint composition of interpretations is the gist of intersubjective
learning (not "going from unshared to shared information"). No commitment to mutual beliefs residing in some
Platonic realm is necessary.
    Collaborative knowledge construction requires interactions between participants, so the analysis begins by
identifying uptake events in which one participant takes up another's contribution and does something further
with it.  Contributions   may  include   attentional orientation,   information,   or expressions     of attitude.    Uptake is
possible in any medium through which contributions are shareable. Examples of uptake include "A has said P,
B has responded with Q," "A says P and B expresses (dis)agreement," "A brings O into the workspace, and B
also begins to consider O," "A has created object O1; B has changed it to O2," "A has created O1 and B has
created O2; now A combines O1 and O2 in such a manner," etc.
    Once we have identified uptake events, we need to recognize what the participants have jointly accomplished
through   sequences   of  uptakes,  and  we need   to   identify  the  potential influence   or   utilization  of  technology
affordances in this accomplishment. What do we look for in order to identify the interpretive act accomplished
through the uptake? Intersubjective learning and knowledge building involve multiple processes (see the model
in Stahl, in press), and we may elect to support different aspects of these processes (as discussed in the first half
of the paper). Therefore we should not expect one theory to do the entire job for us. An eclectic approach that
"triangulates" from multiple theoretical perspectives is necessary due to the complexity of the problem we are
tackling. We can draw upon various theories for insights on what counts as interpretive acts and what those acts
mean for the learning of individuals and groups. I illustrate below with strategies taken in Suthers (2005).
    Contribution theory     (Clark  &  Brennan,  1991)    suggests    that we  look   for presentation/acceptance      pairs in
which one    participant's   action in the medium    is  taken  up  by another   participant   in  a  manner     that indicates
understanding     of its meaning.   The  signal of acceptance    is often  implicit,  so can be   difficult   to identify.  For
example, it can consist merely of continuing the interaction. But implicitness is a property of interaction, not a
limitation of the analysis method. More damaging, an analysis based solely on contribution theory at best can
tell us only how people check that they have achieved mutual understanding, but does not inform us about the
process   by which   this   mutual understanding     is reached.  Therefore    the   theory  will  be    of limited   value  in
understanding what kinds of interactions lead to learning, and whether these are supported by our interventions.
    Social and socially contextualized theories have       more   to say   about how   learning    is accomplished     through
interaction. Representations that externalize one's beliefs can make beliefs explicit enough for one's interlocutors
to notice conflicts, thereby initiating a socio-cognitive process of learning (Doise & Mugny, 1984). As analysts,
we  look  for situations    in which   the externalization     of  ideas   led to  identification     of commonalities      and
differences  of interpretation that   were subsequently    taken    up by  at  least  one of the   individuals    involved.  In
addition to overt verbal argumentation, clues that conflict is being addressed include revision or deletion of the
others' ideas or the use of an explicit conflict relation between one's own and others' ideas, if the medium
provides for such relations.
    The foregoing perspective is limiting in that it treats participants as separate cognitive entities that interact
via language   and    (other)  notations,  yet  retains  the locale   of   knowledge   construction      activity  within    the
individual.  A distributed     cognition perspective    (Hollan,  Hutchins    &  Kirsch,  2002)    suggests      that cognitive
activities such as knowledge construction are distributed across individuals and information artifacts through and
with which they interact. The information-transformative and interpretive components of intersubjective learning
can occur across multiple individuals via external representations. Under the distributed cognition perspective we
would look    for transformations     of representations   across    individuals   where    those  transformations      can  be
collectively interpreted as a cognitive process.
    The cultural-historical activity theoretic (CHAT) perspective          (Cole   &   Engeström,     1993)    considers    how
activity is formed within and changes a larger context that includes not only the self and the object or topic of
interest, but also   tools, one's  community,   one's   role in  this  community,     and the  norms     for  behavior   in  the
community. CHAT is complex and not easy to summarize in passing. Here I focus on the concept of mediation.
When we examine the relationship between any two elements of an activity system (the subject, object, tool,
community, roles, rules), we can sometimes benefit from asking how a third element mediates the relationship
between   the first  two, influencing  the form  the    relationship  takes.  For  example,    external   representations   can
mediate between individual and community by crystallizing prior practice. Under a mediation perspective, we
might analyze  collaborative    use of   representations  by looking   for  ways   in which    the representation     mediates
(makes possible      and  guides)   interactions   between   participants. The        creative acts   afforded by      a given
representational notation may affect which negotiations of meaning and belief take place. For example, we
would look for discussions initiated as participants prepare to modify a representation and also identify ways
in which participants use representations as resources for referring to ideas (Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003).
    There are other theories that can be applied to the process of generating researchers' interpretations of uptake
relations as evidence of participants' interpretations of their dynamically evolving context. It is my sense that we
have at our disposal a powerful repertoire of theories of learning and social interaction, and have not yet fully
explored the analytic power of this repertoire. Although I welcome any new (or revived) theories that provide
fresh perspectives on the problems of CSCL, I would not want to see the field neglect to explore the power of

                                                             
our present theoretical toolkit as we rush to align our work with the vogue theory of the year. It will take the
next decade to work out the implications of those we already have at our disposal.

CONCLUSIONS
CSCL   is a field  that  is establishing   basic   yet sometimes   peripheral    findings as it seeks its   center. Work
currently being undertaken      in the field   encompasses     several epistemologies   of   collaborative learning,   and
leverages information technology as communication medium, as a constraining and guiding medium, and as a
resource for collaboration. However, there is an emerging awareness that we need to grapple with the central and
most unique problem of CSCL: processes of intersubjective learning, and how technological affordances mediate
or support such processes. A framework for analysis was offered that suggests interpretation of basic "uptake"
actions  in terms     of  cumulative   composition      of  interpretations  of   a  shared  context,  examining      how
representational and other technological affordances guide action by offering potentials and constraints, and how
affordances of    the "substance"   CMC    makes   out  of  communication    can  serve as resources  for   conversation,
reflection, and group awareness.
  Research methodology        in CSCL      is largely  trichotomized   between   experimental,  descriptive and  iterative
design approaches. Although sometimes combined within a single research project, the methodologies are even
then typically kept separate in companion studies or separate analyses of a single study. This situation can be
productive for a little longer, as the experimentalists continue to identify variables that affect general parameters
of collaborative behavior, while the ethnomethodologists identify patterns of joint activity that are essential to
the meaning-making and      learning we all   seek to  support. However,    very soon  CSCL    needs experimentalists   to
study dependent variables that directly reflect the phenomenon of interest, the ethnomethodologists to look for
predictive regularities in technology mediated meaning making that can inform design, and the designers to
generate  and  assess  promising   new    technology   affordances  in  terms of  the  meaning-making      activities they
enable. Mutual assistance is possible through hybrid methodologies, for example applying richer descriptive
analytic methods   to  the  problem    of  understanding   the  implications  of  experimental  manipulations   and   new
designs, and through computer support for our own meaning-making activities as researchers.
  The critiques put forth by this paper apply to my own current work as well as others' and have demanded
shifts in my own thinking. Perhaps these critiques also reflect impending shifts in our field--towards the study
of practices of intersubjective learning and how these practices are mediated by technology affordances.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am in gratitude to Tim Koschmann and Gerry Stahl for comments on a draft of that chapter and especially for
their papers that have challenged my thinking; to Nathan Dwyer for years of stimulating discussions and for
comments    on drafts  of the  present paper;  and  to  the reviewers  for  deeply  insightful  and  detailed  comments,
many of which are not adequately addressed here but will be taken up in an expanded version of this paper. This
work was  supported    by  the National   Science  Foundation   under  award  0093505.    Any   opinions,  findings,   and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation.

REFERENCES
Andriessen,   J., Baker,    M.  &  Suthers,   D.   (Eds.)  (2003). Arguing    to  Learn:   Confronting    Cognitions    in
       Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning Environments. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Baker, M, Hansen, T., Joiner, R. & Traum, D. (1999). The role of grounding in collaborative learning tasks. In
       P. Dillenbourg    (Ed.),  Collaboratie   Learning:   Cognitive   and  Computational      Approaches  (pp. 31-63).
       Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Baker, M. &   K.  Lund   (1997). Promoting    reflective  interactions in a CSCL    environment.  Journal   of Computer
       Assisted Learning, 13, 175-193.
Bromme, R., Hesse, F.W. & Spada, H. (Eds.) (2005). Barriers and Biases in Computer-Mediated Knowledge
       Communication--and How They May Be Overcome. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Button, G. Y. & Dourish, P. (1996). Technomethodology: Paradoxes and Possibilities. Proc. ACM Conference
       on Human Factors in Computing           Systems (CHI'96), April    13-18,  1996,   Vancouver,  BC,   19-26.    New
       York: ACM.
Clark, H.H. &   Brennan,    S.E.   (1991). Grounding    in Communication.     In  L.B. Resnick,  J.M. Levine   and    S.D.
       Teasley  (Eds.),   Perspectives on     Socially Shared  Cognition.   (pp. 127-149). Hyattsville, MD:    American
       Psychological Association.
Cole, M. & Y. Engeström (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Salomon (Ed.),
       Distributed    Cognitions:   Psychological      and  Educational     Considerations. (pp.     1-46).   Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press.
Doise, W. & Mugny, G. (1984). The Social Development of the Intellect. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

                                                            
Dillenbourg,   P.  (2002).  Over-scripting  CSCL:   The   risks of blending   collaborative   learning with  instructional
     design.     In P. A. Kirschner  (Ed.),  Three  worlds  of  CSCL.   Can   we  support  CSCL.    (pp. 61-91).   Heerlen:
     Open Universiteit Nederland.
Dillenbourg,   P. (2005).  Designing  biases that  augment    socio-cognitive interactions.  In R. Bromme,     F.W.   Hesse
     & H. Spada (2005), op. cit.
Dwyer,  N.  &    Suthers,   D.  (2005).  A  Study   of the  Foundations     of Artifact-Mediated    Collaboration.    Proc.
     Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, May 30-June 4, 2005, Taipei (this volume).
Erickson,  T.,   Halverson,  C.,  Kellogg,  W.  A., Laff,  M.   &  Wolf,   T.  (2002).  Social  Translucence:   Designing
     Social Infrastructures that Make Collective Activity Visible. Communications of the ACM, 45(4), April
     2002, pp. 40-44.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
Fischer, G. & Ostwald,      J. (2005). Knowledge communication in design communities. In              R.   Bromme,    F.W.
     Hesse & H. Spada (Eds.), op. cit.
Goldman, R., Crosby, M., Swan, K. & Shea, P. (2004). Introducing Quisitive Research: Expanding qualitative
     methods      for  describing learning  in  ALN.   In Starr Hiltz, R.  &   Goldman,    R. (Eds.), Learning    Together
     Online: Research on Asynchronous Learning Networks. (pp. 103­121). Mahwah, New Jersey: LEA.
Guzdial, M., Hmelo, C., Hubscher, R., Newstetter, W., Puntambekar, S., Shabo, A., Turns, J., & Kolodner, J.
     (1997).     Integrating   and   guiding collaboration:    Lessons    learned in  computer-supported     collaboration
     learning research      at Georgia  Tech.   Proc.  Computer-Support     for   Collaborative  Learning    (CSCL    `97),
     Toronto, Ontario, pp. 91-100.
Hollan, J., Hutchins,   E., &   Kirsh,  D. (2002).  Distributed    Cognition:  Toward   a  New  Foundation    for  Human-
     Computer       Interaction   Research.  In  J. M.  Carroll    (Ed.), Human-Computer        Interaction  in   the New
     Millennium. (pp. 75-94). New York: ACM Press Addison Wesley. (Reprinted from ACM Transactions
     on Computer-Human Interaction, 7(2), June 2000.)
Hollan, J.  &    Stornetta, S.  (1992).  Beyond    being  there. Proc.    SIGCHI     Conference  on   Human     Factors in
     Computing Systems (CHI'92), May 3-7, 1992, Monterey, California, pp. 119-125.
Johnson, R. B & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2004). Mixed methods research: A research paradigm whose time has
     come. Educational Researcher , 33(7), 14-26.
Kato, H.,  K.  Yamazaki,    K., Suzuki,  H.,   Kuzuoka,   H., Miki,  H.   & Yamazaki,   A.   (2001).  Designing   a Video-
     Mediated       Collaboration   System   Based  on a  Body   Metaphor.    In  T. Koschmann,    R.  Hall  &  N.  Miyake
     (Eds.), CSCL 2: Carrying Forward the Conversation. (pp. 409-423). Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum.
Koschmann,     T. (2002). Dewey's contribution     to the foundations  of  CSCL    research.  Proc. Computer    Supported
     Collaborative Learning 2002, Boulder, January 7-11, 2002, pp. 17-22.
Koschmann, T., & LeBaron, C. (2003). Reconsidering common ground: Examining Clark's contribution theory
     in    the OR.  In K.   Kuutti,  E. Karsten, G.  Fitzpatrick,  P.  Dourish,   &  K. Schmidt    (Eds.), ECSCW      2003:
     Proc. Eighth European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work. Amsterdam: Kluwer.
Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., Robbs, J., & Barnhart, A. (2003). Problematizing
     the problem: A single case analysis in a dPBL Meeting. In Wasson, Ludvigsen & Hoppe (2003), op.
     cit., pp. 37-46.
Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., Robbs, J. & Barnhart, A. (2005). How do people
     learn?      Members'   methods   and  communicative      mediation.   In  R. Bromme,     F.W.   Hesse   &  H.    Spada
     (2005), op. cit.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press.
Lingnau,   A.,   Hoppe,   H.U.,  Mannhaupt,     G.  (2003). Computer      supported   collaborative  writing   in  an early
     learning classroom. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19, 2, 186-194.
Matusov, E. (1996): Intersubjectivity Without Agreement. Mind, Culture and Activity. 3(1). 25-45.
Norman, D. N. (1999). Affordance, conventions, and design. ACM interactions, 6(3), 38-43.
Olson, G. M & Olson, J. S. (2000). Distance Matters. Human-Computer Interaction, 15(2/3), September 2000.
     Reprinted in J. M Carroll (Ed) Human-Computer Interaction in the New Millennum. (pp. 397-417). New
     York: ACM Press (2002).
Pfister, H.R. (2005). How to support synchronous net-based learning discourses: Principles and perspectives. In
     R. Bromme, F.W. Hesse & H. Spada (2005), op. cit.
Piaget, J. (1976).  The   Grasp   of Consciousness:    Action   and Concept    in the   Young   Child. Cambridge,     MA:
     Harvard University Press.
Rieber,   L.P.   (2004).    Microworlds.     In D.   Jonassen    (Ed.),   Handbook      of  Research     for  Educational
     Communications and Technology (2nd ed.). (pp. 583-603). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Roschelle,    J. (1994,   May).   Designing     for cognitive    communication:      Epistemic   fidelity    or   mediating
     collaborative inquiry? The Arachnet Electronic Journal of Virtual Culture, 2(2).
Rummel,    N.,   & Spada,   H. (2005).  Sustainable  support   for computer-mediated    collaboration.   How    to  achieve
     and how to assess it. In R. Bromme, F.W. Hesse & H. Spada (2005), op. cit.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building: a challenge
     for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-68.

                                                            
Slavin, R. E. (1995). Cooperative Learning: Theory, Research and Practice. (2nd ed.) Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Stahl, G. (in press). Collaborating    with Technology:    Mediation  of  Group Cognition.    Cambridge,  MA:  MIT
       Press.
Stahl, G. (2000) Collaborative information environments to support knowledge construction by communities,
       AI & Society, 14, 71-97.
Suthers, D.   (2005). Collaborative  Knowledge   Building   through  Shared  Representations.  Proc.  38th  Hawai`i
       International Conference on the System Sciences (HICSS-37), January 3-6, 2005, Wakoloa, Hawai`i (CD-
       ROM), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE).
Suthers, D., Girardeau, L. & Hundhausen, C. (2003). Deictic Roles of External Representations in Face-to-face
       and Online Collaboration. In Wasson, Ludvigsen & Hoppe (2003), op. cit., pp. 173-182.
Suthers,  D., & Hundhausen,     C. (2003).  An  Empirical  Study  of  the  Effects of Representational Guidance on
       Collaborative Learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-219.
Toth, E., Suthers, D., & Lesgold, A. (2002). Mapping to know: The effects of evidence maps and reflective
       assessment on scientific inquiry skills. Science Education, 86(2), 264-286.
Van Der   Pol,  J., Admiraal,   W.,    & Simons,     R-J. (2003).  Grounding   in  electronic discussions: Standard
       (threaded) versus anchored discussion. In Wasson, Ludvigsen, & Hoppe (2003), op. cit., pp. 77-81.
Von Glasersfeld,      E., (1995).  A   constructivist approach    to teaching.  In  L. Steffe  &   J.  Gale  (Eds.).
       Constructivism in Education. (pp. 3-16). New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Vygotsky,  L.  S. (1978).   Mind  in Society:  The Development    of Higher  Psychological    Processes. Cambridge,
       MA: Harvard University Press. (Originally published in 1930.)
Wartofsky, M. (1979). Models, representation and scientific understanding. Boston: Reidel.
Wasson, B., Ludvigsen, S., & Hoppe, U. (Eds), Designing for Change in Networked Learning Environments:
       Proc.  International  Conference     on Computer    Support   for Collaborative  Learning  2003.   Dordrecht:
       Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Weinberger, A.,   Reiserer, M.,  Ertl, B.,  Fischer, F. &  Mandl,  H. (2005).  Facilitating collaborative knowledge
       construction   in computer-mediated learning environments with cooperation scripts.    In R. Bromme,   F.W.
       Hesse & H. Spada (2005), op. cit.
Wenger, E. (1987). Artificial Intelligence and Tutoring Systems: Computational and Cognitive Approaches to
       the Communication of Knowledge. Los Altos, Morgan Kaufmann.
Whitworth, B., Gallupe, B., McQueen, R. (2000). A cognitive three-process model of computer-mediated group
       interaction. Group Decision and Negotiation, 9, 431-456.

                                                          
