           A   Heterogeneous                            Animated                Platform               for
              Educational                    Participatory                   Simulations

                                                  Bill Tomlinson
                             ACE (Arts Computation Engineering) program
                                       University of California, Irvine
                                                   wmt@uci.edu

       Abstract.  This  paper describes   a  multi-user interactive  installation featuring  real time  animated
       creatures and a  mobile   interaction  paradigm.     This   paradigm  has  been   designed   to serve  as a
       platform for education in a variety of content domains.       Drawing   on  previous  research  in   mobile
       computing  and   animated  educational      systems,   this project contributes   a  novel   metaphor   for
       interactions among real and virtual creatures and worlds. This "Land/Water" metaphor offers that
       virtual space is like land for virtual     creatures, and   real space is   like  water for  them.     The
       interaction paradigm involves groups of animated creatures that live on desktop screens, and may
       be transported   from  screen   to   screen by   means   of   mobile   Tablet  PCs    carried   by   human
       participants. This paper presents a working implementation of this paradigm and describes its use
       as an educational tool.

       Keywords: Human-Computer Interaction, Handheld/Mobile Devices, Virtual/3D Environments,
       Participatory Simulations

INTRODUCTION
The continual    development     of    new   computational
technologies presents the opportunity for the creation of
novel  modes   of interaction    that  may   contribute    to
educational processes.   Computer      graphics   have  been
embraced by the      educational community      in   a  wide
variety of domains such as chemistry (Wilson, 2002) or
history  (Jenkins,   2002).    More     recently,    mobile
computational  devices   have  begun    to   play  a role  in
education   through   participatory    simulations,     e.g.,
(Klopfer  &   Woodruff,  2003),  and   university    campus
deployments,   e.g., (Tatar et al.,    2003).   This   paper
presents an interaction paradigm       that  embraces both
computer graphics and mobile   devices    in an educational
context and describes a working implementation of this
paradigm.       This     interaction        paradigm    and      Figure   1: The   Virtual   Raft   Project.  Desktop
implementations based on it offer a viable platform for          screens   serve  as "virtual   islands"    and  tablet
presenting  a range  of  educational   content  areas   in  a    PCs serve as "virtual rafts."
compelling interactive way.
  The interaction paradigm presented here is a multi-user experience involving several fixed computer displays
and several mobile handheld devices (see Figure 1).     Each fixed display serves as     a "virtual island"  inhabited by
populations of 3D    animated  virtual creatures.  When   a human   participant   brings one of   the  mobile  devices  (a
"virtual raft") close to the screen, one of the creatures on the virtual island moves onto the virtual raft.           The
participant may then carry that creature to a different virtual island; once the raft is close enough to the other
island, the creature can move off the handheld onto the other desktop screen.        This interaction paradigm, where
people  participate  in the migration     and dispersal    of individuals    and  populations,    encourages   an   active
engagement from participants in the unfolding of the natural or cultural history existing on the islands.            This
interaction may serve as a platform for a range of educational content, including anthropology, social science,
mythology, ecology and environmental biology (such as the study of biodiversity or invasive species.)               For a
better sense of the interaction, please view the following short video:
   http://www.ics.uci.edu/~wmt/movies/HomeschoolVideo.mov
  The core metaphor in this interaction paradigm draws a parallel between the land/water distinction in the real
world and the virtual space/real space distinction. In this "Land/Water" metaphor, virtual space serves as land for
virtual creatures, and real space functions as water.   Virtual creatures may  move   around  in    virtual space, but are

                                                           
not able  to move   around  in real space;   similarly,  real land
animals are able to operate effectively on land   but   not  nearly
so well in water.
    This metaphor provides a set of organizing principles for
an interactive educational simulation.       It distinguishes   the
operational domain of virtual creatures from that of people,
thereby providing a way of explaining how people are meant
to  interact with   the  system.   It provides    inspiration   for
subject matter that may be effectively conveyed through this
kind of simulation. And it provides guidance for the visual,
acoustic,  tactile  and   other  elements    of  the  interactive
experience.  While the platform is not     ideal for all topics of
education, it does provide a useful framework for exploring
topics  that deal   with  groups   of   people   (e.g.,  social or
cultural  education,    see Figure    2), groups   of    biological
organisms    (ecology,  evolution,  etc.)  and  potentially   other    Figure   2:  A  community       of   autonomous
topics (math, languages) as well.                                      animated characters inhabits each virtual
                                                                       island in one version of the system.
RELATED WORK
This project builds on previous work in educational technology in two main areas.               The first area, computer
graphics  and animation, has a long history of engagement with         education.  Computer graphics   have   been   used to
teach chemistry by visualizing molecules (Wilson, 2002), astronomy through collaborative virtual reality (Hay
et al., 2002), history through interactive history-based games (Jenkins, 2002) and many other topics.            Animated
characters are becoming common in education and training simulations, e.g., (Hill et al., 2003). Affective
characters, in particular, are also being used to help the educational process (Schaub et al., 2003). The system
presented  here offers  graphics that are  competitive   with   the high  end   of modern   computer     games,  using  3D
autonomous characters, real-time shadows, and particle system fire and water effects.
    Mobile computational devices are also on the rise in the popular cultures of industrialized societies, with the
rapid penetration of cell phones and PDAs over the last few years.          Numerous researchers have considered the
capabilities of these mobile formats in educational contexts, e.g., (Roschelle & Pea, 2002).                  The    Teacher
Education    Program   at MIT   has done   pioneering    work   in  developing    participatory simulations    (Klopfer   &
Woodruff, 2003).    Other   researchers have    explored the use of  mobile  devices  in education    through  a variety  of
different platforms (Borovoy et al., 1998). The project described in this paper uses mobile devices with high end
graphics and built-in accelerometers (sensors for detecting the motion of the device); the use of these capabilities
helps  to create a  novel   mobile  interaction   with   believable  autonomous     characters and    virtual  worlds,  and
distinguishes this work from previous research efforts.
    This project also builds on previous work in autonomous characters and interactive installation design.             The
system   extends  a code   base developed    by  the  author  and   his   collaborators, e.g.,  (Isla et  al., 2001),   and
incorporates ideas in believable characters (Perlin & Goldberg, 1996), affective computing (Picard, 1997) and
biomorphic computation.     By synthesizing elements from each of these areas,       the  project   presented  here  offers a
unique and novel educational interaction.

INTERACTION               PARADIGM
A challenge in building virtual environments is deciding how real space and virtual space should relate to each
other.  An effective way   to present  the virtual/real  boundary   is to offer a  metaphor   that gives people  a   starting
point for their understanding.   For example, the metaphor in a flight simulator      is that   the user is a  pilot sitting
in the cockpit and the computer screen is the front windshield of the airplane.          Other computational metaphors
suggest that the computer screen is a "desktop" and that areas of the screen are "windows."
    The central metaphor presented in this paper draws a parallel between the virtual space/real space distinction
and the commonly understood distinction between land and water.           This core "Land/Water"     metaphor    has served
as the primary focus in developing all elements of the interaction paradigm and has had numerous implications
for the  design of  the system.  The    core elements    of the interaction paradigm     are: animated   creatures,  virtual
islands, virtual rafts and human participants.    This section addresses each of these elements in turn.
    The goal of this interaction paradigm is to provide a way for human participants to engage with animated
creatures.   These creatures provide the central focus for the educational content to be delivered by the system.
Each stationary computer screen provides a fixed window onto an island community inhabited by the animated
creatures. The screen itself serves as the boundary between virtual land ­ the area where the         virtual creatures live
and that people can see ­ and virtual water ­ the "gulf" of real space where people live and virtual creatures can
not go.   The animated creatures are constrained to exist on a virtual island, but are able to look out over            the
virtual water and interact with things they see there (by means of a web cam mounted on top of the screen).

                                                             
          While    the virtual  islands  allow    people   to   have  some
simple interactions with the virtual creatures via the web cams on
each island,  the  primary  mode     of  interaction   is through    several
Tablet PCs that people carry around the installation space.           These
Tablet PCs serve   as virtual rafts that are able  to  carry creatures   and
interact with the islands and with each other. Each raft has a water
simulation    running  on  it, with   simple   real-time   waves     and  an
animated wooden platform in the middle of the screen (see Figure
3). The Tablet PCs have two-axis        accelerometers built    into  them,
which   provide    information   about   how   the   device   is  moving.
These accelerometers make it possible for the character            to   react
when   the   participant tilts the  device.     This   simple     mode    of
interaction,  where the virtual raft   responds   to  real world   gravity,
creates a strong link between the virtual and real worlds.                      Figure 3: A view of the screen on the
   This interaction    paradigm     is   designed     to   situate   human      tablet PC based virtual raft.
participants at the conceptual center of the installation.      People use
the rafts to  help characters  move    onto new   islands;   in this regard,   the participants  serve   the role of   an  ocean
current or other force of nature.   By   putting  people in   a   position to  move  creatures around the      world and    view
the ensuing   results,  the project    seeks   to enable   an   active  engagement      with  the  ideas  presented    by   each
installation. This  centrality   of the  participants  will  be   particularly important   in the   upcoming ecology-based
version of the project (see Future Work section below), which seeks in part to demonstrate that environmental
stewardship is an active, hands-on process.

PLATFORM            FOR     EDUCATION
The virtual raft interaction paradigm has been designed to help people have interactive educational experiences.
Storytelling, and   in particular interactive   storytelling,   have  been    used effectively  as  learning   tools (Rossiter,
2002; Roussos et al., 1997).      The   Virtual   Raft paradigm    provides    many  of the   ingredients   of good   stories ­
characters, voyages, encounters with different kinds of creatures ­ and thereby encourages people to find stories
in the events that they find there.    By   giving   participants  the  raw   materials of stories, the  project  lets them   to
create their own narratives through which they can assemble an understanding of the material presented.
    The paradigm    also provides   a  fertile platform   for   providing  a   range of educational    content.   The current
installation has been developed with humanoid characters as a means for addressing color theory, social content
and mythology.     Another version is currently bring planned        in  collaboration  with  the  Discovery Science      Center
in  Orange   County,   CA,  that features animated     versions   of  several  animal   species   and  may   be   used  to  help
students learn ecological concepts such as the spread of biodiversity and the impact of invasive species.
    The value  of  this paradigm    comes   not   just from   its ability  to  be  adapted to  a  range  of  different  content
domains, but also from its ability to encourage people to engage in critical thinking.                 The   system   does   not
necessarily prescribe a certain set of ideas, but instead allows participants to interact with a system and discover
for themselves     the effects of their  actions.    While    the  computational     design   of  each   implementation      will
determine the cause-and-effect relationships to which participants will be exposed, the value judgments may be
left to the participants themselves.
    This paradigm also encourages participants to engage in real-time problem solving.                   Each  version    of the
system has a multiplicity of outcomes based on how people interact.            The design of the system allows       people   to
try out certain solutions and then attempt to change the impact that they have had.               While people's actions are
effectively irreversible, there is nevertheless an abundance of opportunities to recover from previous actions.              By
combining    the irreversibility of action  and   the  potential  to  recover  from  mistakes    with  multiple   user-defined
opportunities for "success," the system encourages an active engagement with the concepts being presented.

EVALUATION
A fully functional prototype    based  on this paradigm    was created in summer 2004.        This prototype    was  exhibited
at the opening   of a  new  building   on the  campus     of the  University   of  California,   Irvine, in  November     2004.
Approximately 200 participants interacted with the installation over two days, in nine groups of 20 and several
small groups.    These participants included industry professionals, academic administrators, professors, college
students and a few grade school children.       Each group visited the installation for a total of ten minutes.             This
visit consisted of a two minute introduction to the overall research, a one minute orientation to the installation
itself, a five minute interaction with the installation, and two minutes for questions at the end. While it was not
possible to collect data through questionnaires or other experimental instruments at this event, the video cited
above offers some first hand evidence that the installation had the impacts described in this section.
    The focus of this installation was to teach participants how the colors of light blend together. When each
group of participants arrived, the three islands had red, green and blue fires on them, and each of the islands was
inhabited by three characters with torches the same color as the fire.             Whenever   a  character   moved   to   a  new
island, it would walk over to the fire on that island and add its torch color to it.             Therefore, if    a participant

                                                              
carried a character with a red torch to a green island, the red character would walk over to the green fire and the
fire would turn yellow. The participants were assigned the task of using the three rafts to disperse the characters
so that each island ended up with white fire on it.          To accomplish this       task required at  least six   successful
character transmissions (a character with a red torch needed to go to the blue island and the green island, a blue
character needed to go to red and green islands, and a green character needed to go to the blue and red islands).
    All nine large groups completed the task of turning all three fires white within the allotted five minutes.              In
the course   of observing   200  people   interact  with   the  installation, several hypotheses  about    the   system  were
drawn.   First, the success of all nine groups supports the idea that the interaction paradigm       draws    on  a metaphor
that people readily understand.    Since each group was able to perform the assigned task after         only  one   minute   of
introduction to  the interaction,  the island/raft interface appears to   be intuitive.  People of all ages were willing     to
carry the virtual raft interface and convey characters around the space. While 200 people mostly from southern
California does not represent a cross sample of humanity, it did appear that the installation did not rely upon a
given language or cultural perspective for the core interaction paradigm to retain its effectiveness.
    Second,    since people  took   turns carrying     the interface, the  paradigm   is   transferable and   lends  itself  to
cooperation among multiple users.       Whereas    many    mixed   or augmented    reality environments    require  some  sort
of tethered interface such as a heads up display or data glove, this interaction paradigm allows people to move
fluidly  in  and out of  the role  of   primary  interactor  without   any  significant  changeover  cost.    The   multi-user
aspect of the virtual raft system caused the groups to work together to accomplish the task, including both raft-
holders  and    bystanders.     It was    common       to  hear
exclamations    such  as, "Ooh,    this island  has  a yellow
fire, so it needs  somebody     with a  blue   torch!" and  to
have people share information with each other about
where characters of various colors were in the space
    A third feature of the system is that the interaction
appears to be engaging to people.        When each group,
which had been through an hour of speeches and were
now   at the    end  of  an  hour-long    tour  of   projects,
reached the installation space, they were largely quiet
and subdued.     However,    once  the  interaction  with   the
Virtual  Raft   Project began,   they   became   much     more
animated.       During    the   five    minute     interaction,
members     of each  of the  groups     talked and  interacted
physically   with   each  other.   At   the    end of  several
interactions, when the group accomplished its goal, the
participants broke   into   spontaneous    applause.       This
applause was not directed at the people demonstrating              Figure   4:   Multiple   participants    may     interact
the project, but rather at the group itself for succeeding         with   the installation   simultaneously      by means
at its task.                                                       of several virtual rafts.

FUTURE WORK
    This project  is developing    in   two  main   directions.    First, this  system   could be used     as a  platform   for
exploring    and learning    about  social  and    cultural phenomena.        Themes     such as the    spread   of  cultures,
acceptance/discrimination, communication and teamwork could all be addressed by means of a system in which
characters encounter communities that are new to them and try to find their place in that social system.             In order
to develop   these  facets  of the system,   it will   be  necessary  to  build  a more    comprehensive   system   of social
intelligence in the characters.    Previous work by    the  author  has  focused   on social  intelligence in virtual wolves
(Tomlinson, 2002), and will provide a starting point for human-like computational social competence.                         In
particular,  mechanisms     for characters to remember information about           their world  and to   communicate      this
information to each other will be important parts of this future implementation.
    The research team that created the Virtual Raft Project is also currently in the design stages for a version of
the system based on ecology. By letting people move animated species among several virtual islands, the
installations will allow them to understand concepts such as the spread or contraction of biodiversity, the role of
predator/prey interactions, and the impact of invasive species.           This project is being designed in      consultation
with educational curators at Discovery Science Center in Orange County, CA.                 The creators are developing      it
with an awareness of the California Science Standards (in particular focusing on the life sciences curriculum); the
system will be evaluated based on its effectiveness at helping visitors learn that content.                   In order to   be
exhibited in a science center, it will be necessary to make the mobile elements of the system more robust to
handling by thousands of children every year.          In addition to producing a California specific       installation,   the
system will be designed to produce a series of regionally specific installations featuring species from a range of
regional ecosystems.      By   designing  the   system  from   its inception  to develop   multiple versions,    the  research
team hopes to make it significantly easier to be able to develop new bodies of content for the same core
interactive platform. The broad goal of the project is to give visitors to regional science centers and museums an

                                                               
opportunity to think critically about the science of ecology by engaging with locally relevant ecological themes
in an interactive setting.

CONCLUSIONS
This paper has presented a novel interaction paradigm for multi-user participatory simulations.   This paradigm
involves desktop computer screens that serve as virtual islands populated by autonomous 3D animated creatures,
and mobile devices, such as tablet PCs, that serve as virtual rafts that participants may use to carry creatures
between the islands. This paper described how this "Island/Raft" paradigm may   serve   as an interactive platform
for education in several different content domains, and presented a functional implementation of the paradigm.
  This paper and the research it represents contribute to a new generation of educational systems that draw on
technological advances     in mobile   computing,   ubiquitous  computing,    computer   graphics  and    artificial
intelligence, and compete effectively against emerging forms of interactive entertainment.    By harnessing these
technologies and drawing elements from entertainment media to create an engaging experience, computational
systems will be able  to   present content in ways that are of interest to learners and growing  effectiveness  as
educational tools.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank Man Lok Yau, Jesse Gray, Sara Goetz, Eric Baumer, Jessica O'Connell, Ksatria
Williams and So Yamaoka for their work on the Virtual Raft Project, as well as the staff of Discovery Science
Center. This research was supported by the ACE (Arts Computation Engineering) program, the Donald Bren
School of Information & Computer Sciences, the Claire Trevor School of the Arts, the UC Game Culture &
Technology Lab, and the California Institute for Telecommunications & Information Technology.

REFERENCES
Borovoy, R., Martin, F., Vemuri, S., Resnick, M., Silverman, B., & Hancock, C. (1998). Meme tags and
        community mirrors: Moving from conferences to collaboration. Paper presented at the Proceedings of
        the 1998 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work.
Hay, K. E., Elliott, D. M., & Kim, B. (2002). Collaborative network-based virtual reality: The past, the
        present, and the future of the virtual solar system. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Computer
        Support for Collaborative Learning: Foundations for a CSCL Community.
Hill, R. W., Douglas, J., Gordon, A., Pighin, F. P., & van Velsen, M. (2003). Guided conversations about
        leadership: Mentoring with movies and interactive characters. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the
        Fifteenth Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-03), Acapulco, Mexico.
Isla, D., Burke, R., Downie, M., & Blumberg, B. (2001). A layered brain architecture for synthetic creatures.
        Paper presented at the Proceedings of the International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence
        (IJCAI), Seattle, WA, USA, August 4-10.
Jenkins, H. (2002). Game theory: Digital renaissance. MIT Technology Review, 1-3, March 29.
Klopfer, E., & Woodruff, E. (2003). Platforms for participatory simulations - exploring systems and generating
        discourse with wearable and handheld computers. Paper presented at the Conference on Computer
        Supported Collaborative Learning, Oslo.
Perlin, K., & Goldberg, A. (1996). Improv: A system for scripting interactive actors in virtual worlds. Paper
        presented at the Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 96, New Orleans, LA, USA, August 4-9.
Picard, R. (1997). Affective computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Roschelle, J., & Pea, R. (2002). A walk on the wild side: How wireless handhelds may change cscl. Paper
        presented at the Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning,
        Boulder, CO.
Rossiter, M. (2002). Narrative and stories in adult teaching and learning. Clearinghouse on Adult, Career and
        Vocational Education, 241.
Roussos, M., Johnson, A. E., Leigh, J., Vasilakis, C. A., Barnes, C. R., & Moher, T. G. (1997). Nice:
        Combining constructionism, narrative and collaboration in a virtual learning environment. SIGGRAPH
        Comput. Graph., 31(3), 62--63.
Schaub, H., Zoll, C., & Aylett, R. (2003). Modelling empathy: The eu-project victec (virtual information and
        communication technology with empathic characters). Paper presented at the Fifth International
        Conference on Cognitive Modeling, Bamberg, Germany, April 10-12.
Tatar, D., Roschelle, J., Vahey, P., & Penuel, W. R. (2003). Handhelds go to school: Lessons learned.
        Computer, 36(9), 30--37.
Tomlinson, W. (2002). Synthetic social relationships for computational entities. Unpublished Ph.D.,
        Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Wilson, E. K. (2002). Computer learning hits its stride. Chemical & Engineering News, 80, 35-39, 9/16/02.

                                                         
