              The Effect of Video-Augmented Chat on
                 Collaborative Learning with Cases

                 Michael Tscholl                                         John McCarthy
      Department of Computer Science                           Department of Computer Science
           University College London                               University College London
             m.tscholl@cs.ucl.ac.uk                                 j.mccarthy@cs.ucl.ac.uk

                 Jeremiah Scholl
      Department of Computer Science
        Lulea University of Technology
              jeremiah@cdt.luth.se

      Abstract. Efficient learning with cases requires discussion on the facts of the case as well as on
      their meaning. We investigated the focus (factual vs. abstract) of a case-based learning discussion
      when video was added to a chat-based learning system. Students whose first experience includes
      high-quality video, focus significantly more on abstract knowledge than students first exposed to
      chat-only or chat + low-quality video. We also found that these students expressed a preference
      for face-to-face discussion. We conclude that video may improve learning where discussions on
      abstract and concrete knowledge are important.

      Keywords: case-based CSCL, video, eye tracking, dialogue analysis, non-verbal communication

INTRODUCTION
Anthropological and social research has consistently revealed the importance of non-verbal cues for dialogue,
discourse and information management. However, the specific effects of these additional cues on learning are
not well studied. Here we investigate the availability of visual contact on learning by analyzing a case-based
CSCL dialogue, distinguishing between foci on factual information and foci on abstract, general knowledge.
Good learning with cases requires that generalizations are drawn from the factual information conveyed in the
cases and that the point of the case is understood and reflected upon (Guzdial, et al. 1996). While this research
has been carried out in a case-based CSCL environment, its findings are relevant for all educational methods
using discussion where a careful balance between factual and general knowledge must be fostered.

BACKGROUND
The effect of non-verbal  cues on  dialogues  is well studied. For  example, focus   shifts are introduced  and
accompanied   by specific facial behaviors   and gestures  (Kendon, 1987;  McNeill,  1992);   establishing  and
maintaining common ground uses non-verbal cues (Chovil, 1991; Argyle & Cook, 1976). Less is known about
how visual cues affect learning quality and efficacy. Some pertinent research has, however, shown that the
technology used for learning affects what is talked about. For example, Veerman et al. (1999) found that in chat-
only systems, students focus more on the use of knowledge than its meaning, while the opposite result is found
in a system featuring chat and a facility for representing of conceptual knowledge. The student writing groups of
Hewett (1998) using computers and oral communication focused on more abstract, global idea development,
than their peers using only computers. And in observational studies of learning with cases comparing f2f with
CMC, from which this study derived its hypotheses, Tscholl & Dowell (2005) found a similar pattern. The
alternative explanation of differences on learning with and without visual contact focuses on the improved
intimacy and immediacy of face-to-face dialogues. A certain amount of intimacy is valuable in case-based
learning, where drawing parallels and seeing similarities and differences between (personal) episodic knowledge
and the case  under discussion is an important   means  of generalizing. Further, as collaborative  learning is
promoted by exchanging viewpoints, contrasting and critiquing, the closeness of visual contact may affect the
dynamic of the dialogue (cf. Walther (1999))

                                                       
Augmenting chat with a video channel may be a straightforward way to counter the downsides of chat alone.
This research aims to contribute to the understanding of the impact of video on learning discussions.

RESEARCH QUESTION AND APPROACH
The primary research question was whether the addition of a video channel leads to more discussion of abstract
concepts.  More   generally  we  were interested   in whether   the  dialogue  patterns  differed across  the  media
conditions. We this by using two different video conditions, alongside chat only communication. In the low
frame rate condition video was delivered at 1 frame every five seconds. This frame rate was adopted to give a
sense  of presence  of  the other  students while  effectively blocking  non-verbal   communication.     As  outlined
recently by (Ehrlich et al, 2000), motion is an important pre-requisite for emotion communication, but at 1
frame very 5 seconds no motion is communicated and simple non-verbal gestures like nods and shakes of the
head cannot be discriminated. In the high frame rate condition video was delivered at 25 frames/second. To
measure how students used the video channel we employed eye tracking. We also measured user perceptions of
the different media conditions with a short questionnaire.

Dependent Variables

Facts vs. General (F-G Coding)
We distinguished two types of foci: concrete foci, includes facts or detailed aspects of the case, and the other,
abstract foci, includes general concepts pertinent to the case, the principle or the `point' of the case. What we
wanted  to capture  with  this distinction  is whether an  utterance is  explicitly tied to  the factual  information
conveyed in the case or whether it is only derived from it and positioned into the dialogue as a stand-alone
object of discussion.   We  reasoned  that  bringing  such objects  into the discussion  would    require non-verbal
communication, as such a shift would entail a change to, and maintenance of, a more complex topic.
All utterances or propositions within an utterance containing at least one reference to a specific detail of the
case or the case as a whole ("but she refused to attend twice") were counted as concrete/factual (F). Utterances
focusing on the definition or `nature' of concepts ("what is negligence actually"), utterances referring to the
general consequence of applying a concept to the case ("...but then a doctor has to check every symptom every
time. This is not practical"), and utterances mentioning the point of the case ("this is a he-said, she-said
situation") were designated as abstract/general (G). Utterances outside these criterions (such as "yes, I think so,
too") where categorized as the utterance they referred to (if the reference could be determined uniquely).
Coordination measure
We measure coordination by assigning a score of 0, 1, 2, ...to indicate the number of messages between the
current and the topically related one. Messages starting as new thread were scored 0.
Eye-Tracking Measures
The eye   tracker records   gaze  position  on the screen  50  times/second   as a  series  of X-Y   data points. To
understand  where   people  look  during   the discussion  we  categorized the  screen  into 4   Regions  of Interest.
These were, (i) the participants' thumbnails, (ii) video focus window, (iii) chat window and (iv) the browser
containing  the  learning material.  An illustration of these regions and the layout used in the evaluation is
shown in Figure 1. The measure of Gaze % is the proportion of (raw X-Y) gaze samples that are recorded in
different areas  of the screen.   As an  indicator of  transitions we also   recorded  the  Revisits to  the different
regions. A revisit is counted when gaze moves briefly out of one region for a single fixation before returning
back to that region. It has been associated with the need to seek additional information.
Questionnaire Measures
The short  questionnaire    with 8  questions  was structured  as  a series  of  statements,   gauging  for  usability,
enjoyment and perceived video quality. Included was: "I would have preferred a face to face discussion". After
discussing each case participants rated their strength of agreement with the statements on a 7-point scale.

E-LEARNING STUDY
Groups of 4 students discussed three cases under three different media conditions: chat only, low frame rate
(0.2fps) and high frame rate (25fps). The three cases were actual cases of medical negligence, including a short
description of the case details and a judges' verdict (example: Figure 1). The task given was to explain the
judge's verdict.

                                                        
 The Vadera case: A 22-year old woman presented herself 3 times within a year at her GP's practice, with the intention of starting
 contraception before she got married. She was warned that there were health risks associated with contraception pills. On the last
 visit her blood pressure was taken and  it was at 150/100 (higher    than normal for a                                                    woman  of her     age).      This       high reading       was
 taken by the GP (Dr. Shaw) as a symptom of `white-coat hypertension', a phenomenon cause by anxiety that occurs in a doctor's
 presence, that can however also be indicative of a general tendency to hypertension. The next day, she started the pill. A                                                                          week
 later, the plaintiff was admitted to the hospital suffering from numbness and difficulty in walking. Her BP was read several times
 and was at 170/110, 110/60 and 140/110. She had suffered a stroke that left her completely paralysed.
 The statistical evidence does not link taking contraceptives with stroke, over the population as a whole.

 Verdict:   the judge did find the GP negligent but not liable.

                                         Figure 1: An example case from the study

Method

Participants
24 people participated in the study. 16 were female and 8 male. The mean age was 26. They were recruited
from subject pools within UCL and were paid          $15 for participation. They were tested in groups of 4 people. All
groups conducted discussion of cases in all three conditions, Chat Only, Low Frame Rate and High Frame
Rate.  One member of each group was eye-tracked to understand their attention patterns.
Equipment and Software
For our    experiments    we  used  a modified     version      of Marratech     Pro,   a                                                     commercially             available        multimedia
conferencing tool that includes media such as audio, video, chat and a shared whiteboard.                                                                                The Marratech Pro
client is used in conjunction with the Marratech E-meeting Portal (a license server and media gateway) to set
up multimedia conferencing sessions.         The version we used limited bandwidth usage for video to 400 kb/s.
Procedure
A short questionnaire given before the discussion probed basic demographic information and the participants'
experience with chat rooms, instant messaging (IM) and video conferencing. At the end of each case discussion
they completed a short questionnaire. The same questions were asked after each case and the questionnaire
layout encouraged active comparison with previous responses. At the end of the session participants were given
a final questionnaire to understand how they used the video channel and what they tried to communicate

                                                                 Order       Case 1                                                                Case 2                           Case 3
Design                                                           A           Chat                                                                 Low (0.2fps)                      High (25fps)
Two groups of 4 students were assigned to one of                 (2x4)
three different variations that counterbalanced the              B (2x4)     High                                                                 Chat                              Low
order  of  media    conditions with   a     Latin  Squaresdesign (Table 1).C (2x4)Low                                                             High                              Chat
                                                                                      Table 1: Study design.
RESULTS

Dialogue Analysis
Figure  2  shows    the number   of general     concepts   recorded    in   the                                                             Number of General Concepts in the
dialogue. As illustrated in the figure there were significantly more                                                                                          Dialogue
general    concepts   produced   by      the  two   groups       whose     first
experience   was    high   frame    rate    video  (Z=3.068,       p< 0.001).                                                              15
However, we found no difference in chat coordination between the                                                                           10
different media conditions.                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                            0
Questionnaire Data                                                                                                                                    chat                 low                  high
                                                                                                                                                                   Media Condition
Analysis of the questionnaire data also revealed effects contingent
on  the  order   in which   media   conditions     were experienced.       For                                                                              start chat   start low   start high
example, students said they found it harder to speak their mind if
their first experience had been with chat only [F(4,42) = 2.7, p <                                                                         Figure 2: G's produced by condition
0.05]. This difference disappeared when they used high frame rate
video.  Preference for a face-to-face discussion also interacted with the order in which media conditions were
experienced. Those who were first exposed to high frame rate (25fps), expressed a clear preference for face-to-

                                                                
                                                                                                                         Average Frequency
face discussion [ F(2,21) = 5.35, P < 0.05]. By contrast, those exposed to the low frame rate (0.2fps) on the
whole said they would not prefer a face-to-face discussion. Those exposed to chat first did not have an opinion
either way.

Eye-Tracking Data
The eye tracking data illustrate that the video actually received very little of users' attention. A visualization of
the gaze distribution is presented in Figure 3 (the learning material display occupied the right and center of the
screen; below left: chat window; mid left: large video; above left: thumbnails). Gaze density is clearly much
higher  in the   chat   window.   Surprisingly,    in  the
video conditions less that 10% of gaze is directed
towards   the  large   video   window      and even   less
towards   the  thumbnail     window.       Across  media
conditions there appeared to be large differences
in  the revisits made    to  different   screen  regions.
As described above, a revisit is scored when the
eye  makes    a  single   fixation    outside  a   region
before  returning  to   that region.   Revisits    to both
the focus  and   chat   windows   are  much    higher   in
the high frame rate condition [F(2,4) = 14.5, p <
0.05; F(2,4)  =  7.56,  p <    0.05]. This    indicates in
the  high  frame   rate   condition    there   are   many
instances where a glance is made from the chat to
the focus window and vice versa.
One   explanation    of this result   is that  the eye  is
attracted  to    the   motion    in   the     high    video                 Figure 3: Gaze distribution.
condition. If this were the case, we would expect
the eye to be drawn to the video immediately after
it switches   to   the  latest  message     sender.     However,  only  3%  of all video switches were     immediately
accompanied by a glance to the video focus window. Much more common was that the student would first read
the message and then glance at the focus window.
To investigate further, we conducted a post-hoc investigation of eye movements in the "Start high" condition.
We were interested in whether the
eye movements were related in any                                        High Frame Rate        Low Frame Rate
way  to shifts  in the  dialogue   from                                     F          G          F                 G
discussing facts to general concepts           Prop.   Of    messages
of the case. Specifically, the video           followed     by   video
may    be  used    for  checking      the      glances                     71%        73%         52%              56%
reaction   to  a   sent  message.     To       Mean No. Of Glances
investigate,    we    calculated    two                                    2.3        1.8         3.4              1.7
different  measures.     One    records                  Table 2: Glances during different phases of discussion.
the  proportion    of  messages    of    a
particular type that are followed by glances to the video window. The other measures the mean number of
glances made in these instances. As shown in Table 2, there are a higher proportion of glances to the video
window in the high frame rate condition. However, there is clearly no difference in the proportion of glances
following factual (F) statements vs. general (G) concepts.         In contrast, though not significant, the mean number
glances following factual statements is marginally higher than those following general concepts.
As     an    additional     analysis     we                                     High Frame        Low Frame Rate
calculated    equivalent     measures      to                                       Rate
investigate   how  they  used   the   video                                    Sent      Read      Sent            Read
window     when    they   either   sent    amessagethemselvesorreadamessagefromsomeoneelse.Onemeasure was the proportion of timesProp.ofmessagesfollowed by video glancesMean No. Of Glances69%2.370%2.345%2.863%2.6
they  glanced   at the  video   after  they
sent a message (to check response) vs.                          Table 3: Glances to messages sent and read
the proportion   of   times  they glanced
at it when someone else sent a message (to check intention). For the messages where they did glance at the

                                                               
video, we  calculated  the   mean number    of glances/message.     Again   however,   we found    fewer glances   to the
video  window   in  the low   frame   rate condition  but no    differences in glances  following     messages  sent  vs.
messages read (see Table 3). Expressed emotion during the chat sessions was almost completely absent.

CONCLUSIONS
The results show that adding high-quality video to a chat-based distributed learning environment has an effect
on    the discussion, attitudes and behavior of participants. However this was only observed when the students
first used high   quality video. Then,  more   general  concepts  in the    discussion were  produced,   an  effect   that
persisted through the remainder of the session. The eye tracking data show that compared to the chat window
there were very few glances to the video focus window. However there was some evidence that people would
frequently and briefly switch between the chat and video window, especially in the high frame rate condition.
We found no evidence that the video channel was used in any way to regulate the dialogue. Even if such
evidence were uncovered it would not explain the production of general concepts for the "start high" groups
when they communicated by chat alone. Thus, although the video has had an effect, we find no evidence that
this effect is due to a regulation of dialogue through the visual channel.
A much simpler explanation is that the first experience with high frame rate video changes the way students
feel about each other. The video may increase the intimacy between students in the group. To some extent, this
intimacy may be unfulfilled. Although students seek eye contact, because of the position of the camera, it is
never actually made. This leaves them feeling as though they would do better to meet face to face. In other
words,  the first  experience  with high   quality video  may   function as  an  ice-breaker    - whose  importance    in
education is well known (Lott & Lott, 1965; Meyers, 1997).
There  are  two innovations   in  this study  that are fruitful for future  research.  Firstly,   the technique to  code
concrete and abstract references in the dialogue revealed interesting differences that identify subtle changes in
communication patterns under different media conditions. Secondly the use of eye tracking helps to isolate in
detail how people use the information available on the screen.
While a coding that distinguishes between factual and general concepts is particularly suited to the Case Based
Learning method we use here it can also be used in other approaches such as problem-based-learning               On the
eye-tracking front we would caution against using a simple measure of gaze % to different screen regions. As
shown by the re-visit and post-hoc analysis the gaze % measure can hide subtle but important differences in
how   people   use information    available  on the   screen.   Overall  we  would   recommend        adopting a   multi-
dimensional    approach   to identify how   dialogue,  attitude and eye  data  can  be  tied together   to give  a more
detailed picture of user performance.

REFERENCES
Argyle, M. and M. Cook (1976). Gaze and Mutual Gaze. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
Chovil, N. (1991). "Discourse-Oriented Facial Displays in Conversation." Research on Language and Social
       Interaction 25(1991/1992): 163-194.
Ehrlich, S.M., Schiano, D.J., Sheridan, K., Communicating Facial Affect: It's Not the Realism, It's the Motion .
       Ext. Abstracts. CHI 2000, ACM Press (2000), 251 - 252
Guzdial, M., Hmelo, C.E., Hubscher, R., Nagel, K., Newstetter, W., Puntambekar, S., Shabo, A., Turns, J., &
       Kolodner, J.L. (1997). Integrating and Guiding Collaboration. Proceedings CSCL '97, pp.91-99.
Hewett, B. L. (1998). The characteristics and effects of oral and computer-mediated peer group talk on the
       argumentative writing process. Dissertation Abstracts International, 59(09), 3435.
Kendon,    A.  (1987).  On   gesture:  its complementary   relationship     with speech."  Nonverbal     Behavior     and
       Communication. A. W. Siegman and S. Feldstein. Hillsdale, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.: 65-97.
Lott, A. J. & Lott, B. E. (1965). Group cohesiveness as interpersonal attraction: a review of relationships with
       antecedent and consequent variables. Psychological Bulletin, 64, 259-302
Meyers, S. A. (1997). Increasing student participation and productivity in small-group activities for psychology
       classes. Teaching of Psychology, 24(2), 105-115.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind. Chicago and London, The University of Chicago Press.
Tscholl, M., & Dowell, J. (2005). Differences in f2f and case-based CSCL. (in preparation)
Veerman,    A. L., Andriessen,   J. E.  B.  &  Kanselaar, G.    (1999). Collaborative  Learning    through  Computer-
       Mediated Argumentation. In Hoadley, C. (Ed.) Proceedings of CSCL99, Stanford, Palo Alto. LEA.
Weiner,  M.,   and  Mehrabian,    A.,   1968,  Language    within   Language:    Immediacy,     a  Channel   in  Verbal
       Communication, Appleton, New York.

                                                          
