    Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning in
         Higher Education: Scripts for Argumentative
    Knowledge Construction in Distributed Groups

              Armin Weinberger                                               Karsten Stegmann
                 Frank Fischer                                      Department for Applied Cognitive
    Knowledge Media Research Center,                                Psychology and Media Psychology,
                      Tübingen                                             University of Tübingen
          a.weinberger@iwm-kmrc.de                                       k.stegmann@iwm-kmrc.de
              f.fischer@iwm-kmrc.de

      Abstract.  Learners   rarely  know   how   to construct    knowledge   together in   argumentation.   This
      experimental study analyzes two computer-supported collaboration scripts, which should facilitate
      processes and outcomes of argumentative knowledge construction. One script aims to support the
      construction  of   single arguments    and  the   other    script aims to  support   the construction  of
      argumentation sequences. Both scripts were varied independently in a 2u2-factorial design. 120
      students of Educational Science participated in the study in groups of three. Results show that the
      computer-supported     scripts  facilitate  specific    processes    and   outcomes   of   argumentative
      knowledge construction. Learners with scripts argued better and acquired more knowledge on
      argumentation   than  learners  without   scripts without    impeding    acquisition of  domain  specific
      knowledge.

      Keywords: argumentative knowledge construction, computer-supported collaboration scripts

OBJECTIVES
University students are supposed to become experts within a specific domain. In this regard, students are meant
to be able to both understand and participate in argumentative discourse in their field. Even though knowledge
on argumentation   start to develop   from   an  early age (Stein   &    Bernas, 1999),  studies showed     that adults'
knowledge  on  argumentation    are  often suboptimal     (e.g., Kuhn,   1991).  Adults hardly   base their  claims on
grounds and rarely consider counterarguments. Even though students may in general acquire domain-specific
knowledge, they hardly seem to learn how to argue based on this knowledge within their domain.
   An important opportunity for the development of knowledge on argumentation is the active participation in
high-quality argumentative discourse in instructional settings (Kuhn, 1991). Regular classroom settings rarely
foresee opportunities for learners to engage actively and equally in high-quality argumentative discourse (Cohen
& Lotan, 1995). High-quality argumentative discourse in instructional settings means that collaborative learners
construct formally and   content    adequate arguments    while    jointly working  on   a learning   task. Computer-
supported collaborative learning (CSCL) may provide an ideal context for this kind of discourse (Marttunen &
Laurinen, 2001). During CSCL, students may construct and exchange arguments online that can be examined
and evaluated by learning partners for longer periods of time than in face to face situations. Collaborative
learners  may thus elaborate    the learning material   by  constructing    arguments   themselves  to promote     their
perspective on one hand and on the other integrate arguments of their learning partners in their own perspective.
In this way, learners may lead a high-quality online argumentative discourse with regard to formal aspects and
contents  and acquire domain-specific   knowledge      as well   as knowledge    on argumentation     (see  Andriessen,
Baker, & Suthers, 2003; Weinberger & Fischer, in press).
   The goal of this study is to implement CSCL within a university curriculum of educational science and to
investigate how processes as well as outcomes of argumentative knowledge construction can be facilitated by
means of computer-supported scripts within this CSCL environment.

ARGUMENTATIVE KNOWLEDGE CONSTRUCTION
Argumentative knowledge construction means that learners construct arguments within a specific domain with
the goal to acquire knowledge (Weinberger & Fischer, in press). First, we will portray potential outcomes of
argumentative knowledge construction. Second, we will describe the processes of argumentative knowledge
construction and how they may facilitate specific outcomes.

                                                          
Argumentative knowledge construction aims to foster at least two different outcomes, namely domain-specific
knowledge as well as knowledge on argumentation (Andriessen et al., 2003).
   Knowledge on argumentation comprises knowledge on how to construct formally complete arguments with
the components claim, ground and qualifier (knowledge on the construction of single arguments) and the
knowledge on how to construct specific sequences of arguments consisting of arguments, counterarguments and
integrations (knowledge on the construction of argumentation sequences).
   Domain-specific knowledge in the context of this study means to be able to apply concepts from a specific
theory that is to be learned. Learners constructing formally and content adequate arguments activate their prior
knowledge,    elaborate  the given     learning material,   and thus   construct new    domain-specific   knowledge
(Andriessen et al., 2003).
   The processes of argumentative knowledge construction are allocated on at least two dimensions, namely the
formal argumentative dimension, regarding the formal structure of arguments and argumentation sequences, and
the epistemic dimension, regarding the contents of the single arguments (Weinberger & Fischer, in press).
On the    formal  argumentative   dimension,    the construction    of single arguments    and   the  construction  of
argumentation sequences consisting of more than one single argument can be differentiated.
   A single argument has been regarded as a claim which can be supported by grounds and/or specified by
qualifier (Toulmin, 1958). Grounds may justify the claim through a warrant. The qualifier limits the validity of
the claim. Toulmin's model seems to be feasible to give an account on the quality of single arguments on formal
as well as domain-specific levels. Furthermore, the model can be applied in different domains for constructing
arguments    based on   uncertain information.    Constructing   arguments    with  these elements    facilitates self-
explanation of the learning material (Baker, 2003). Self-explanation is supposed to facilitate the integration of
new knowledge into existing cognitive structures. Learners prompted to give self-explanations acquired more
knowledge than unsupported learners (Chi, DeLeeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994).
   Specific argumentation sequences have been regarded as an indicator for the construction of knowledge
(Leitão,  2000). First, learners construct arguments     to justify their position. This  construction of   arguments
facilitates self-explanation of  the   learning material  (see  Baker, 2003).  Second,   learning  partners construct
counterarguments   to   challenge and   reconsider  these   positions. Counterarguments    facilitate meta-cognitive
activities, prompting learners to rethink their initial argument (Leitão, 2000). Finally, learners construct replies
and eventually refine the initial positions. By balancing arguments and counterarguments in order to solve
complex problems, participants may acquire knowledge on argumentation and domain-specific knowledge.
   The epistemic dimension regards how learners work on the learning task, what (theoretical) concepts they
consider and how they may construct knowledge. Beyond formal aspects of argument construction, the contents
learners use to construct arguments supposedly play a crucial role in argumentative knowledge construction
(Kuhn, Shaw, & Felton, 1997). It has been found that learners in problem-oriented learning environments need
to apply those theoretical concepts, which they are supposed to learn (application of new knowledge) in order to
acquire   domain-specific  knowledge    (Fischer, Bruhn,    Gräsel, &   Mandl, 2002;    Weinberger,   2003). Beyond
applying new knowledge, application of prior knowledge has been regarded as important to the acquisition of
domain-specific knowledge, e.g., in problem-oriented learning environments of medical education (Schmidt,
1993). The amount of activated prior knowledge is supposed to influence how much new knowledge can be
acquired. Students construct meaning by using their prior knowledge in the sense that new knowledge needs to
be meaningfully related to existing bodies of knowledge (Anderson & Pearson, 1984).

USING COMPUTER-SUPPORTED COLLABORATION SCRIPTS TO FACILITATE
ARGUMENTATIVE KNOWLEDGE CONSTRUCTION
A central topic of CSCL research is how argumentative knowledge construction can be facilitated. Different
approaches are being investigated. One prominent approach is visualization, which uses software tools and
different   representations  to   guide   argumentative     knowledge     construction.   Interfaces  with   different
representational aids such as graphs, matrices or texts were found to have different effects on CSCL (Suthers &
Hundhausen, 2001). Software tools, may visualize the argumentation of learners (Kirschner, Buckingham Shum,
& Carr, 2003). For instance, diagrammatic representations visualize how arguments are related to each other and
thus facilitate and guide learners' awareness of the argumentative discourse (Hoppe, Gaßner, Mühlenbrock &
Tewissen, 2000). Tools like SenseMaker (Bell, 1997) support learners to represent their arguments by providing
spaces and categories to group arguments and differentiate claims from evidence.
   Another    approach  to  facilitate argumentative  knowledge     construction is  to  realize computer-supported
collaboration scripts based on O'Donnell's (1999) scripted cooperation approach. Scripts can be implemented
into the communication interface of CSCL learning environments as kind of a guideline. They can interactively
suggest the next step with a minimal intervention of a teacher. Therefore, the quality of self-regulated learning
can be facilitated with a minimum of external regulation. In spite of possible connotations of the term "script",

                                                          
the interface merely suggests learners to construct specific arguments by providing prompts learners should use
or respond to (Baker & Lund, 1997; Dillenbourg, 2002; Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2003; Nussbaum, Hartley,
Sinatra, Reynolds, & Bendixen, 2002; Weinberger, 2003; Weinberger, Ertl, Fischer, & Mandl, 2005). In this
approach, interfaces may be designed to specify and sequence and eventually to allocate different learning
activities to learners. Studies    show,  that  computer-supported      collaboration    scripts  may   support  specific
processes  and   outcomes  of  argumentative    knowledge    construction,   but   may   have   "side effects"  on others
(Dillenbourg, 2002; Weinberger et al., 2005). Kollar and colleagues (2003) investigated computer-supported
collaboration scripts, which provide text spaces for claims and evidence that learners are supposed to fill as well
as a specific sequence of arguments, counterarguments and integrations. Whereas learners acquired domain-
specific knowledge independent of the script support in this study, computer-supported collaboration scripts
facilitated knowledge on argumentation as an outcome of argumentative knowledge construction. Against this
background, scripts can be conceptualized that facilitate the construction of a single argument according to
Toulmin's model (1958) and scripts that facilitate the construction of argumentation sequences according to
Leitão   (2000). A script  for the construction    of single arguments    should   facilitate the  relative frequency  of
grounds that support a claim while a script for the construction of argumentation sequences should foster the
relative frequency  of  counterarguments.    Both   scripts  should support    learners  to  apply  concepts   from prior
knowledge    to  problems  (application of   prior knowledge)   as  well    as the new   theoretical  concepts  they  are
supposed to learn (application of new knowledge).

RESEARCH QUESTIONS
There is little knowledge whether computer-supported collaboration scripts that specifically aim to support the
construction of single arguments and argumentation sequences may foster the formal argumentative and / or the
epistemic  dimension   of  argumentative    knowledge   construction.   Based    on this,   the following   two research
questions are examined:
x   To what extent does a script for the construction of single arguments and a script for the construction of
    argumentation   sequences    and  their  combination,    influence  the    processes of   argumentative    knowledge
    construction on the formal argumentative and the epistemic dimension?
x   To what extent does a script for the construction of single arguments and a script for the construction of
    argumentation   sequences    and   their combination,    facilitate the  outcomes    of   argumentative    knowledge
    construction, namely domain-specific knowledge and knowledge on argumentation?

METHOD

Sample and Design
One hundred twenty students of educational psychology participated in this study. The experimental learning
environment was part of a regular curriculum. The students, who were attending a mandatory introduction
course, participated in an online learning session as a substitute for one regular face to face session of the
course. Participation was required in order to receive a course credit at the end of the semester. The learning
outcomes of the experimental session, however, were not accounted for in students' overall performance. The
participants were separated into groups of three and each group was randomly assigned to one of the four
experimental    conditions in  a 2u2  factorial design.  We   varied    (1) the script   for  the construction  of  single
arguments (without vs. with) and (2) the script for the construction of argumentation sequences (without vs.
with). Time on task was held constant in all four conditions.

Learning environment in the different experimental conditions
The subject matter of the learning environment was Weiner's attribution theory (1985). A three-page description
of this theory was handed out to the students. Three learning cases were used as a central component of the
learning   environment. Each     case was    authentic and   complex    and  allowed    learners  to  construct different
arguments based on theoretical concepts of the attribution theory. One case, for instance, asked to interpret
school performance differences between Asian and American/European students with the attribution theory.
   Three students worked together, but were placed separately in one of three different laboratory rooms. The
group's task was to analyze the three cases in an 80-minute collaboration phase and to provide a joint solution of
the case. A problem-oriented learning environment, developed for asynchronous, text-based collaboration was
used.  The  implemented    newsgroup    tool  was  used  to  exchange    email-like  text    messages.  In  addition, the
environment allowed for implementing different types of computer-supported collaboration scripts.
   (1) The control group received no additional support in solving the three problem-cases.

                                                           
  (2) The script for the construction of single arguments is implemented in the interface as a given text
structure within the individual messages and aims to support learners in the formation of single arguments. The
script, based on Toulmin's model (1958), differentiates between claim, ground with warrant and qualifier and is
realized by text windows in the interface of the CSCL environment (see figure 1). The learners were asked to fill
out each text window of the interface to construct a complete single argument. After building the argument, the
single argument would be added with a click to the message body. Non-argumentative parts of the message, like
questions, could be added directly to the message body, without using the argument construction interface.

Figure 1. The interface of the script for the construction of single arguments.

  (3) The script for the construction of argumentation sequences aimed to facilitate a specific argumentation
sequence of argument-counterargument-integration (following Leitão, 2000). The subject of the posted message
was automatically pre-set, depending on the position in the cascading discussion thread. Each first message of a
discussion  thread  was   labelled "argument".    The   answer   to  an   argument  was   automatically  labelled  as
counterargument and a reply to a counterargument was labelled as integration. The next message was again
labelled  counterargument,  then   integration and  so   on. In this way,   there  was  a  default path through    the
discussion according to the Leitão model (see figure 2). The learners could change the subject of their message
if necessary.
    (4) In the   combined  condition,  the learners  are supported   with  both   scripts during   collaboration. The
interface  contains  the three  fields for  argument    construction  and  subjects  of   the messages   are pre-set
automatically by the script for the construction of argumentation sequences.

Figure 2. Discussion thread guided by the script for the construction of argumentation sequences.

Procedure
First, pre-tests served  to determine   prior  domain-specific   knowledge,    knowledge      on argumentation    and
experience  with  CSCL   environments.   The   pre-tests were   used to   control randomization.   Subsequently,   the
participants were asked to study individually the three-page description of the attribution theory for 20 minutes.
Learners were then introduced to the learning environment. Afterwards, the learners collaborated for 80 minutes
in groups of three to work on the learning cases and to agree on case analyses. In the final phase (about 45
minutes), the students took individual post-tests on domain-specific application-oriented knowledge regarding
the attribution theory and knowledge on argumentation tests.

Data sources and instruments
Processes  and   outcomes  of  argumentative   knowledge     construction have been   analyzed   with an instrument
described  in  Weinberger   and    Fischer (in  press).  Trained  coders   segmented   the  discourse   corpora   into
propositions and rated the segments on the epistemic dimension with regard to application of prior knowledge
and application   of new    knowledge   and    on the   formal  process   dimension  of   argumentative  knowledge
construction  with  regard  to the  construction  of  single  arguments    and the  construction   of argumentation
sequences. With respect to segmentation, the coders achieved an agreement of 83%. The median of the Kappa
values for categorizing the epistemic dimension was sufficiently high with  = .72 as well as for the formal
argumentative dimension ( = .61).

                                                         
Process variables
On the formal argumentative process dimension of argumentative knowledge construction, grounds as well as
counterarguments have been coded. Grounds are reasons given in support of a claim. Grounds can come in form
of facts, statistics, expert opinions, examples, explanations and logical reasoning. In the context of this study,
learners may support claims with case information or concepts from the given attribution theory. Indicators for
grounds that support claims are prepositions such as "because", "due to the fact" etc. even though learners may
not always explicitly connect grounds to the respective claims. For instance, if the claim, "Asian attribution
patterns are typically superior" is based on the ground "Asians typically ascribe failure to a lack of efforts rather
than a lack of talent", this last phrase has been coded as one ground. The percentage of grounds has been
calculated in    comparison  to other  components  of single    arguments  (simple claims,   qualifiers, and   non-
argumentative    moves such   as  questions). A  high share  of  grounds   indicates high-quality    argumentative
discourse with respect to the construction of single arguments.
    Regarding the construction of argumentation sequences, the percentage of counterarguments was calculated
in comparison to other argumentative moves within an argumentation sequence (arguments, integrations, and
non-argumentative moves). Counterarguments are arguments that oppose another argument. The opposition of
arguments has been assessed on the basis of differences of claims. If one claim contradicts a preceding claim,
the later claim is being coded as counterargument. For instance, the argument "The teacher is supporting his
pupils in adjusting the task difficulty to their individual skill levels" can be countered by the argument "The
teacher is not supporting the pupils in adjusting the task difficulty (because adjusting task difficulty can be based
on a dysfunctional attribution of the teacher)". Counterarguments are typically expressed by another learner than
the one who made the initial claim. Learners may, however, also construct counterarguments to their own
arguments.
    On the epistemic dimension, both the application of new knowledge and the application of prior knowledge
have been focused on. With regard to the application of new knowledge, any unit of analysis has been coded that
contains a relation of a theoretical concept from the given attribution theory to case information. For instance,
the case information "Michael says he is not talented for maths" is explained with the following theoretical
concept in the phrase "this indicates that Michael attributes his failure in maths to internal stable causes". When
learners explain case information with concepts that do not stem from the given attribution theory, they apply
prior knowledge to case information, e.g., the case information "Michael says he is not talented for maths" is
considered in "Michael is just plain lazy ­ he needs to acquire learning strategies and discipline".
    The processes on the formal argumentative and the epistemic dimension will be illustrated in a single case
study based on a segment of a discussion thread that has been supported with the script for the construction of
argumentation sequences. The segment will indicate the single messages, their titles, authors (with fictional
names), and their position in the cascading discussion thread. Each message will be analyzed for the above
process categories on the two dimensions, namely with regard to grounds, counterarguments, application of new
knowledge and application of prior knowledge.
Outcome variables
In order to measure domain-specific knowledge, participants had to individually analyze a new case. The written
analyses of the participants were segmented into propositions and coded with respect to adequate applications of
theoretical concepts of the attribution theory. The number of these propositions that the individual learners were
able to construct was counted by five trained coders ( = .72) and served as indicator for the acquisition of
domain-specific knowledge.
    In the knowledge on argumentation test the participants had to recall components of single arguments and
argumentation sequences. Furthermore, participants were asked to formulate arguments about "smoking" in the
knowledge     on argumentation   test. The arguments  that  learners built were   analyzed   with    respect to the
components of single arguments (claim, ground, and qualifier). The argumentation sequences that learners built
were analyzed with respect their function as argument, counterargument, and integration. Thus, knowledge on
the construction  of single  arguments   and  knowledge on the  construction of   argumentation   sequences   were
differentiated. Two trained coders rated the knowledge on argumentation test ( = .83).

RESULTS

Research Question 1 on processes of argumentative knowledge construction
First of all, the effects of the  two   computer-supported collaboration  scripts  and their combination     on the
processes of argumentative knowledge construction were examined. This includes the effects of the two scripts
on the formal argumentative dimension and the effects of the scripts on the epistemic dimension.
    With respect to the formal argumentative dimension the scripts produced the following specific effects on
the relative frequency of grounds (see table 1 for percentage of grounds). The script for the construction of

                                                         
single arguments increases the percentage of arguments based on grounds substantially and strongly (F(1, 36) =
21.24; p < .05; 2 = .37). The script for the construction of argumentation sequences shows no effect on the
percentage of grounds (F(1, 36) = 0.02; n.s.). No interaction effect of both scripts could be found (F(1, 36) = 0.91;
n.s.).
    Both scripts influenced the percentage of counterarguments (see table 1). The script for the construction of
argumentation sequences strongly affected the percentage of counterarguments (F(1, 36) = 9.08; p < .05; 2 = .20)
positively, as did the script for the construction of single arguments (F(1, 36) = 7.14; p < .05; 2 = .17). The two
scripts did not interact with regard to the percentage of counterarguments (F(1, 36) = 1.23; n.s.).

Table 1. Formal argumentative dimension by experimental group: Mean percentages and standard deviations of
grounds and counterarguments.
                                               Grounds                      Counterarguments
              Experimental group               M               SD             M             SD
              Control group                    12.08 %         11.48          2.46 %       3.67
              Script for the construction ofsingle arguments33.80 %11.19      5.36 %       8.07
              Script for the construction ofargumentation sequences16.36 %17.785.99 %      3.95
              Combined condition               30.64 %          6.10        13.00 %        6.59

    The    computer-supported  collaboration  scripts also affected  the epistemic dimension  (see    table 2). With
regard to the application of new knowledge, the script for the construction of single arguments produced a
negative effect (F(1, 36) = 5.47; p < .05; 2 = .13). Neither a main effect of the script for the construction of
argumentation sequences (F(1, 36) = 1.91; n.s.) nor an interaction effect of both scripts on application of new
knowledge could be found (F(1, 36) = 0.00; n.s.).
    The    script for  the construction of   argumentation  sequences    significantly and  strongly   increases  the
application of prior knowledge (F(1, 36) = 11.24; p < .05; 2 = .24). Neither a main effect of the script for the
construction of single arguments (F(1, 36) = 0.00; n.s.) nor an interaction effect of both scripts could be found (F(1,
36) = 0.90; n.s.) with respect to application of prior knowledge.

Table 2. Epistemic dimension by experimental group: Means and standard deviations of application of new
knowledge and application of prior knowledge.
                                               Application of               Application of
                                               new knowledge                prior knowledge
              Experimental group                 M             SD             M             SD
              Control group                    7.97            3.45         13.80           7.93
              Script for the construction ofsingle arguments5.073.75        16.80           8.52
              Script for the construction ofargumentation sequences6.234.16 27.00          12.78
              Combined condition               3.43            4.03          24.20          8.72

    Both scripts successfully facilitated the specific processes of argumentative knowledge construction they
aimed at. Supported with the script for the construction of single arguments, the percentage of grounds doubles,
but  still only    one third  of  the claims  is  supported    with grounds.  Both  scripts  double    the  share of
counterarguments, but typically learners do not construct counterarguments, but argue in favor of one claim
only. Both scripts seem to have specific "side effects" on the epistemic dimension. Learners with the script for
the construction of single arguments less frequently show applications of new knowledge and learners with the
script for the construction of argumentation sequences show applications of prior knowledge more frequently
than   learners without  scripts. In order to illustrate these effects on the epistemic  and formal     dimension of
argumentative knowledge construction simultaneously, a discourse segment of a learning group supported by
the script for the construction of argumentation sequences is presented next. This discourse segment has been
selected to illustrate a discourse with a high frequency of application of prior knowledge.
    The learning case that the learners work on in this example is about a pupil who is afraid not to make
mathematics class next year, because he thinks he is not talented for this subject (internal stable self-attribution).
His parents equally attribute their son's failure on lack of talent (internal stable attribution of others), whereas
his teacher ascribes his failures to a lack of efforts (internal variable attribution of others). In the learning group

                                                          
of three, 32 messages in two threads have been sent to discuss and analyze this case. This means that two
"argumentation" messages have been followed by 17 messages automatically labeled "counterargument" and 13
messages   automatically   labeled   "integration".  The    participants did  not  replace  or modify   any   of  the
automatically set  subjects   of the messages.   Eight   messages   from  one of  the discussion   threads have  been
selected for the example illustration.

 (1) Karin: Argument
 If you think that you are not talented for math, you have little chance for success!

   (2) Karin: Counterargument
   What do you think? Can you compensate lack of talent by learning?

     (3) Ella: Integration
     I think you may compensate lack of talent momentarily by learning, than you will forget what
     you have learned, because you are happy that you are done with learning.

      (4) Karin: Counterargument
      But you can learn in order to improve your performance, can't you?

         (5) Ella: Integration
         Yes, but math is one of these subjects you can drill and practice, but only with the help of others,
         because when you are learning all alone you lack certainty all of a sudden, you get scared and
         you don't know right from wrong anymore.

          (6) Karin: Counterargument
          That's right, you might need help for learning, maybe friends who know their stuff better than
          you. But you still can learn!

            (7) Ella: Integration
            Yes, he has to be at home and learn, but certainly only as a "MUST" ­ he won't have fun.

              (8) Karin: Counterargument
              You may be more successful with fun things. But how many things that need to be learned are
              fun to do?
Figure 3. Schematic representation of a segment of one of the discussion threads from an example discourse
that has been supported by the script for the construction of argumentation sequences.

   In this example (see figure 3), the first message (1) of Karin labeled "Argument" is a short explanation of the
learning case which can be categorized as application of new knowledge, because the attribution theory states
that the  attribution for   failure  on   lack of    talent decreases    chances  for success.   Ignoring   the label
"Counterargument", the same learning partner, Karin, continues the discussion thread and (2) replies to herself
with a message containing questions that point beyond analyzing the case with the attribution theory. Karin's
learning partner, Ella, (3) replies to that in a message labeled "Integration" and constructs a claim that is
supported by a ground, but shows application of prior knowledge rather than analyzing the case with adequate
concepts from attribution theory. Karin (4) replies with a message labeled "Counterargument". Her message
actually contains a counterargument (without grounds and qualifiers) to Ella's claim that learning compensates
lack of talent only momentarily, but Karin does not return to analyze the case with new knowledge, but rather
discusses  other aspects   of  the  learning case    and applies prior   knowledge.   Another  (5)  message   labeled
"Integration" from Ella follows. However, this message is actually rather a counterargument then an integration.
On   the epistemic dimension,    Ella  does  not apply   new   knowledge,    but yet  again introduces  new   aspects
(application of prior knowledge), namely instructional approaches towards the subject mathematics. Karin's (6)
message "Counterargument" again actually contains a counterargument. On the epistemic dimension, she also
applies prior knowledge. Ella then (7) turns to other motivational approaches (application of prior knowledge) to
make her point that learning is of little help in this case, but again does not refer to the theory which is to be
learned. Her "Integration" message can be coded as counterargument. Karin finally (8) notes that motivation is
important for learning, but not sufficient to explain performance differences in different subjects (application of
prior knowledge). In opposing Ella, Karin constructs a counterargument.
   First of all, it can be noted that learners apply an argument-counterargument sequence. The learners do not
always   respond  to  the  given   labels of   their messages    in the  intended  manner,   e.g., they construct  a

                                                          
counterargument even if their message has been automatically labeled "integration". Learners do not always
follow the prescriptions of the script for the construction of argumentation sequences. But as the results show,
the computer-supported collaboration scripts still affect the processes of argumentative knowledge construction
in the intended direction.
  With regard to the formal argumentative dimension, Ella claims that learning may not improve performance,
which she supports with various grounds (messages 3, 5, and 7). Karin constructs the counterargument that
learning  may    improve     performance     (messages  4, 6,  and   8). With    regard         to the epistemic    dimension,   the
participants appear to wander off the actual task to analyze the case with the help of concepts from attribution
theory (application      of  new   knowledge).   Instead,  learners  apply  prior            knowledge  starting with   the  second
message   of  this discussion        thread. Karin  is  asking   the question    which           leads learners    to discuss   their
epistemological beliefs on the efficacy of learning.

Research Question 2 on outcomes of argumentative knowledge construction
In order to answer research question 2, the influence of the two computer-supported collaboration scripts on the
outcomes   of  argumentative       knowledge   construction,  namely     domain-specific           knowledge    and   knowledge  on
argumentation was examined.
  Neither    the script     for  the construction  of  single arguments    (F(1,         36) = 0.33; n.s.), nor  the  script for the
construction of argumentation sequences (F(1, 36) = 0.08; n.s.), nor the interaction of both scripts (F(1, 36) = 1.27;
n.s.) facilitated the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge. Learners of all four experimental conditions did
not differ with respect to the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge.
  Knowledge on argumentation could be specifically facilitated with the scripts.

Table  4. Outcomes       of  argumentative    knowledge   construction   by experimental             group:  Means    and standard
deviations of domain-specific knowledge and knowledge on argumentation.
                                      Domain-specific                       Knowledge on the construction of
                                      knowledge                  single arguments                    argumentation sequences
 Experimental group                    M           SD             M               SD                     M             SD
 Control group                        4.33         2.16          3.08            1.08                   2.23           1.65
 Script for the construction ofsingle arguments4.701.49          4.17            1.55                   2.03           1.69
 Script for the construction of
 argumentation sequences              4.90         2.52          2.70            1.21                   5.25           1.05
 Combined condition                   3.77         2.12          4.78            0.75                   4.55           0.85

  The script for the construction of single arguments strongly facilitated knowledge on the construction of
single arguments   (F(1,     36) = 17.97; p  <   .05; 2 =  .33), whereas    no   effect         of the script  for  construction  of
argumentation sequences (F(1, 36) = 0.10; n.s.) nor an interaction effect of both scripts could be found (F(1, 36) =
1.79; n.s.).
  The     script for     the construction     of argumentation    sequences      strongly          facilitated knowledge     on  the
construction of argumentation sequences (F(1, 36) = 41.50; p < .05; 2 = .54), whereas no effect of the script for
the construction of single arguments (F(1, 36) = 1.10; n.s.) nor an interaction effect of both scripts could be found
(F(1, 36) = 0.39; n.s.).
  Although all experimental groups acquired a similar amount of domain-specific knowledge, both scripts
successfully facilitated the acquisition of knowledge on the construction of single arguments or the construction
of argumentation sequences. The learners were able to construct single arguments and argument sequences
depending on what the computer-supported collaboration script aimed at. The scripts did not interact and can be
combined to foster knowledge on the construction of single arguments as well as knowledge on the construction
of argumentation sequences at the same time.

CONCLUSIONS
Computer-supported collaborative learning can be realized in the curriculum of university studies and facilitated
with computer-supported collaboration scripts. Compared to traditional classroom settings, students can thus be
encouraged to actively construct arguments (cf. Cohen & Lotan, 1995; Weinberger, 2003). Potential settings for
CSCL in university lectures could be that learners build small groups and work on problems together via the
internet.  Computer-supported         collaboration   scripts  can   facilitate  specific          processes    and   outcomes    of
argumentative knowledge construction of students in higher education. The analysis of the formal argumentative

                                                              
dimension of the discourse within the learning groups of the control condition showed in line with other studies
(Kuhn,  1991;  Kuhn    et al., 1997),   that learners  hardly base   their   claims on  grounds  and   hardly    construct
counterarguments.   The    computer-supported        collaboration   scripts   showed   that  they    can  improve    the
argumentative discourse quality of students. Scripts could be integrated into a CSCL environment and proved to
facilitate the percentage of grounds and counterarguments that learners construct in argumentative discourse.
Thus, the scripts improved the formal argumentative dimension and influenced the epistemic dimension of
argumentative knowledge construction. Learners with the script for the construction of single arguments did not
as frequently engage in the application of new knowledge as learners without the script. The script for the
construction of argumentation sequences facilitated the application of prior knowledge. Computer-supported
collaboration  scripts may     activate prior   knowledge   and    facilitate  learners to come    up  with   alternative
explanations. An explanation for the pattern of results with respect to the processes of argumentative knowledge
construction is that the scripts provided a structure that defined the activities of the learners with respect to the
formal argumentative dimension, but shifted the focus of learners away from the question with what kind of
content this structure is supposed to be filled. Thus, learners may have been more concerned to satisfy the
affordances on the formal argumentative dimension than on the epistemic dimension. Learners were challenged
to find grounds and counterarguments, but not supported with respect to the question on what contents these
grounds and counterarguments should be based on. Therefore, the prior knowledge may have been more easily
available to learners to apply than the new knowledge concepts that were to be learned.
  In line with other studies (e.g., Kollar et al., 2003), the scripts facilitated knowledge on argumentation on the
specific levels they were aiming at, but did not facilitate domain-specific knowledge. Assumptions that the
construction of arguments also leads to the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge through elaboration of the
learning material cannot be fortified (Baker, 2003). An explanation for this is that learners supported with the
scripts focused on the construction of arguments, but may have based their arguments rarely on new knowledge,
which has been found to be related to acquisition of domain-specific knowledge (Weinberger, 2003). It can be
assumed that parts of these results can be traced back to the specific effects of the scripts on the processes of
argumentative   knowledge      construction.  Therefore,  future   scripts    might need   to  foster both  the   formal
argumentative  and  the   epistemic   dimension   of  argumentative   knowledge     construction in   order to   facilitate
students to learn to argue on a general level as well as within their domain. There are indications, however, that
knowledge  on   argumentation    may    foster  acquisition  of domain-specific     knowledge    in the   long   run (see
EUROSCALE project at http://www.euroscale.net; Kollar et al., 2003). In reference to this prior work, the
scripts applied in this study may be an apt instructional method to foster knowledge on argumentation in CSCL
environments and future argumentative knowledge construction scenarios.
  Knowledge on argumentation is important for lifelong learning and should be further developed (Andriessen
et. al., 2003; Linn & Slotta, 2000). Based on this study, consequences for practitioners as well as researchers can
be drawn. In the educational practice of universities, specific scripts in problem-oriented environments may
endorse  argumentation     trainings.   Scripts  for  argumentative     knowledge    construction   can   activate   prior
knowledge of learners and facilitate acquisition of argumentative knowledge without impeding acquisition of
domain-specific  knowledge.     The   study  has  also shown    that CSCL      environments   could endorse    university
curricula and thus change educational practice. Teachers or coaches can integrate computer-supported scripts
into ongoing collaboration processes with little additional effort. With regard to future CSCL research, there is a
lack of studies on  computer-supported       collaboration  scripts  in  field settings  like classrooms   or  university
lectures in different domains. Additionally, we need to further investigate the combination of script components
with different goal    dimensions,  e.g., scripts that  also  facilitate the   epistemic  dimension   of  argumentative
knowledge construction (Weinberger et al., 2005). We therefore suggest systematizing the effects of computer-
supported collaboration scripts in universities. An important step in making scripts available and applicable in
different university departments is to formalise script components that aim at specific aspects of argumentative
knowledge  construction.    Computer-supported       collaboration   scripts   may   thus  support  specific   forms   of
argumentative discourse within different domains and CSCL may become an endorsement to argumentative
knowledge construction in higher education.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The study was partly funded by the DFG and KALEIDOSCOPE ­ a European network of excellence.

REFERENCES
Anderson,  R.C.,   &   Pearson,   P.D.    (1984).    A schema-     theoretic   view  of   basic  processes    in reading
       comprehension. In P. D. Pearson (Ed.), Handbook of reading research (255-291). New York: Longman.

                                                           
Andriessen, J. E. B., Baker, M., & Suthers, D. (Eds.). (2003). Arguing to learn. Confronting cognitions in
       computer-supported collaborative learning environments. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Baker, M. (2003). Computer-mediated argumentative interactions for the co-elaboration of scientific notions. In
       J. Andriessen & M. Baker & D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to learn: confronting cognitions in computer-
       supported collaborative learning environments (Vol. 1, pp. 1-25). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Baker, M., & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a CSCL environment. Journal of Computer
       Assisted Learning, 13, 175-193.
Bell, P. (1997). Using argument representations to make thinking visible for individuals and groups. In R. Hall,
       N. Miyake, & N. Enyedy (Eds.), Proceedings of CSCL '97: The Second International Conference on
       Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, (pp. 10-19). Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Chi, M.   T. H.,  DeLeeuw,    n., Chiu,  M.  H., &   LaVancher,  C.  (1994). Eliciting  self-explanations improves
       understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Cohen,   E.  G., &   Lotan, R. A.    (1995). Producing  equal-status interaction in the heterogeneous   classroom.
       American Educational Research Journal, 32, 99-120.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
       design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL? (pp. 61-91). Heerlen:
       Open Universiteit Nederland.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., & Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering collaborative knowledge construction with
       visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12, 213-232.
Hoppe, H. U., Gaßner, K., Mühlenbrock, M., & Tewissen, F. (2000). Distributed visual language environments
       for cooperation and learning. Journal Group Decision and Negotiation, 9, 3, 205-220.
Kirschner, P., Buckingham Shum, S. J., & Carr, C. S. (Eds.). (2003). Visualizing argumentation. Software tools
       for collaborative and educational sense making. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. (2003). Cooperation scripts for computer-supported collaborative learning. In
       B.   Wasson    & R.  Baggetun    & U.  Hoppe   &  S. Ludvigsen   (Eds.),  Proceedings   of the International
       Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning - CSCL 2003, COMMUNITY EVENTS -
       Communication and Interaction (pp. 59-60). Bergen, Norway: InterMedia.
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kuhn, D., Shaw, V., & Felton, M. (1997). Effects of dyadic interaction on argumentative reasoning. Cognition
       and Instruction, 15, 3, 287-315.
Leitão, S. (2000). The potential of argument in knowledge building. Human Development, 43, 332-360.
Linn, M. C., & Slotta, J. D. (2000). WISE science. Educational Leadership, 29-32.
Marttunen,   M.,    & Laurinen,   L. (2001).  Learning  of  argumentation  skills in networked    and  face-to-face
       environments. Instructional Science, 29, 127-153.
Nussbaum, E. M., Hartley, K., Sinatra, G. M., Reynolds, R. E., & Bendixen, L. D. (2002, April). Enhancing the
       quality   of on-line discussions.  Paper  presented  at the Annual meeting   of  the American   Educational
       Research Association, New Orleans, LA.
O'Donnell, A. M. (1999). Structuring dyadic interaction through scripted cooperation. In A. M. O'Donnell & A.
       King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 179-196). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schmidt, H. G. (1993). Foundations of problem-based learning: some explanatory notes. Medical Education, 27,
       422-432.
Stein, N.   L., &   Bernas, R.  S. (1999).   The early emergence    of argumentative   knowledge   and  skill. In J.
       Andriessen & P. Coirier (Eds.), Foundations of argumentative text processing (pp. 97-116). Amsterdam:
       Amsterdam University Press.
Suthers,  D. D.,    & Hundhausen,    C. D.   (2001). Learning  by  constructing  collaborative representations:  An
       empirical comparison of three alternatives. In P. Dillenbourg & A. Eurelings & K. Hakkarainen (Eds.),
       European perspectives on computer-supported collaborative learning (pp. 577-592). Maastricht, NL:
       University of Maastricht.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weinberger, A. (2003). Scripts for computer-supported collaborative learning. Effects of social and epistemic
       cooperation scripts on collaborative knowledge construction. Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich.
       Available at: http://edoc.ub.uni-muenchen.de/archive/00001120/01/Weinberger_Armin.pdf.
Weinberger, A. & Fischer, F. (in press). A framework to analyze argumentative knowledge construction in
       computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
       collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33(1), 1-30.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and emotion. Psychological Review, 92,
       548-573.

                                                          
