 Macroscopic Study of the Social Networks Formed
                      in Web-based Discussion Forums

                                               Yau-Yuen Yeung
                                            Department of Science
                                    Hong Kong Institute of Education
                                             yyyeung@ied.edu.hk

       Abstract. It is proposed and outlined in this paper on how to investigate the macroscopic features
       of those large-size social networks formed in web-based discussion forums. Some preliminary
       results on the pattern of the distribution of replies for individual topics, views for individual topics
       and   co-discussants  of  individual participants  will be presented.     The  present  results will be
       compared with those found in other areas of large-size social networks and the significances and
       future   work  on   those macroscopic   properties of   social  networks  for better understanding   of
       computer-supported collaborative learning will be discussed.

       Keywords:      Social Network     Analysis,  Web-based     Discussion    Forum,   Computer-Mediated
       Communication

INTRODUCTION
  Since mid1990s, social network theory (see, e.g. Wasserman and Faust, 1994; Degenne and Forse, 1999; and
Batten, Casti and Thord, 1995) has been employed by a number of researchers to analyze students' interaction
and learning    in various  computer-supported    collaborative  learning  (CSCL)    environment   as   facilitated by
different kinds of computer-mediated communication systems in several university programs.         Although most of
those prior network analyses (see, e.g. Haythornthwaite, 1998; Palonen and Hakkarainen 2000; Cho, Stefanone
and Gay, 2002; Martinez et al., 2003; and Aviv, Erlich and Ravid, 2003) were very intensive, were established
in varied settings and were often coupled with qualitative data as collected from face-to-face interviews for
triangulation of their results, yet one serious limitation of their work comes from the fact that the size of their
networks under investigation is usually very small (ranging from a dozen to a hundred only).       This shortcoming
will not only cast doubt on the accuracy and general validity of their results but also prevent them from studying
many significantly important macroscopic features of social networks such as identification of the network type,
distributions of various network properties, formation of giant cluster and percolation phenomena etc which
have attracted extensive research interest by many researchers on different types of social networks (e.g. the
Internet, the World Wide Web, phone call networks, citation networks, research collaboration networks, country
roadmaps, airline routing networks, electricity transmission networks, spread of AIDS and the food web) in the
last few years (see, e.g. Albert and Barabasi, 2002; Buchanan, 2002 and Watts, 2003).
  There     are several  key   channels   such as  web-based/online     discussion   forum, email,  ICQ/chat    room,
NetMeeting (or equivalent GnomeMeeting in Linux/Unix systems), phone call, scheduled/unscheduled face-to-
face discussion which are usually found or adopted in many CSCL environments. Online discussion forum is
specifically chosen    for the   present study  because   by   default it can   record  almost all the   participants'
communication information and the messages themselves can readily be retrieved for content analysis without
additional efforts for hardware or software modification.      Furthermore, Haythornthwaite's (1998) study on the
growth of community among distance learners revealed that web-board was the most popular (with nearly 100%
usage) channel     of communication   adopted   by those  distance    learners enrolled for a  master  degree   in  his
university.

IDEAS AND METHODOLOGY
First of all, we can construct two kinds of social network from a web-based discussion forum.       It is known that
the mathematical description of a network is a graph (Wasserman and Faust, 1994; and Yeung, Liu and Ng,
2005) which is denoted by G(N, R), where N is the set of nodes or actors and R is the set of relationships or
links between these nodes. In a given discussion forum, there is a set of participants P who post the set of
messages M in it.     Hence, an obvious network for the discussion forum can be formed by taking P and M

                                                         
altogether as the node set, i.e. N = {P, M}. The relationship set S is imply "who submits/posts that message" and
this links up individual elements in P with one or more elements in M, i.e. a one-to-many mapping from P to M
because one participant can post many messages in the discussion forum. It is noted that we exclude multi-
authorship by treating the one who posts the message as the sole node in our network but unlike research
publications, multi-authored messages are rather rare in discussion forum.       Let us call it the basic network
GB({P, M}, S) and it is obviously a kind of bipartite graph (Wasserman and Faust, 1994) in which there is no
link or relationship given to relate elements within the set P or within the set M. Can we have an objective way
to provide   the linkages  amongst    certain elements  within the set   P?  And  what    are the  significances    or
implications of studying those linkages for the understanding of CSCL?
     To answer the questions raised in the last paragraph, we shall borrow the idea of research collaboration
from Newman      (2001) who   has constructed   several very  large-size (up to 1.5   million nodes)   collaboration
networks of researchers in various major fields of science by identifying two researchers as "socially linked" if
they have published at least one paper together. In an online discussion forum, there is  a topic starter who raises
a question, announces a message or expresses his/her view on a certain issue and this forum message may be
subsequently replied by one or more forum participants.   Those followers and the original    topic starter can all be
treated as "socially linked" because they have mutually exchanged ideas, shared information or learnt from the
peers (there are of course some rare cases that the topic starter never returns to view the follow-up messages).
Therefore, a second kind of network called the collaborative learning network GC(P, MS) can be constructed by
taking the forum participants P as the set of nodes and the relationship set consists of all the submission of
messages MS to individual topics for indicating the co-discussion of a particular topic by various participants.
     Based on the afore-mentioned conceptual framework and the usual social network theory, the following
procedures have been adopted to construct both the basic network GB and the collaborative learning network GC
for groups of online discussion forums:
1.   Retrieve the forum participant's name (maybe nickname) from every message of a chosen forum and put
     all names for a particular topic in the same line (separated by a certain delimiter) to implicitly denote their
     relationships.  A special Windows-based program called the "HAS Centre Browser" (available from the
     author)  has  been   developed   to provide the capability to  complete    this task automatically  while   the
     researcher uses it to browse the online forum. Some other relevant information such as the number of
     views for a given topic can also be retrieved by this program.
2.   Participants' names from all topics of one or a group of forums are combined into a single file, sorted and
     duplicates eliminated and re-labeled with unique sequential numbers.     This step can be done by using the
     MS Excel program.
3.   Participant  names   in the original computer  files for Step 1 above   are then  converted   into the unique
     number labels as given in the Step 2. A small program has been developed to accomplish this task so that
     the data will be given in a format suitable for input by other social network analysis computer programs.
4.   Two   powerful   and  well-known     shareware/freeware  programs   called UCINET      (Borgatti, Everett and
     Freeman, 2002) and PAJEK (Batagelj and Mrvar 1999) for social network analysis can be used to extract
     various network statistics and draw the corresponding network graphs for providing a macroscopic view
     of the complex networks.
     As an initial study, a public website called Linux Forum (http://www.linuxform.com/forums/) is chosen
because the forums inside are very well-documented and are provided with many useful statistics.        Unlike the
Microsoft Windows, Linux is an open-source operating system which has rather little official technical supports
and so peer support and collaborative learning are very essential in building up the knowledge base.        On the
other hand, authors need to register with a unique login name before they are allowed to post messages in any
forum and this can effectively eliminate the problem of misidentification of forum participants. There are some
moderators present to keep the forum discussions evolving in a proper manner and the content analysis of some
randomly selected messages inside many forums of this website reveals that most forum participants are very
professional in  attitude and    most of  their messages   do  contain   meaningful   and   useful knowledge   and
experiences for peer sharing or collaborative learning.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
For the Linux Forum website mentioned above, the HAS Centre Browser was used to retrieve messages from 36
forums (grouped under 6 main areas) during the period of the first two weeks in Nov., 2004.     As extracted from
all those messages, there were in total 24,384 topics which were followed by 51,724 replies and 53,070 counts
of participant names. Four areas of forums, namely Linux Forum, Miscellaneous, Linux News Discussions and
Rants were excluded from our study because their themes are either not directly related to the collaborative
learning or sharing of knowledge on the Linux systems or they are read-only archives copied from other Usenet
groups.

                                                         
   Figure 1 shows a semi-log pilot for the frequency distribution of the number of replies for individual topics
posted in all the 36 forums under study.    The greatest number of follow-up replies for a particular topic is 148.
Since most topics were followed by 30 or less replies, the sparsely distributed data for higher number of replies
were truncated from Figure 1.     As most data nearly fall along a straight line, this set of data is very likely to
follow the exponential distribution which is commonly found in the medical and industrial engineering field.
For instance, the life span of a person or of an engineering product follows this kind of "memoryless" right-
skewed distribution whose probability density function has the form p(k) = O exp(-O k) where the parameter O =
0.266 yields the best fitted straight line in Figure   1. This result implies that  a given topic started in any forum is
most likely unreplied at all and on average there are 1/O = 3.76 replies.        In research collaboration networks, the
degree of co-authorship (number of authors per paper) and the degree collaboration (number of collaborators per
author) also follow this exponential distribution (Yeung, Liu and Ng, 2005).
   Since there are many people who simply want to find answers (or passively learn without sharing or mutual
communication)   from   other  forum     participants' conversation,    Figure 2  shows the  frequency    distribution of
views for all messages posted around a given topic. After some critical examination, it is discovered that those
data actually follow a lognormal   distribution with    the form  p(k)  =      1kS2Sexp( (ln k  M )2 2S 2 )   where M  =
4.3 and S = 0.92 yield the best fitted "bell-shape" curve.       This is a new kind of network distribution which has
not been identified by any previous researchers in most well-known large-size networks even though lognormal
distribution is quite commonly used to describe various biological, social and economic phenomena.            This result
means that for each group of messages posted around a given topic of this Linux Forum website, there were in
total most likely viewed (exp(M+S2/2) =) 113 times or in average (exp(M-S2) =) 32 times by other people.
However, we must be aware that the number of views per topic will naturally grow with time and be cautious in
our interpretation that one or more search engines (e.g. Google) are scanning through all messages at regular
time intervals and their activities are recorded in the view count of this forum, yielding a same rate of growth for
the view count in every messages posted.     Further investigation will be required to uncover and explain for the
occurrence of this kind of distribution.

Figure 1: Frequency   distribution    of follow-up   replies     Figure  2:  Frequency      distribution  of  views    for
for a given topic posted.                                        messages posted around a given topic.

   To study the interaction between forum participants, we need to employ the UCINET and PAJEK software
to carry out the very time-consuming and memory intensive computation. As an initial analysis, a smaller
collaborative learning network GC was constructed for 4 forums in the General Linux Issues area which contains
9,327  topics with 3,214     different participants    in total.  Figure  3 shows   a log-log  plot for   the  frequency
distribution of co-discussants of individual participants.       Co-discussants are defined to be those who have ever
posted messages for a certain topic. These data could reveal many useful characteristics such as centrality, social
roles, cohesion, and cluster formation of a social network. For this short paper, we just present one key result ­
the data follows a power-law form distribution p(k) ~ k-n where the power-law exponent n = 1.20 for the best
fitted straight line given in Figure 3. Power-law form distribution is a characteristic form of the so-called "scale-
free" network (Albert and Barabasi, 2002) which is commonly found in many other kinds of social networks
and it is postulated to come from the "rich get richer" phenomenon or a combined effect of "growth" and
"preferential attachment".   For examples, Newman (2001) and Yeung, Liu and Ng (2005) also got the power-
law form for the productivity (or number of papers per authors) in the research collaboration networks and got
the values of the exponent n = 2.1, 3.41 and 2.86 for the physics teaching, computer science and medicine
networks, respectively.   In the present network, the most active    participant  has 633   co-discussants while 23%   of

                                                            
participants have no co-discussant (as
all topics  started by   them   were   not
replied by anyone else at all and they
did  not    participate  in  other   topic
starters' discussion).  Another 29% of
the participants have just only one co-
discussant.     These       results    are
comparable with the result for physics
teaching  networks   in  which   32%    of
the authors have no collaborator at all
(Yeung Liu and Ng, 2005). Figure 4
reveals a global picture of the network
concerned in which each participant is
represented    by a dot    and  links  are
used   to   join    up   co-discussants.
Isolated dots  have  been   intentionally
moved    to the   circumference     of the
figure for the ease of identification.       Figure 3: Frequency distribution of co-discussants

Figure 4: The collaborative learning network of 3,214 participants (denoted by dots with straight line for co-
discussion linkage) in the 4 forums of the General Linux Issues area

CONCLUSIONS
The rationales and importance of studying large-size CSCL networks have been introduced and discussed.         A
workable framework was outlined together with a concrete example on how to analyze some online discussion
forums   in a  chosen   public  website.   Some new  and interesting results for large-size CSCL   networks were
obtained.   In particular,  it was  found  that the number  of replies for a given  topic follows  an exponential
distribution, the number of views follows a log normal distribution and the number of co-discussants follows a
power-law distribution, revealing that it is a kind of "scale free" network. All results deviate significantly from
the Poisson distribution which is a typical characteristic of a random network (Albert and Barabasi, 2002).

                                                           
   While this short paper opens a new direction of research on CSCL networks, there are still much more work
to be carried out in future.  In particular, we need to develop computer programs to efficiently extract important
network features from very large-size networks.     We could also study the time evolution of those networks by
retrieving forum data at regular time intervals (say, every 3 months).  Finally, we need to study forums in many
other types of websites to confirm if those network characteristics are actually universal in nature.        Those
macroscopic results for large-size CSCL networks will certainly help us obtain a global understanding of the
sorts of interaction and sharing between learners and could potentially be applied to design and implement some
small/medium size CSCL networks in a better way.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support from The Hong Kong Institute of Education is gratefully acknowledged.

REFERENCES
Albert, R., and Barabási, A.-L. (2002) Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Reviews of Modern Physics,
      74, 47-97.
Aviv, R.,  Erlich, Z., and   Ravid,  G. (2003)   Network   Analysis of Cooperative  Learning. Proc.     Information
      Communication Technologies in Education (ICICTE) 2003, Samos, Greece, July 2003.
Batagelj, V. and Mrvar, A. (1999) Pajek ­ Program for Large Network Analysis. [Online] http://vlado.fmf.uni-
      lj.si/pub/networks/pajek/.
Batten, D., Casti, J., and Thord, R. (1995) Networks in Action. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Borgatti, S.P., Everett, M.G.   and   Freeman,   L.C. (2002) Ucinet  for Windows:   Software  for Social    Network
      Analysis. Harvard: Analytic Technologies.
Buchanan, M. (2002) Nexus : small worlds and the groundbreaking science of networks. New York : W.W.
      Norton.
Cho, H., Stefanone, M. and Gay, G. (2002). Social network analysis of information sharing networks in a CSCL
      community.    In   Proceedings    of the   Computer-Support   for  Collaborative   Learning    (CSCL)   2002
      Conference, G. Stahl (Eds.), Jan. 7-11, Boulder Colorado, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 43-50.
Degenne, A, and M. Forse, M. (1999) Introducing Social Networks. (translated by A.Borges) London: SAGE
      Publications.
Haythornthwaite, C. (1998). A social network study of the growth of community among distance learners,
      Information Research, 4 (1). http://informationr.net/ir/4-1/paper49.html.
Martinez,  A.,  Dimitriadis,  Y., Rubia,   B., Goomez,  E.,  and de la  Fuente, P. (2003)  Combining     qualitative
      evaluation   and social   network  analysis for  the study of classroom   social interactions. Computers  &
      Education, 41, 353­368.
Newman, M.E.J. (2001) Scientific collaboration networks. I. Network construction and fundamental results.
      Physical Review E64, 016131-8.
Palonen, T., and Hakkarainen, K. (2000) Patterns of Interaction in Computer-supported Learning: A Social
      Network    Analysis.   In   B. Fishman    and S.  O'Connor-Divelbiss  (Eds.), Proceedings      of the Fourth
      International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 334-339). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Watts, D.J. (2003) Six Degrees: The science of a connected age. New York: W.W. Norton.
Wasserman, S. & Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis: methods and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press.
Yeung, Y.Y., Liu, T. C.Y. & Ng, P.H. (2005). A social network analysis of research collaboration in physics
    education. American Journal of Physics, 73(2), 145-150.

                                                          
