   Advanced Digital Video Technologies to Support
          Collaborative Learning in School Education
                                           and Beyond
Carmen Zahn, Friedrich Hesse, Matthias Finke                      Roy Pea, Michael Mills, Joseph Rosen
  Knowledge Media Research Center, Tuebingen,                  Stanford Center for Innovations in Learning,
      Computer Graphics Center, Darmstadt,                                Stanford University, CA.
                       Germany                                                         USA
                c.zahn@iwm-kmrc.de                                           roypea@stanford.edu

      Abstract. The aim of the paper is to characterize two new advanced video technology software
      systems developed for uses in collaborative learning (DIVER1 and HyperVideo2), and how they
      extend the paradigms of video use in classrooms today. The rationale for and characteristics of
      these tools are described, and early experiences with their educational uses are characterized.

      Keywords: Cognitive tools, advanced video technologies in school education, teacher education,
      collaborative knowledge construction

INTRODUCTION
In school-based education of today, video is normally utilized as supplement to teacher lectures, in order to
enrich regular lessons and to situate or visualize knowledge for a better understanding of a topic at hand.
Empirical  findings concerning the  effectiveness  of such  video supported   learning consistently    show   that
comprehension and transfer of knowledge can be facilitated by dynamic (audio)visual formats in many domains
- and that this is especially true for interactive presentations (Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt,
1997; Park & Hopkins, 1993).
   Introducing video into school-based education in the future could consist of utilizing new advanced digital
video technologies as cognitive tools that broaden the spectrum of the existing video use paradigms: Advanced
digital video has brought about new conventions of filmic expression in many areas--whether in the arts, at
home or in the workplace. In many workplaces, advanced digital video technology is not only a means of
communication   via video conference,  but is also used for collaborative video  analyses, e.g. in    the area of
professional sports, teacher education or in the life sciences. Such advanced technologies may include tools for
the selection of single video scenes from existing video information and for the direct integration of video
scenes with e-communication facilities. Thus, we are confronted with a situation where we need to establish new
components of visual literacy and digital literacy that relate to such work scenarios. Literacy concepts cannot be
restricted to static and text-based media anymore, but have to integrate the understanding, analysis and active
use of non-linear and audiovisual media as well including the use of digital video technology (Pea, 1991; Pea &
Gomez, 1992).
   To this end, advanced   digital video technologies  may  become  part  of our educational systems      and  the
question is then: How can such technologies (and new paradigms, respectively) be implemented in schools and
in educational and learning processes broadly? How does the use of digital video technology interact with the
cognitive concepts and prerequisites of students and teachers? Our two groups--in Germany and the United
States--have been working in parallel on exemplars of a paradigm that is already a part of our everyday lives,
but which has been minimally appropriated yet in K-12 education. In the present contribution, we will focus on
these two advanced educational digital video systems that were explicitly developed on the basis of cognitive
and socio-cognitive psychological and pedagogical considerations.

1 DIVERTM, WebDIVERTM, DiveTM and "Guided Noticing"TM are trademarks of Stanford University for DIVER
  software and affiliated services with patents pending. The DIVER project work has been supported by grants
  from the National Science Foundation (#0216334, #0234456, #0326497) and the Hewlett Foundation.             The
  DIVER team contributing to these efforts includes Roy Pea (Director), Michael Mills, Joe Rosen, Kenneth
  Dauber, and graduate students Robb Lindgren, Paula Wellings, Sarah Lewis and Lori Takeuchi.
2 The HyperVideo    system was     developed  at the  Computer Graphics   Center  in Darmstadt,       Germany  in
  cooperation with the Knowledge Media Reasearch Center in Tuebingen, Germany.

                                                       
DIGITAL VIDEO TECHNOLOGIES AND GROUP KNOWLEDGE PROCESSES
Learning to observe - Learning to analyze: The DIVER system was developed by the Stanford Center for
Innovations in Learning.     DIVER is based on the notion of a user "diving" into videos, i.e., creating new points
of view onto a source video and commenting on these by writing short text passages or codes (Pea, Mills,
Rosen, Dauber & Effelsberg, 2004). DIVER makes it possible to readily create an infinite variety of new digital
video clips from any video record.     A user of DIVER software "dives" into a video record by controlling--with
a mouse, joystick, or other input device--a virtual camera that can zoom and pan through space and time within
an overview window of the source video.          The   virtual  camera can  take  a snapshot   of a still image   clip, or
dynamically record a video "path" through the video to create a diveTM (which we also call a DIVER worksheet,
see figure 1 below).   A dive is made up of a collection of re-orderable "panels", each of which contains a small
key  video  frame    that represents   a clip, and   a text field that  can   contain   an annotation,    code, or   other
interpretation.    Diving  on  video   performs    an  important  action for     establishing  common     ground  that  is
characterized as "guided noticing" (Pea, in press). The use of the virtual camera for the framing of a focus
within  a complex    and  dynamic   visual   array directs  the viewer's attention   to notice  what  it  is that is thus
circumscribed, and the point-of-view authoring thus guides the viewer to that noticing act.         In this way, DIVER
can  be  used as   a tool to promote     the development   of   "professional vision"   in learning within   disciplinary
domains (Goodwin, 1994).

          Figure 1: DIVER worksheet

    Originally, DIVER's primary focus was for supporting research activities in the learning sciences (such as
interaction analysis: Jordan & Henderson, 1995), and in teacher education, where video analyses play a major
role for understanding one's own behavior and reflecting on it in relation to the behavior of others. DIVER has
also been designed to enable the active exploration of panoramic video data--where one or more digital video
cameras and associated mirrors are used to capture 360-degree horizontal imagery. In this case as well, the user
may select visual information by virtually `pointing to it' in the much larger spatio-temporal data structure of the
video, for the purposes of collaborative reflection and analysis. The final product then is a collection of separate
short video segments with annotations that represent the user's point of view on the video.
    There are two different ways users work with video using the DIVER approach. In the first, after creating a
dive using the desktop DIVER application, the user can upload it onto WebDIVER, a website for interactive
browsing, searching, and display of video clips and collaborative commentary on dives.                In an alternative
version of the WebDIVER system, one can dive on streaming video files that are made accessible through a web
server over the Internet, without either requiring the downloading of a DIVER desktop application or the media
files upon which the user dives. Using WebDIVER in either of these ways, a dive can be shared over the
Internet  among    teachers, student-to-student,   teacher-to-students,  or   in other scenarios  with    colleagues and
become    the focus   of  knowledge    building,   argumentative,   tutorial, assessment    or general    communicative
exchanges.
    On a generic level the system might be described as a cognitive tool that enables "pointing to video" and
thus helping    to develop   skills of   observation  and  noticing details   and   enhancing   the probability   that  in
collaborative processes, the focus of attention and negotiating of meaning between participants in a conversation
will build upon a common ground. With DIVER it becomes obvious that advanced technology may not only
amplify existing kinds of activities and communication, but that it might augment our spectrum of activities and
initiate entirely new forms of learning (Pea, 1985).
    The DIVER system distinctively enables what its creators call "point of view" authoring of tours of existing
video materials in a way that supports sharing, collaboration, and knowledge building around a common ground
of reference (Pea, in press; also see Goldman-Segal, 1998 and Stevens et al., 2002 for related prior work). This

                                                           
form of communication with video is important for tapping the powerful potentials of video-enhanced learning
in the classroom.

  Learning    to  integrate text and   video -  learning  to design: The     web-based  HyperVideo    system   for
collaborative learning was   developed  at the  Computer   Graphics  Center/Darmstadt   in  cooperation with  the
Knowledge Media Research Center/Tübingen. It is based on the idea of "annotating movies," i.e. selecting video
segments from a source video and having spatio-temporal hyperlinks added to video: Users of the HyperVideo
system can create dynamic sensitive regions within video materials and add multiple links to these sensitive
regions. The links can consist of data files uploaded from a local computer, as well as URLs. The links can then
be discussed by means of an integrated e-communication tool. Thus, users can include their own annotations and
knowledge in a video and share them with others in a group or community. The overall design approach
encompasses several steps: (1) information is mainly presented by video, (2) knowledge can be collaboratively
expanded by means of both dynamic links and written e-communication, and (3) the process of knowledge
building is reflected in a  resulting hypervideo structure   we denote    as a `dynamic information  space'   of a
collaborating group (DIS, Chambel, Zahn & Finke, 2004).The system is based on client/server architecture. The
web-based graphical user interface (GUI) is shown in figure 2. A special video player (upper left part, see
below)   displays the  spatio-temporal   hyperlinks (white   rectangles)   within  the  video frame   and  offers
functionalities in order to create new video annotations. The separated navigation space below the video player
helps the users to navigate within the DIS. On the right side of the screen, additional information and the users'
discussions/comments are displayed. Newly created video annotations are immediately transferred from the
client to the server in order to be instantly shareable by the community.
  On a generic level, the HyperVideo system is as a cognitive tool enabling the linking of video information
thus helping  users to learn  to establish non-linear  information structures   and to focus  their attention and
discussion in collaborative learning on associated concepts or related external representations of knowledge
(e.g., a visible object and a text, or visible object and a formula). Such uses have been discussed in the context
of performing collaborative hypervideo design projects (Chambel, Zahn & Finke, 2004). A respective program
and the technology were evaluated and further developed during three psychology courses at the University of
Muenster/Germany    that were   planned according   to an instructional   program based on  courses  of hypertext
writing, originally developed by Stahl and Bromme (2004).

         Figure 2: Graphical user interface (GUI) of HyperVideo

ADVANCED DIGITAL VIDEO SYSTEMS AS `RHETORICAL PROBLEM SPACES'
IN COLLABORATIVE SITUATIONS
  Stahl and Bromme (2004) - applying Bereiter & Scardamalias (1987) model of knowledge transformation to
the process of learning by hypertext design - assume that the peculiarities of hypertext may influence the process
of learning in very specific ways: 1) Hypertexts are non-linear media, so hypertext design processes do not only
include linear writing processes, but also the selection and creation of small "nodes" and the representation of
concept relations by links and an overall structure (integration). Also multiple ways of "reading" the hypertext
must be considered (e.g., multiple audience perspectives). This should lead learners to a very deep elaboration of
content. 2) Hypertext design problems (due to their complex nature) are solved in cooperation and collaboration
with others, so the production process has to be coordinated in a group. This should lead to collaborative
knowledge building and knowledge exchange. 3) Hypertext design has just begun to emerge, so that even
among  professionals  different  `metaphors' (= genre   knowledge  and    mental models  of the medium)   can  be

                                                        
applied. To be able to work and learn, students have to consciously develop and negotiate upon a joint idea of
`what a hypertext is' as a first step of their coordinated work. Finding an appropriate metaphor should lead to
developing discourse knowledge, on the one hand, and further joint elaborations of the content, on the other
hand.  These  assumptions    are also   substantiated   by empirical   results: The  reflection  of different  audience
perspectives has been found superior to not doing so. The thorough evaluation of links representing semantic
relations between nodes has been found to lead to a deeper elaboration than not using such activities. And
finally, a space metaphor showed to guide knowledge transformation processes better than a book metaphor of
hypertext (Stahl & Bromme, 2004).
   Similar assumptions can be made for hypervideo design processes, too. As was described in the previous
section, we view advanced digital video technologies as cognitive tools according to a perspective of distributed
intelligence (Pea 1993, 2004). Merging this view with the works on hypertext design fostering knowledge
transformation processes (Stahl & Bromme, 2004), we generally perceive advanced digital video technologies as
establishing new rhetorical problem spaces with their own rhetorical rules. These rhetorical problem spaces can
well be  understood   in the sense   of Bereiter    and Scardamalia   (1987)    who  assumed  two   problem   spaces as
important for text writing: the content problem space and the rhetoric problem space.
   However, because in the present context we have to deal with digital video, the rhetoric problem spaces in
hypervideo   design  tasks are  (audio-)visual  ones    instead  of being   merely  based  on text.  Consequently,   the
rhetorical rules of our new rhetorical problem spaces relate mainly to visual and filmic codes (such as mise en
scène and montage), rather than relating solely to text. And hypervideo design as a rhetoric problem, finally,
includes relating to different text genres, to the visual codes and styles of pictures/graphical displays and to the
dynamic visual codes of film and animation. This, in turn, constitutes the educational value of such tasks.

COLLABORATIVE ACTIVITIES INVOLVING ADVANCED VIDEO TECHNOLOGIES
   We are now exploring in pilot studies a variety of ways that collaboration among school students can be
advanced   in learning   using advanced     video   technologies  such   as the two  systems  we    have  described. In
WebDIVER, learners can collaboratively analyze video records from archival sources (e.g. science videos), or
from video they have themselves collected (e.g. of fieldtrips, art museums, classrooms). In the HyperVideo
system, learners and teachers can collaboratively create hypervideo documents (e.g. in university courses, as
mentioned above) on the basis of existing or of self-shot videos. In both the Stanford and German software
systems, collaborative video work can take place either face to face in a computer-intensive school setting or
after-school  club,   or  over   computer    networks,     involving   distant  locations,   either  synchronously   or
asynchronously. These are the main features that distinguish the two systems from related works. Moreover, in
both systems, learning scientists can also collaboratively engage with video, to interpret and analyze educational
interactions or other behaviors of interest to their studies.
   In preliminary work with the WebDIVER collaborative video analysis framework, we have found utility in
the following scenarios: (1) pre-service secondary teachers in Stanford's school of education, creating dives of
ten-minute unedited videorecordings of their own teaching, which they analyze with respect to the rubrics which
their faculty mentors use to evaluate their work; (2) learning science doctoral students collaboratively analyzing
teaching  videorecords   according   to different   disciplinary perspectives   (anthropology,   linguistics, sociology,
developmental psychology, educational psychology, cognitive science) and then working to combine them to
deepen the quality of interaction analyses; (3) distributed researchers working to analyze video data from user
studies, in this case, of preschool children interacting with a touch-screen video-based storytelling system we
call KiddieDIVER, and providing a collective set of recommendations via a dive on these data that was shared
with the software engineer over the web for review and implementations of software improvements based on
insights from the collaborative video analysis activity; (4) faculty use in preparing dives on videos of secondary
educational practices that are used in lectures to exemplify and explore theoretical concepts from the research
literature used in their courses (e.g., cognitive apprenticeship, scaffolding, academic language); and (5) a film
studies professor working with his students to compare several different film versions of the Shakespeare Play
Henry V.
   In  each  of these scenarios,  we    are finding  that  collaborative diving  requires  working    in new   rhetorical
spaces, in cooperation and coordination with others. We make several points on the last scenario to exemplify
the transformative nature of such activities with respect to common pedagogical methods: Film students spend
considerable time studying major filmmakers, film genres, the grammar of cinematography (Metz, 1974), as
well  as narrative techniques    and the  animated   special  effects  that have   defined recent   film developments.
DIVER    provides  a  new  tool  for  the   faculty member    and   film student  to develop   the  web   of  perceptive
knowledge that ties together the history of films, filmmakers, film methods and techniques and film criticism. In
a film studies  course   now underway     using DIVER      at Stanford,  graduate   students  in film are  studying  the
relationship between the actor and the written work. For example, students are looking at two clips, the 1989
film adaptation of Henry V directed and played by Kenneth Branagh, and the 1944 film version of the same

                                                           
Shakespeare play directed and played by Laurence Olivier. The same scene and words will be analyzed: Henry
V's "Crispin's Day" speech. Previously the film studies professor provided a related assignment to students--
describing in an essay what was different about each actor's interpretation--but by having them write about the
movie scenes from memory.     With WebDIVER, film students are able to point to specific space-time regions of
the film in real-time examples from each movie, and to justify their analysis with video-based argumentation
using the scenes from the movies being compared. This exercise takes place outside of the classroom, as a
homework assignment. Each student is given their own protected workspace, and they access the films and the
WebDIVER analysis tool on-line via a web browser. Students will then present their analysis in class, also using
WebDIVER. The students will have a chance to comment on each other's work, both orally in class and again
later on-line by adding  messages  and  comments   to the   web-based      Dive   worksheets.   Although this same
assignment has been used in film class before, this will be the first time a) students will be able to point directly
to the  scenes they're analyzing and  referencing; and   b) an       informal learning discussion   (via web  page
collaborative commentary) will continue outside of the classroom presentations. In WebDIVER, students can
also literally navigate the movie by way of the actor's/script's utterances (i.e. click on an utterance and go
directly to the corresponding scene in the movie). The utterances also scroll along with the movie. The professor
anticipates a nuance and depth to analysis that he has not experienced using his previous approach to instruction
and assessment.
      Prior studies involving the HyperVideo system include an experimental test of how users (N= 74) learn
with different design versions of a hypervideo in the domain of biology (Zahn, Barquero & Schwan, 2004) and a
comparison of how (and where) authors with different prior knowledge would suggest placing hyperlinks in
biology videos (Zahn, Schwan & Barquero, 2002). The results of this latter study revealed that authors of
different knowledge backgrounds (content-experts, media-experts and novices) developed similar ideas of a
hypervideo structure, which were mainly based on formal features of the source video (such as, for example,
terms included in the audio track). Results also showed that the linking decisions of expert-authors were quite
congruent with those of novice users, indicating that even users with low prior knowledge were capable to make
meaningful linking decisions.
      Our prior works provide the basis for applying hypervideo design tasks at school. As a starting point,
hypervideo design will be applied in German secondary schools to support media education in German native
language lessons ("Deutschunterricht"). The topic will be TV-advertising. We plan to study the collaborative
analysis of TV-ads based on the DIVER system and the collaborative hyperlinking of TV-ads based on the
HyperVideo system. Altogether, we will conduct two large experiments in a learning lab. Our interest is to
investigate the interactions of DIVER and HyperVideo as two generic types of digital video technology with a)
individual cognition (i.e. mental models of "hypervideo" in learners) and b) teacher's instructions (i.e. the
support of group discussion by teachers) and the influences of these interactions on group knowledge processes.
This future-orientation leads us to the last section of this paper.

CONCLUSION
   In writing about modern music, writing, art and science, Umberto Eco (1989) notes that "`open' works,
insofar as they are in movement, are characterized by the invitation to make the work together with the author
and that (2) on a wider level (as a subgenus in the species `work in movement') there exist works, which though
organically completed,  are `open' to a continuous  generation       of internal relations that the addressee must
uncover and select in his act of perceiving the totality of incoming stimuli." To the extent that DIVER and
HyperVideo use can make video and movies and other rich media 'open' to HyperVideo linking and to Diving--
interpretation and extensible use with guided noticing, DIVER path movie-making making and annotation--
there is without question an active role for the reader, who becomes an author in bringing the work of the video
or other medium to a more completed state in his or her interpretations of it. DIVER also provides a tool for
evidence-based argumentation, in which one uses what one notices in the medium to make a case around it, and
thus extends the work in significant ways with the act of authoring the dive. For the constructivist educator or
more generally for those who want a more active voice in media uses for communication and knowledge
production, these two systems exemplify a video use paradigm for education that moves away from today's
broadcast-centric and asymmetric uses of video to the communicative empowerment of the video user, who can
easily craft point-of-view movies within movies with commentaries and hyperlinks to share with others.         We
view this fundamental shift from consumption to authorship of video points-of-view as a vital transformation in
the use of the video medium for advancing learning and education.

                                                        
REFERENCES
Barron, B. J., Schwartz, D. L., Vye, N. J., Moore, A., Petrosino, A., Zech, L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). Doing
     with understanding: Lessons from research on problem and project-based learning. The Journal of the
     Learning Sciences, 7 (3&4), 271-311.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale N.J.: Erlbaum.
Chambel, T., Zahn, C., & Finke, M. (2004). Hypervideo design and support for contextualised learning. Paper
     presented at the IEEE 2004, Finland.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1997). The Jasper Project: Lessons in curriculum, instruction,
     assessment, and professional development. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Eco, U. (1989). The Open Work. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Goldman-Segall, R. (1998).   Points of viewing children's thinking: A digital ethnographer's journey. Mahwah,
     New Jersey: LEA.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist. 96(3), 606-633.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning
     Sciences, 4, 1, 39-103.
Metz, C. (1974). Film Language: a Semiotics of the Cinema. New York: Oxford University Press.
Park, O., & Hopkins, R. (1993). Instructional conditions for using dynamic visual displays: A review.
     Instructional Science, 21, 427-488.
Pea, R. (1985). Beyond amplification: Using the computer to reorganize mental functioning. Educational
     Psychologist, 20, 167-182.
Pea, R.D. (1991, July). Learning through multimedia. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 11(4), 58-66.
Pea, R. D. (2004). The social and technological dimensions of "scaffolding" and related theoretical concepts for
     learning, education and human activity. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 423-451.
Pea, R. D. (in press). Video-as-data and digital video manipulation techniques for transforming learning
     sciences research, education and other cultural practices. To appear in J. Weiss, J. Nolan & P. Trifonas
     (Eds.), International Handbook of Virtual Learning Environments. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
     Publishing.
Pea, R. D., & Gomez, L. (1992). Distributed multimedia learning environments: Why and how?  Interactive
     Learning Environments, 2(2), 73-109.
Pea, R., Mills, M., Rosen, J., Dauber, K., Effelsberg, W., & Hoffert. E. (2004, Jan-March). The DIVERTM
     Project: Interactive Digital Video Repurposing. IEEE Multimedia, 11(1), 54-61.
Roschelle, J. M., Pea, R. D., Hoadley, C. M., Gordin, D. N., & M., Means B. (2000). Changing how and what
     children learn in school with computer-based technologies. The Future of Children - Children and
     Computer technology, 10(2), 76-101.
Stahl, E. & Bromme, R. (2004). Learning by writing hypertext: A research based design of university courses in
     writing hypertext. In H. Van Den Bergh G. Rijlaarsdam, & M. Couzijn, (Ed.), Effective learning and
     teaching of writing (2 ed., Vol. 14, pp. 547-560). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Stevens, R., Cherry, G., & Fournier, J. (2002). Video Traces: Rich Media Annotations for Teaching and
     Learning. Proceedings of the CSCL 2002 Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning,
     Boulder, CO.
Zahn, C., Schwan, S. , & Barquero, B. (2002). Authoring hypervideos: Design for learning and learning by
     design. In & E. Stahl & R. Bromme (Ed.), Writing hypertext and learning: Conceptual and empirical
     approaches (pp. 153-176). London: Pergamon/Elsevier Science.
Zahn, C., Barquero, B., & Schwan, S. (2004). Learning with hyperlinked videos ­ design criteria and efficient
     strategies of using audiovisual hypermedia. Learning and Instruction.

                                                        
