Texts-In-Interaction: Collaborative Problem-Solving
           in Quasi-Synchronous Computer-Mediated
                                    Communication

                                               Alan Zemel
                                               Math Forum
                                            Drexel University
                                            arz26@drexel.edu

     Abstract. Quasi-synchronous chat consists of the production and posting of text messages in an
     online environment. It differs from face-to-face talk-in-interaction in a number of important ways
     that are significant for participants in the chats and methodologically in terms of the way analysis
     can be conducted and the kinds of analytical claims that can be made. The perspective adopted in
     this paper is that chat interaction can be considered the computer-mediated production and reading
     of texts-in-interaction. However, since the production of a posted text is usually not available to
     anyone but the author of that text, I am not concerned with the production of posted texts. Rather,
     I am concerned with the way texts, as produced artifacts, are organized to be read by recipients. In
     particular, I consider ways in which quasi-synchronous chat postings provide instruction in their
     design for how they are to be read by recipients of these postings.

     Keywords:     Quasi-synchronous   online  chats,   reading,   interaction,  collaboration,   conjoint
     participation.

INTRODUCTION
In a quasi-synchronous online chat, (Q-SOC), postings are not meant to be `heard'. Instead, they are designed to
be read by those who participate in the chats. Because the composition of posted texts is not witnessable to
anyone other than the actor who is typing the text, recipients only read text as presented to make sense of it. In
F2F, we witness the false starts, the repairs, and all manner of difficulties in getting things said. There is no
particular equivalent in Q-SOC.  Recipients do not  see  the false starts, the  erasures or    corrections a writer
performs because the writer's actions are unavailable to readers. All recipients see is the completed text as the
finished product of the writing process. This difference between Q-SOC and F2F is consequential for how
participants make sense of what they are doing when they are reading, writing and posting text messages during
chats. The analytical consequence of participants' inability to use the production of texts as an interactional
resource is that only that which is posted as the enduring record of their interaction can be examined.

Reading's Work
In their seminal work on online chats as interactional phenomena, Garcia and Jacobs (1998, 1999) have noted
that turn-taking, turn-allocation and repair in Q-SOC differs significantly from the way that turn-taking, turn-
allocation and repair are performed in F2F (Garcia and Jacobs 1998, 1999). The most important conclusion to be
drawn from Garcia and Jacobs (1998, 1999) is that Q-SOC are not, in fact, "speech" exchange systems. Rather
they are "text" exchange systems that display, in the online posting of texts, the organization of interaction
among participants in these chats. While there are certain similarities to F2F conversational speech exchange
systems, the differences between them are significant to the way that interaction is achieved.
       The interactional work done during Q-SOC consists of posting and reading text messages. Posted
messages   are designed  to be read by recipients. These  texts  are contingent,  situated  and   produced   to be
interactional resources in quasi-synchronous online chats. This contrasts with face-to-face interaction in which
speakers speak, recipients listen to the production of that speech and collaborate through their talk and other
observable resources (gesture, etc.) to collaboratively constitute, make sense of, and participate in the emergent
interaction. In computer-mediated quasi-synchronous online chats, the actors' work of posting and reading text
messages is how they organize, constitute and participate in chats. Rather than interact through emergent talk,
they interact by reading and producing for posting texts and text fragments. According to Livingston (1995),

                                                        
         "The work of reading is the work of finding the organization of that work that a text describes. The
         contextual clues in a text offer the grounds, from within the active participatory work of reading, for
         finding how those clues provide an adequate account of how the text should be read." (p. 14).

Thus a text is organized to inform and instruct readers with regard to how it is to be read. Each text provides
clues for how readers are to make sense of it and, in the case of Q-SOC, how they are also to make sense of it in
relation to previously posted texts.

DATA
The  data  I inspect  for this analysis  consist of  time-stamped   chat logs of  math   problem   solving sessions
sponsored by the Math Forum of Drexel University. The chats were advertised, sponsored and conducted by the
Math Forum as part of its participation in the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) research project, an NSF funded
project at Drexel University.1
         Time-stamped     logs of the chats  were recorded   at the Math   Forum  server  that received  the posted
messages. The text messages as they were posted to the server were available for inspection, the sequence of
their posting and the durations between postings in the sequence. For the purposes of this analysis, the use of
chat logs  alone  for analytical  inspection is  consistent  with the assumptions  made    about   the  interactional
environment of Q-SOC.
         These chats usually involved two or more participants and a facilitator. The participants oriented to and
understood that the chat had a specifically declared institutional `purpose' and affiliation to which they oriented
and by which they managed themselves and were managed by the facilitator. This so-called `purpose' was to
collaboratively work together in the chat to produce solutions to posted math problems. This was made evident
in the way that participation in the chats was allocated and managed by the participants and the staff at the Math
Forum. Access to PoWwows (these online chat sessions) was available only on specific occasions and through
the auspices of the Math Forum. The participants had 1) self-selected to visit the Math Forum website and 2)
self-selected to register for PoWwows. Participants were screened in advance of their participation with respect
to their level of math proficiency and  were informed of the purpose and so-called `rules' of the chat.

ANALYSIS
Garcia and Jacobs (1999) and Schönfeldt and Golato (2003) have prepared discussions of classic conversation
analytic concerns with respect to chats. These include turn-taking, turn-allocation and repair. In this analysis, I
consider the way that participants managed their participation in the chat to do problem-solving work as a
collectively and  collaboratively  achieved  outcome.  What     makes this  analytically interesting is that certain
interactional resources by which actors constitute themselves as a collectivity in talk-in-interaction (Lerner
1993) are not available in Q-SOC. The reason for this has to do with differences in the technologies that support
and sustain these different systems of interaction. For example, it is impossible to collaborate in the conjoint
production of any given text posting, although it is possible to conjointly constitute a sensible sequence of
postings. Furthermore, chat participants cannot monitor recipients for how they make sense of that as that post is
being produced. The sense they make derives exclusively from the way these texts are designed to be read.
         In Q-SOCs, the production, transmission and receipt of posted text messages are separable actions. The
most significant consequence of this is, as Garcia and Jacobs (1999) point out, that the monitoring and execution
of these  actions are more  loosely   linked to  the actions of other  chat participants  than the   monitoring and
execution of conversational actions among interlocutors in F2F interaction. Furthermore, where violations of
projected next-turn actions are treated as repairable or accountable matters in F2F interaction, they are routinely
treated as artifacts of the technology   by  which   Q-SOCs   are achieved  and  thus do   not always   warrant the
production of repairs or accounts. Of course, repair happens in chats, but its organization and achievement are
subject to the technical constraints that govern the posting of messages (Schönfeldt and Golato 2003).

1 "The VMT Project investigates issues of online collaborative math problem solving by extending the Math
 Forum's     popular    "problem     of  the  week"    service    for  use    by  small    groups    of  students."
 (http://mathforum.org/wiki/VMT/). "The Math Forum is a leading center for mathematics and mathematics
 education on the Internet. The Math Forum's mission is to provide resources, materials, activities, person-to-
 person interactions, and educational products and services that enrich and support teaching and learning in an
 increasingly technological world" (http://www.mathforum.org/about.forum.html).

                                                         
COLLABORATION AS READING'S WORK
Written texts in quasi-synchronous online chats are recognizable as utterance-like constructions that make use of
textual rather than spoken resources to provide for their intelligibility. The work that these texts do is accessible
and made intelligible in the way they are designed to be read and in the way interactants come to read them.

Extract 1

The second extract from a problem solving chat affords the opportunity to examine in detail certain chat features
that emphasize the textual properties of chats and how these properties impact interaction. In this excerpt, we
can see how participants in the chat organize themselves through their postings to begin work on the problem of
the week (shown in Figure ).

Ame (8:02:54 PM): Ok I guess we can start now
Fir (8:02:57 PM): just a minute. i'm uploading it
Azn (8:03:01 PM): ok
Lif (8:03:02 PM): ohk
Eef (8:03:02 PM): alright
Ame (8:03:04 PM): Sure thing

          The   fragment begins  with  an invitation from  Ame  to begin    working      on the math  problem   that is
presented as an assessment of the readiness of all participants. This assessment is localized as Ame's position
and is epistemically downgraded to a possibility that others would be expected to confirm or deny ("I guess we
can ..."). Furthermore, it begins with an activity transition marker "Okay" and is addressed to recipients as a
collectively through the use of the first person inclusive plural pronoun "we". By including all these elements in
a single posting, Ame presumes that recipients can recognize this as both an assessment of recipients readiness
to take up the math and as a bid to actually do so. It is only by reading this posting in a way that allows it to be
interpreted as such an assessment and bid that recipients come to treat it as such. Evidence that they do is
provided by the responses produced.
          Fir's posted response  is designed to be   read  in two parts:   the  first part  "just a minute," calls  for
recipients to temporarily refrain from starting and the second part "i'm uploading it" provides a warrant for his
request, and serves to 1) challenge Ame's presumption that all are ready to begin and 2) constitute what being
ready to "start now" might mean for recipients. The indexical term "it" is not identified and is the activity of
"uploading it" is treated as relevant and intelligible to recipients. Even if recipients agree to wait "a minute",
there is  nothing  to  prevent them  from  examining   the problem  or working        on it "offline" at their various
locations. This leads us to consider the question, `What is being regulated by this request?' I would argue that
what is being regulated in Fir's post is the activity: `working on the problem conjointly'.
          The suspension of conjoint consideration of the problem is temporally bounded by what participants
take to be an appropriate duration for uploading and inspecting the problem. Such a suspension of conjoint
consideration   of the problem   could be  problematic  for   participants if it extends    beyond  some  appropriate
duration. Furthermore, the suspended conjoint consideration is treated as something members are capable of
performing, thus implying that it is not problematic for participants. Yet it remains to be seen at this point of
what such conjoint participation might consist.

Eef (8:04:05 PM): r we ready yet?
Ame (8:04:31 PM): We should start talking
Eef (8:04:40 PM): yes, i conker
Lif (8:04:51 PM): has anyone come up withan equation or expression to solve for n

          After a short time of approximately a minute or so, Eef poses a query to all recipients as a collectivity,
asking them "r we ready yet?" (8:04:05 PM). Ame puts forward an affiliative position "We should start talking"
which  is endorsed    by Eef.  This sequence of postings   is followed by     a  post at  8:04:51   PM from    Lif who
formulates the first query regarding the problem. With this move, and without postings indicating any objection
from other recipients, participants in this PoWwow collaborated to begin conjoint consideration of the problem.
          The posting by Lif at 8:04:51 PM also serves to identify for participants what conjoint consideration of
the problem might be for them, i.e., coming up with an equation for deriving values for the variable n. This
formulation relies on participants' familiarity with the problem in its textual representation and this method of
interaction using text messaging. Thus, Lif's posting embodies the presumption that others can interpret "n"
appropriately as the variable in the mathematical expressions contained in the problem text.

                                                        
         Eef   then produces   a   post that suggests that he  had  used  the quadratic equation  and calls on any
recipient, who also used the quadratic equation, to post an acknowledgment.

Eef (8:05:14 PM): did n e 1 else use the quadratic equation?
Azn (8:05:28 PM): i kinda did...
Eef (8:05:35 PM): me 2
Ame (8:05:39 PM): I got a inequality
Azn (8:05:46 PM): n^2 + 4n + 4...

The abbreviational forms used by Eef, "n e 1" for "anyone,"are typical of chat abbreviations but also points to
the importance of readings work. In particular, "n" and "1" in this post are designed to be read as keystroke-
saving abbreviations that rely on similarity of sound when pronounced rather than similarity of form. This
reliance on spoken forms for textual representation underscores how speaking can be used as a textual resource
in chat.
         Azn acknowledges using quadratic equations as a first effort but the modifier "kinda" and the ellipsis
combine to suggest the possibly he did not get very far. The ellipsis and other such markers are textual indexical
phenomena whose sense is determined by their use in postings. (An alternative sense of the ellipsis emerges
only as a result of a subsequent post by Azn, which is discussed below.)
         In the next    post, Eef  explicitly declares  that he used  the quadratic equation.  Doing  so  served to
constitute a sub-association of participants who had pursued this strategy. Ame, on the other hand, indicates that
he had taken a different approach, implicated by the reference to an "inequality." The subsequent posting by
Azn describes the quadratic equation he had deployed. This sequence of postings at this point is a fairly typical
example of the complexity of sequencing faced by participants who have no access to the work others do to
compose their messages. Azn's post at 8:05:46 PM relevantly can be seen as a continuation of his posting at
8:05:28 PM. This posting in fact modifies the sense of the ellipsis in the 8:05:28 PM posting, shifting its sense
from one    of marking    uincertainty   to  projecting an   subsequent  continuation,  and providing grounds    for
suspecting that the ellipsis in the 8:05:46 PM posting also may be projecting a continuation.
         Despite    the fact  that Ame   appears to   have   used a different approach  from  the others, all three
participants at that point are busy describing systematic and mathematically coherent approaches for obtaining a
value for n. Fir however used trial and error:

Fir (8:06:08 PM): i don't know what ur talking about! i just picked numbers out ofthe air:-[
Fir (8:06:14 PM): :-\

         Fir's two postings are a complaint with an account and emoticon, followed by a post consisting solely
of an emoticon. Emoticons are textual objects used to convey the emotional valence of a posting. As semiotic
resources, they constitute text-based interpretive methods for use by authors and readers. At this point, Fir uses
the resources available to an author of text messages and that recipients will recognize to indicate 1) he, Fir, is
having a problem with what they are doing and 2) that he is not able to engage with others in what they have
begun as conjoint collaboration. This leads to the next post by Ame:

Ame (8:06:21 PM): Lets start over
Fir (8:06:27 PM): please do
Ame (8:06:27 PM): Who thinks they got the farthest
Eef (8:06:28 PM): alright
Fir (8:06:39 PM): i finished it.
Ame (8:06:43 PM): Great
Lif (8:06:46 PM): wonderful

         The suggestion to "start over" leaves implicit what needs to be restarted though Fir, in the next posting,
appears to understand clearly what is meant. The proposal appears to call on recipients to stop pursuing their
discussion in terms of mathematical strategies and to restart using different mathematical resources that would
allow Fir to participate in particular ways. Again, the collective plural pro-term is implicated in the construction,
amplifies Ame's proposal as a way of reasserting the collaborative nature of their association.
         Rather than wait for others to display agreement, Ame queries any recipient to take a position as having
gone "the farthest", presumably toward solving the problem. Ame's query constitutes another framework for
conjoint collaboration that is organized around the solution rather than the strategy used to produce the solution
to the problem. Interestingly, Fir, for whom participation had been problematic, then declares that he "finished
it" (8:06:39 PM) implying that he is now in a position to participate.

                                                          
        Eef at 8:06:28 PM appears to be responding to Ame's previous suggestion at 8:06:21 PM that they
"start over". Because sequencing of postings is not under the control of participants but is determined by the
server (Schönfeldt, and Golato 2003) and because participants cannot witness the production of text messages
by others (Garcia and Jacobs 1999), dislocations of text messages occur. Where this would be treated as a
candidate for repair in a face to face interaction, it is deemed to be part of reading's work to sort out the
threading of postings as they arrive on the computer screen.

DISCUSSION
In Q-SOC, posted texts are written to be read. They emerge as part of a sequence of postings and are produced
to be read in a certain order. As such, they are a means of engaging in interaction with other posters of text
messages. Chats are similar to talk in that they both involve the production and organization of sequences of
meaningful actions. Where they differ is in the kinds of actions performed and the sequential organization of
that performance.
        In chat, participants cannot examine or experience the production of each other's postings. Therefore, a
strict sense of the sequentiality of posted texts is often suspended and the coherent threading of posted text
messages is achieved by participants as postings are posted and read (O'Neil & Martin, 2003). Because many
chat systems retain posted messages for recipient review at any time, reading's work need not rely on a strict
sense of sequentiality since prior texts can be recovered. One consequence of this is that the nature of turn
taking and the work required to determine the threading of postings is a normal part of reading's work in Q-
SOC.
        Finally, the way reading's work is accomplished is part of the way participation is organized in chats.
Collaboration and conjoint participation in Q-SOC are achieved primarily by posting messages to which others
respond. Collectivities emerge through and are implicated by the use of collective inclusive pro-terms in the
texts and in the way that participants display their alignments by posting messages of their own. It is only
through postings and the way that these postings are organized to be read that collaborative and conjoint work is
achieved.
        Deictic and indexical work is achieved differently in text messages than in face to face interaction. One
of the features of indexical work in face to face interaction is the way that deictic and indexical utterances rely
on embodied action to give specific and local sense to spoken utterances. Embodied action is not available as a
resource in text messages. One way that such activity is approximated in textual terms is the use of emoticons
and other  such textual devices.  Other  ways    that we have    seen in this   paper include reliance on   shared
documentation, labeling of diagrams and reference to these labels, etc.
        This work represents a first step in CSCL to understand chat as text-exchange system. In considering
how  to design  text exchange    systems to promote    collaborative  learning, it is important that we begin  to
understand the way such text exchange systems are currently used. This way we can see how participants
organize and manage their interactions in textual terms. In so doing, we will be in a better position to consider
the requirements of such a system based on how systems are actually used, rather than on how we think they
should be use.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Gerry Stahl for his very helpful comments. Also, thanks to NSF, Gerry Stahl, Steve Weimar and Wes
Shumar as well as the College of Information Science and Technology and the Math Forum at Drexel University
for supporting this research.

REFERENCES
Garcia, A. and Jacobs, J. B. (1998) The Interactional Organization of Computer Mediated Communication in the
      College Classroom. Qualitative Sociology, 21, 3, 299-317.
Garcia, A. and Jacobs, J. B. (1999) The Eyes of the Beholder: Understanding the Turn-Taking System in Quasi-
      Synchronous Computer-Mediated Communication. Research on Language and Social Interaction, 32, 4,
      337-367.
Livingston, E. (1995). An Anthropology of Reading. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
O'Neil, J.  &  Martin, D. (2003).   "Text   chat in   action." In Proceedings   of  the  2003 international ACM
      SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work, pp. 40-49.
Schönfeldt, J. and   Golato,  A. (2003)  Repair  in   Chats: A  Conversation    Analytic Approach.   Research on
      Language and Social Interaction, 36, 3, 241-284.

                                                        
