         Analyzing and Supporting Collaboration in
 Cooperative Computer-Mediated Communication

              Jörg Zumbach                                         Peter Reimann
            Jochen Schönemann                           Computer-supported Learning and Cognition
           Institute of Psychology                        Faculty of Education and Social Work
    University of Heidelberg, Germany                        University of Sydney, Australia
            zumbach@uni-hd.de                                p.reimann@edfac.usyd.edu.au
jochen.schoenemann@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

        Abstract. Two methods for fostering collaborative behavior are compared: a feedback-mechanism
        to scaffold collaborative behavior, and use of distributed learning resources. Based on recent re-
        search on what constitutes effective collaboration behavior, we developed a coding scheme to
        categorize learner-learner interaction as collaboration. In a collaboration environment for learner
        dyads specifically implemented to test our hypotheses, a human observer identified, in parallel
        with students' interactions, instances of real collaboration, and gave online feedback. In the same
        two-factorial design, we varied the resources available to the partners. The influence of these in-
        terventions on outcomes related to knowledge acquisition, problem-solving, group climate and
        collaborative behavior was tested. Results suggest there are benefits in providing a feedback ap-
        proach in fostering collaboration and enhancing problem-solving quality.

        Keywords: Cooperative Learning, Feedback Research, Problem-Based Learning

APPROACHES TO SCAFFOLDING COLLABORATION
Why does collaboration in learning groups need scaffolding? The main reason is that individuals in a group do
not automatically cooperate and act as a group. This is particularly the case for groups where the members have
not worked together as a team before, are formed for a comparatively short time, and work under conditions
where individual learning goals are predominant. These are all characteristics typical of group work in class-
rooms and other instructional settings, face-to-face or net-based. Under such conditions, scaffolds are needed in
order to get group work going, to mitigate disorientation and reduce cognitive load.
  The problem of poor peer interaction is well known in face-to-face (ftf) collaborative learning. With the use
of typed, text-based computer-mediated communication this problem is likely to be increased. It is much more
difficult to establish, perform and maintain basic cognitive mechanisms like turn taking and grounding. In addi-
tion, (and especially) social mechanisms like building positive interrelationships, establishing a group identity
etc. are afflicted. One way to address this problem, not discussed any further in this study, is to teach collabora-
tion and communication skills directly, as a pre-requisite for group work (e.g. Rummel, Spada, Hermann, Caspar
& Schornstein, 2002). Another, more widely used, approach is to scaffold collaboration.
  A number of methods for scaffolding collaboration have been developed. In order to structure these ap-
proaches, we suggest the taxonomy depicted in Figure 1. A general distinction is made in this taxonomy be-
tween scaffolds that are (instructional) design-based (all decisions are made before the collaboration begins and
there is a blueprint for how collaboration will be conducted) and those that are management-based (the major
decisions are made based on observations from learners' ongoing interaction, and decisions are made at "run
time").

                                                       
                                          Collaboration Scaffolds

                             Design-based                              Management-based

             Task Design;Resource  Scripting    Ontologies        Feedback                Advise
             Distribution
                                                      Problem Solving
 Information    Expertise     Roles/Tasks    Time     Parameters         State Parameters   Collaboration
                                                               Participation                Parameters
                                                               Parameters

                             Figure 1: Approaches to Scaffolding Collaboration

Design-based Scaffolding
One method to scaffold collaboration by design involves the selection of specific tasks and resource distribu-
tions. Examples are Group Jigsaw (Aronson, 1984), Reciprocal Teaching (Palinscar & Brown, 1984) or Prob-
lem-Based Learning (e.g. Barrows, 1985). The rationale behind this approach is that students are forced to col-
laborate in order to accomplish a goal because of task demands and the manner in which information necessary
for accomplishing the task is distributed. An elementary method is to distribute expertise among group members
in early stages of group formation (e.g. Hermann, Rummel & Spada, 2001; Rummel et al., 2002). As this is not
always possible (for example, when ad-hoc groups are formed) other methods have to be taken into account. A
second and more applicable method is to vary resources (for example, the learning material). This method im-
plies that only groups in which members exchange their resources or put them together can successfully com-
plete a (learning) task. Komis, Avouris and Fidas (2003) or Muehlenbrock (2001) provide examples of this
methodology by distributing learning resources for collaborative problem solving among learners. In the study
of Komis et al. (2003) this intervention did not automatically lead to better learning outcomes (in this case, qual-
ity of solutions) compared to dyadic groups with individuals owning all relevant material. However, groups with
distributed resources were more active, exchanged more contributions and became more involved in discussion.
  Another approach that is often used is scripting. Scripting of collaboration (such as assigning specific roles
to the members of a team) has proven effective in order to enhance turn-taking (Pfister & Mühlpfordt, 2002;
Reiserer, Ertl & Mandl, 2002), elaborate design rationales (Buckingham Shum, 1997), and increase reflection
(Diehl, Ranney & Schank, 2001). Reiser (2002) differentiates between two basic mechanisms of these scaffold-
ing techniques: providing structure and problem orientation. Structured communication is one method that can
be used to guide learners in terms of an optimized behavioral model (for example problem solving heuristics) or
a coordinated exchange between several learners. Furthermore, the attention of learners can be drawn to relevant
aspects or elements of a collaborative problem-solving process. Thus, scaffolding and scripting can avoid irrele-
vant or distracting tasks, strategies and processes.
  Scripting as a scaffolding mechanism, however, is not always beneficial. Learner guidance in problem solv-
ing can also limit the degrees of learners' freedom. Reiser (2002, p. 263) states: "However, given the importance
of connecting students' problem solving work to disciplinary content, skills, and strategies, it may also be im-
portant to provoke issues in students, veering them off the course of non-reflective work, and forcing them to
confront key disciplinary ideas in their solutions to problems." In addition, structuring of discourse always in-
volves the interruption of natural discourse. Scripting often requires external guidance on sequencing or catego-
rization of contributions without an underlying, empirically proven rationale for the structuring method itself
(Reimann, 2003). Providing groups with specific communication and collaboration ontologies is the third ap-
proach to design-based scaffolding we would like to discuss. Ontologies specify a vocabulary in a kind of nota-
tion for expressing information that can be exchanged. A classical example is the IBIS notation (Conklin, 1993),
developed to support computer-supported collaborative decision making and organisational memory (for an ap-
plication to CSCL see, for instance, Zumbach & Reimann, 2002). Dan Suther's work on how external represen-
tations affect collaboration is particularly relevant to understanding the importance of ontologies for CSCL. On-
tologies are also important for management-based approaches to scaffolding, on which we will focus next.
  We think that the design-based scaffolding approaches are particularly appropriate for groups that are work-
ing together for the first time and/or whose members have little domain knowledge. In such circumstances,
strong external guidance can help members to focus on the task and to avoid extrinsic cognitive load. For groups

                                                         
that are supposed to work together over longer periods of time (such as problem-based learning teams) and/or
groups where learning about collaboration is as important as completing the problem solving tasks, collabora-
tion management approaches seem more appropriate.

Collaboration Management
Scaffolding based on collaboration management works with "run time" data gleaned from tracing the (on-line)
interaction between group members. A number of approaches have been developed, ranging from the provision
of dynamic feedback of participation behavior all the way to complex advice systems (see Soller et al. 2003).
Focusing on feedback approaches and our own research, we (Zumbach, Mühlenbrock, Jansen, Reimann &
Hoppe, 2002; Zumbach & Reimann, 2003) pursued the analysis of collaborative learning for feedback purposes
in order to foster computer supported collaborative learning. In previous work, we used a methodology of track-
ing user data, aggregating them and feeding them back to groups in order to enrich their available resources by
means of their recent collaborative efforts. A major rationale for this method is that a group's recent work is too
valuable to be forgotten or unused and that traces of learners' own behavior provide the best source for learning
through reflection. We argue that is not sufficient to provide groups with access to shared artifacts; and that
what is needed is access to the development of these artifacts over time (problem solving history). In addition,
group members need to be provided with information about their interaction and communication behavior, if we
are to expect that learning about adequate collaboration and communication is to take place.
  Information about learners' collaborative performance can be traced on a number of dimensions. A first di-
mension is problem solving: how does the contribution of a group member change the problem state and con-
tribute to the solution (e.g., Zumbach & Reimann, 2003)? A second dimension is participation: how often, in
what sequence, around which topics do members contribute to the group's work (Barros & Verdejo, 2000)? A
third dimension concerns members' emotional and motivational state, or well-being. We (Zumbach et al, 2002,
Zumbach & Reimann, 2003) have been able to show that enriching CMC by means of dynamic motiva-
tional/emotional parameters of group members helps to positively influence the group climate as well as indi-
viduals' motivation (Zumbach, Hillers & Reimann, 2003) and, thus, contributes to groups' well-being functions
(cf. McGrath, 1991; McGrath & Hollingshead, 1994). A fourth dimension along which feedback can be pro-
vided is collaboration behavior proper: how does the action of one group member affect other group members'
interaction behavior? Of particular interest in this regard is knowledge sharing (Soller, 2004).
  Major challenges for the feedback approach are the (automatic) identification of collaborative acts and
avoiding cognitive load problems. While previous research (in particular by Mühlenbrock (2001) and Mühlen-
brock and Hoppe (1999), see also Komis et al., 2003 for a similar analysis approach; and Barros and Verdejo,
1999) has shown that collaborative acts can be identified automatically by screening users' interface actions for
certain patterns, methodological problems remain. For instance, with these bottom-up approaches it is impossi-
ble to identify when a certain behavior does not take place. However, from a communication point of view, not
reacting in a certain manner can carry important communicative information. Even if such problems were over-
come, learners' may still not profit from the feedback because of cognitive load and information overload.
Feedback information must be presented (on limited screen space) to a team of people who work on, often com-
plex, tasks in a manner that is easily understandable. Visualisation techniques (e.g. Donath, Karahalios, & Vi-
gas, 1999) become particularly important.

STUDY: COMBINING DESIGN-BASED AND MANAGEMENT-BASED
SCAFFOLDING
Design- and management-based approaches to scaffolding can easily be combined and, given that they address
different issues and phases of group work, this should probably occur. This study analyses how combining the
distribution of learning resources (a design approach) with providing feedback on collaboration behavior (a
management approach) affects various parameters of collaboration. Varying both factors in one experimental
design allows us not only to assess the effects of combining the two approaches, but also to study interactions
between the two factors.

Identifying Collaboration
Analysing collaboration behavior requires us to define units of analysis that capture interaction among group
members. (Aggregated) observations on individual participation behavior and assessment of individual psycho-
logical states are not sufficient. Barron and Sears (2002) emphasize the role of sequence and interdependence of
learner contributions. They suggest that collaboration be regarded as a sequence of different actions and depend-
ing reactions (based on a categorization scheme similar to the suggested definition of single actions provided by
Barros & Veredejo, 2000). Soller and Lesgold (1999, 2000) also use such a categorization. Leaving a conceptual

                                                       
and abstract level, they give precise suggestions on actions that can be defined as "collaborative events". Soller
and Lesgold (1999) define three basic categories of collaborative learning skills (Active Learning, Conversation
and Creative Conflict) and eight dependent subskills (Request, Inform, Motivate, Task, Maintenance, Acknowl-
edge, Argue and Mediate) with each specifying detailed actions.

Table 1: Operationalization of collaborative events (as used in this study).
                      Action of Person 1                                                       Reaction of Person 2                   Reaction of Person 1 (to Person2)

       proposal (related to problem) 1, 2, 3A1also: contraproposal 1, 2, 3        agree/ accept 1, 3, 7
                                                                                    or
A2                                                                                support 1
                                                                                    or
A3.1                                                                              propose a next step 1                              agree/ accept 1, 3, 7
                                                                                                                                                or
A3.2                                                                                                                                 support 1
                                                                                                                                                or
A3.3                                                                                                                                 propose a next step 1
                                                                                                                                                or
A3.4                                                                                                                                 document the proposal 1
                                                                                    or
A4                                                                                document the proposal 1
                                                                                    or
A5.1                                                                              query, challenge, 2                                modify proposal (for solution) 2
                                                                                                                                                or

                                                                                                                                     assert or justify or explain
A5.2                                                                                                                                 (in this case a further positive reac-
                                                                                                                                     tion of person 2 is necessary) 2
                                                                                                                                                or

A5.e                                                                                                                                 agree, bear out (in this case: no col-
x                                                                                                                                    laboration) 1
                                                                                    or

A6                                                                                request time (e.g. for documenting or thinkingabout) 1agree/ accept 1, 3, 7
                                                                                    or
A7                                                                                elaborate (active) 2, 6
                                                                                    or
A8                                                                                elaborate (passive) 2, 6                           perform 2
                                                                                    or
A9                                                                                ask (in case of lack of understanding) 1, 2, 7     restate or repeat 2

B1     ask for help advice 2, 3, 4                                                inform 2, 3

C1     shift focus to a new aspect 2                                              agree/ accept 1, 3, 7
                                                                                    or
C2                                                                                clarify/ negotiate 1, 2, 3                         agree/ accept 1, 3, 7

D1     encourage partner or peer group 2, 5, 8support group cohesion 2, 5, 8

E1     refer to emotional-motivational process 2, 4, 5, 8                         acknowledge 1, 2, 3, 7
                                                                                    Or
E2                                                                                Answer (referring to contribution) 2, 3

F1     coordinate task (steps for solution) 8, 9                                  agree/ accept 1, 3, 7
                                                                                    Or
F2                                                                                clarify/ negotiate 1, 2, 3                         agree/ accept 1, 3, 7

G1     reflect on group processing or analyze group per-formance 5, 9             agree/ accept or answer 1, 3, 7
                                                                                    Or
G2                                                                                clarify/ negotiate 1, 2, 3                         agree/ accept 1, 3, 7

H1     construct meta-knowledge/ reflect on distributionof knowledge 8            agree/ accept or answer 1, 3, 7

I1     drag text block in shared workspace (chat)                      2, 5, 7    continue to work with text
Notes:1 cf. Barron & Sears (2002); 2 cf. Soller & Lesgold (2000); 3 cf. Barros & Verdejo (2000); 4 cf. Barron, Martin, Roberts, Osipovich & Ross
(2002); 5 cf. Johnson & Johnson (1996); 6 cf. Kneser, Fehse & Hermann (2000); 7 cf. Clark (1996); 8 cf. Reinmann-Rothmeier & Mandl (1999); 9
cf. Welch & Tulbert (2000).

                                                                                              
Starting from these definitions and approaches, we developed a coding schema for defining actions to be under-
stood as a "collaborative event" (see Table 1).
  Based on interaction chains, Table 1 shows the categories derived from a literature review for dyadic learn-
ing in terms of action-reaction-patterns (references to the underlying literature are in the note at the bottom of
the table).
  Letters A to I in Table 1 describe nine different possible ways to start collaboration (resulting in 26 possible
action-reaction chains). All utterances, for example, in category A classify openings with a proposal for a prob-
lem solution (or all openings in category F represent coordinative contributions). Each code stands for another
chain of interactions and is a unique collaborative event. The following examples should demonstrate the use of
the coding scheme: In one of the sessions participant A stated in the chat (translation): "I need more information
on the physiological background of depressive disorders. Can you help?". Participant B answered: "Yes of
course. There is something with the neuro-transmitters. According to my resources there might be a relationship
between Serotonin, Noradrenalin, Dopamine, Acetylcholine and depressive disorders (...)." The example is ac-
cording to our coding scheme a B1 event with A asking for help/advise and B sharing requested information. In
another example participant B dragged some text into the chat for A who did not have any need for the pasted
text because it was not relevant to the problem. In that case no collaborative event has been coded (in case of
pasting a "useful" text this would have been an I1 event). Of course one finds longer interaction chains in the
data. Our coding scheme does not account for such macro-structures, but breaks them down into elementary
components, i.e. "collaborative events".

Development of a computer supported learning scenario integrating distributed resources and
collaboration feedback
Based on the considerations mentioned above, we developed a computer supported learning scenario for dyadic
problem solving. The technical platform was an HTML-based interface with several components (see Figure 2).
Each learner had (via a Web browser) access to a frame page with several integrated components. The first com-
ponent was a window containing tasks and the learning material (HTML; left upper corner of Figure 2). The
second component was a text editor where solutions to the presented problems had to be developed (left lower
corner in Figure 2). The third component was a chat window for possible collaboration purposes (right space in
Figure 2). The fourth and last component was an MS Excel© based counter providing feedback about the num-
ber of collaborative events (lower right corner).

                     Figure 2: User Interface for individual and cooperative learning.

In order to test the effects of our methodology, we used a cooperative learning scenario in dyads with underlying
principles of Problem-Based Learning. For operationalization of our feedback approach on collaborative events
we had to use experimenter-based analysis of feedback due to shortcomings of automatic analysis methods re-
lated to semantic interpretation of learner-learner interaction. Thus, a trained experimenter who synchronously

                                                        
analyzed discourse in the chat window, monitored learners working in distributed dyads. In the case of a se-
quence of contributions in accordance with the categories presented in Table 1, the tutor posted the message
"You have successfully cooperated! Keep on!" (in the study this was written in German) and the counter of col-
laborative events was raised. There was no other interference by the experimenter.
  Learners were randomly assigned to pairs and conditions and participated synchronously in different rooms.
After an introductory pre-test, participants were introduced into the learning environment. We assigned each stu-
dent the same task, which was to solve a problem in the field of clinical psychology in a written essay (with the
text editor). The problem itself was a text only case description about a woman with a co-morbid disorder (de-
pression and anorexia nervosa). Learning objectives with regard to this problem included knowledge about
cause, diagnosis, development and therapy of depression and anorexia nervosa as well as relationships between
both disorders. The resources to solve the task consisted of passages of a study book for clinical psychology.
These passages were digitalized and provided together with the case description as an HTML-document (in the
upper left corner of the user interface; see Figure 2).
  The main purpose of this study was to measure the influence of two basic interventions on the quantity of
collaboration and cognitive outcomes as well as group climate: first, the influence of distributed learning re-
sources and second, the availability of feedback on collaborative events (i.e. an underlying 2 X 2 factorial de-
sign). The rationale behind this choice was that prior work (e.g. Zumbach & Reimann, 2003; Zumbach, Hillers
& Reimann, 2004) has emphasized the role of feedback related to problem solving, participation and state pa-
rameters, but not collaboration parameters themselves. Furthermore, there is still need of research on design-
based scaffolding related to task design and resource distribution. Thus, the first factor was the variation of the
learning resources (homogenous versus distributed). In one condition (homogenous resources), each learner had
access to the complete learning material relevant for solving the case. In a second condition, one participant had
access only to relevant passages about depressive disorders and the other participant of the dyad to the learning
material related to anorexia nervosa. As both parts were single chapters in the underlying textbook, they were
simply divided. The second factor was the availability or absence of feedback on collaborative events. In one
condition, the dyadic learning groups received feedback as operationalized and described above. In a second
condition, the experimenter analyzed collaborative feedback events but no feedback was provided (the visualiza-
tion was also removed from the user interface). In the introductory part of the experiment, participants received
information about their task and the possibility of cooperating with a peer over the computer interface. They
were not informed about the different factors of this study (for example, they did not know, in the condition
concerned with distributed learning resources, that the other person had different resources that might be addi-
tionally relevant for solving the given problem). As each participant was assigned the task of producing an indi-
vidual case solution, the approach was cooperative rather than collaborative.

Main Results
Our major goal was to show that distributed learning resources as well as collaboration feedback improve col-
laborative learning and, thus, contribute to learning success, the quality of problem-solving and have a positive
influence on group climate. Overall, 40 participants (7 men and 33 women with a mean age of 24.5 years; most
of them students at the University of Heidelberg) took part in this study. In a pre-test we assessed participants'
prior knowledge with a test related to the learning objectives of the case solution (six open and twenty multiple
choice questions with each half assessing knowledge about depression and anorexia nervosa). The same test was
used as post-test. In the post-test we also assessed the group climate experienced by participants using an
adopted subscale of the Medical School Learning Environment Survey (Lancaster, Bradley, Smith, Chessman,
Stroup-Benham & Camp, 1997; Marshall 1978; some sample items are "The learning experience made students
feel a sense of achievement.", "The experience of the learning environment made students feel depressed." or
"The learning experience made students value themselves."). We expected by means of fostering collaboration
to establish a kind of cognitive but also a positive social interdependence. Thus, we expected processes of cogni-
tive as well as social grounding that should contribute to groups' well-being functions (cf. McGrath, 1991).
We also took into account the number of collaborative events as well as each participant's quality of problem
solution as dependant variables. Overall, participation in this study took about 2 ½ hours with pre- and pos-test
lasting about one hour altogether.
  Results related to absolute events of collaboration revealed a poor rather than extensive cooperation among
individual group members (see Figure 2, left side). In the condition with homogenous resources and no collabo-
ration feedback there was no collaborative event at all. The several interventions led to an increased number of
collaborative interactions (Chi-square (df=1) = 3.86, p<.05; calculated on group level). The highest amount was
in the condition with distributed resources and collaboration feedback. The numbers are, in general, very low
(each dyad had about 1 ½ hours time for problem-solving/cooperation). Several aspects might explain this. First,
students had to read the case description and scan the learning material (which contained about 8500 words
overall; learners were encouraged to read selectively). This took a major part of the available time. Second, the

                                                          
chat limited exchange between students not only to short sentences, but also allowed them to exchange longer
paragraphs of the learning material or their own problem solutions. Most interaction chains (considered here as
collaborative events) included exchange of major text parts.
  Another dependant variable was the group climate as experienced by the learners. There was no effect of the
factor "distributed resources" but a marginal effect of "collaboration feedback" (F(1, 38) = 3,744, p< .061): dy-
ads that received this kind of feedback experienced the group climate better than dyads without this feedback
(see Figure 2 right).

           9                                                                                   5
              Feedback
           8
                with                        7.4
           7    without                   (SD=4.60)                                          4.5
           6                                                                                                               4.17
           5                                                                                             4.01 (SD=0.36)       (SD=0.27)
                                                                                               4
           4    3.8
           3      (SD=3.29)                                                                              3.86              3.91(SD=0.40)(SD=0.29)
                                                                                             3.5
           2                                1.6                                                    Feedback
           1           0                 (SD=3.37)                                                  with
              (SD=0.00)                                                                             without
           0                                                                                   3

               homogenous                distributed                                                homogenous                distributed
                           Resources                                                                           Resources
Number of collaborative events                                 Group climate
                            Figure 2: Results on collaborative events and group climate.
We were also interested in learning outcomes. Results of the standardized knowledge tests (pre- and post test)
were compared in order to compute an overall score of knowledge acquisition from before to after the treatment.
Results reveal no significant effects (see Figure 3, left). Participants in the condition with distributed resources
and no collaboration feedback received the lowest scores. A lack of collaboration as well as additional learning
material (owned by the other partner of the dyad) could explain this.

           20                                                                                 36

           19                                                                                 35  34.78                       34.9
                      17.518 (SD=11.53)                                                       34    (SD=11.20)            (SD=7.36)33
           17                                                                                 32  31.71
                                                                                              31
           16                           15.25(SD=4.06)                                        30   (SD=12.95)
           15         15.75                                                                   29
           14         (SD=3.93)                                                               28
                                                                                              27
           13                           13.65                                                 26
           12  Feedback                  (SD=6.00)                                            25  Feedback24                  24.18
           11    with                                                                              with23                   (SD=7.63)
                 without                                                                           without
           10                                                                                 22

                homogenous                distributed                                             homogenous                distributed

                           Resources                                                                          Resources
Knowledge increase                                             Problem-solving quality
                             Figure 3: Results in knowledge tests and problem solving.

For analyzing the quality of problem solutions provided by the participants, we developed an expert solution (in-
cluding causes, diagnoses and therapy of depression and anorexia nervosa as well as interrelationships between
both disorders). Two expert raters compared participants' case solutions with the expert model using a scoring
scheme (rcorr=0.97). Participants in dyadic groups with collaboration feedback scored significantly higher than

                                                               
those in groups without feedback (F(1, 38) = 4,687, p< .037; see Figure 3, right). There was no significant effect
of distributed versus homogenous resources (F(1, 38) = 1,353, n.s) as well as no significant interaction effect.
The following table shows results on correlations of dependant measures.

Table 2: Correlation matrix of dependant variables.
                     Number of collabo-             Group climate        Problem-solving     Knowledge (post
                     rative events                                       quality             test)
Number of collabo-   -                              0.56**               0.24                -.02
rative events
Group climate        0.56**                         -                    0.18                -0.17
Problem-solving      0.24                           0.18                 -                   0.39*
quality
Knowledge (post      -.02                           -0.17                0.39*               -
test)
Notes:
Spearman R correlation. * = p<.05; **p<.01

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
Based on previous research on CSCL we integrated two major scaffolding approaches into a learning environ-
ment in order to assess the combined effects of such approaches, and their interaction effects. There are many
approaches that try to describe collaboration in terms of learner behaviour. In the literature review we provided
an overview on recent theoretical and empirical approaches. Based on this review we developed a rationale for
defining and categorizing chains of interaction as single, collaborative events. Based on these working defini-
tions we conducted a study testing the influence of feedback on collaboration and distributed learning resources
in a network-based cooperative learning environment.
  In a 2 x 2 factorial experiment we tested the influence of distributed learning resources as well as feedback
related to collaboration on outcomes of knowledge acquisition, quality of problem-solving, group climate and
number of collaborative events in a network-based cooperative learning scenario. Learners in dyads had to solve
a single case following a Problem-Based Learning approach. Results suggest that a distribution of learning re-
sources and feedback about collaboration enhance collaborative behaviour (compared to homogenous learning
material and/or no collaboration feedback). Although we could not find an enhancement in knowledge acquisi-
tion using a common test format, we were able to show that the feedback approach led to significantly better
problem solutions. Results related to group climate also suggest that feedback on collaborative events could fos-
ter collaboration itself and, thus, positively influence group climate.
  Taken together, results suggest that by distributing learning material, collaboration can be positively influ-
enced but this will have no substantial effect on cognitive outcomes or group climate. In addition, monitoring
students interaction behaviour and providing feedback on collaboration triggers further collaborative behaviour
and influences problem-solving processes as well as group climate.
  Let us try to put this study into a more general perspective. If knowledge is created and re-created primarily
through the interactions between people, as a distributed view of cognition suggests, then the analysis of col-
laboration behaviour constitutes a major prerequisite for the understanding of learning and knowledge. To the
extent that collaboration is essential for learning, the analysis of collaboration is essential for meta-learning, for
learning about learning. If learners are to be empowered to reflect upon their collaboration behaviour and to be-
come strategically aware collaborative learners, they ought to be provided with concepts and tools for analyzing
their collaborative learning. Our approach constitutes a first step in that direction. It is only a first step because
in this study we provided minimal information to learners about their collaboration: only the number of `exem-
plary collaboration episodes' was fed back to the students. We did not provide conceptual information (the kind
of collaboration that was observed) at this stage. Further studies will address this.
  Another shortcoming, at least from a pragmatic perspective, is the fact that we used a human observer to ana-
lyze learners' interactions. This is clearly not an approach that will scale up to multiple dyads working in paral-
lel or to groups with more than two participants (where communications begin to take place in parallel between
sub-groups). The dilemma here is that software, so far, has not surpassed humans in their ability to identify
meaningful interaction patterns, or has come close. However, for more or less well-defined discourse areas and
small group sizes, it can be expected that semantic techniques, and also statistical text analysis approaches (text
mining) can be brought to bear on this task.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank Kate Davison for helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.

                                                                
REFERENCES
Aronson, E. (1984). Förderung von Schulleistung, Selbstwert und prosozialem Verhalten: Die Jigsaw-Methode
     [Enhancement of performance in school, self value and pro social behavior: The Jigsaw method]. In G. L
     Huber, S. Rotering-Steinberg und D. Wahl (Hrsg.). Kooperatives Lernen [cooperative learning] (pp. 48-
     59). Weinheim: Beltz-Verlag.
Barron, B., Martin, C., Roberts, W., Osipovich, A. and Ross, M. (2002). Assisting and assessing the develop-
     ment of technological fluencies: Insights from a project-based approach to teaching computer science. In
     G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp.
     668-669). Hillsdale, N.Y.: Erlbaum.
Barron, B., and Sears, D. (2002). Advancing understanding of learning in interaction: How ways of participating
     can influence joint performance and individual learning. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer support for collabo-
     rative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 593-594). Hillsdale, N.Y.: Erlbaum.
Barros, B., and Verdejo, M. F. (1999). An approach to analyse collaboration when shared structured workspaces
     are used for carrying out group learning processes. In S. P. Lajoie and M. Vivet (Eds.), Artificial Intelli-
     gence in Education: Open Learning Environments (pp. 449-456). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Barros, B., and Verdejo, M. F. (2000). Analysing student interaction processes in order to improve collabora-
     tion. The DEGREE approach. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 11, 221-241.
Barrows, H. S. (1985). How to Design a Problem-based Curriculum for the Preclinical Years. New York:_
     Springer.
Buckingham Shum, S. (1997). Balancing Formality with Informality: User Centred Requirements for Knowl-
     edge Management Technologies. AAAI Spring Symposium (Mar. 24-26, 1997), Stanford University, Palo
     Alto, CA. AAAI Press.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge: University Press.
Conklin, E. J. (1993). Capturing organizational memory. Groupware and computer-supported cooperative work.
     R. M. Baecker. San Francisco, Morgan Kaufman: 561-565.
Donath, J., Karahalios, K., and Vigas, F. (1999). Visualizing conversation. Journal of computer-mediated com-
     munication, 4(4), Online Version: http://jcmc.huji.ac.il/vol4/issue4/donath.html.
Hermann, F., Rummel, N., and Spada, H. (2001). Solving the case together: The challenge of net-based interdis-
     ciplinary collaboration. In P. Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings, and K. Hakkarainen (Eds.), European perspec-
     tives on computer-supported collaborative learning. Proceedings of the European conference on com-
     puter-supported collaborative learning (pp. 293-300). Maastricht, NL: McLuhan Institute.
Johnson, D. W., and Johnson, R. T. (1996). Cooperation and the use of technology. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.),
     Handbook of research for educational communication and technology (pp. 1017-1044). New York:
     Macmillan.
Kneser, C., Fehse, E., and Hermann F. (2000). Kooperatives Lernen auf der Grundlage komplementären Vor-
     wissens: ein Experiment und eine Simulationsstudie [Collaborative Learning on the Basis of Comple-
     mentary Knowledge: An Experiment and a Simulation Study]. Kognitionswissenschaft, 9, 17-31.
Komis, V., Avouris, N., and Fidas, C. (2003). A study on heterogeneity during real time collaborative problem
     solving. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen, and H.-U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for Change in Networked
     Learning Environments (pp. 411-420). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Lancaster, C. J., Bradley, E., Smith, I. K., Chessman, A., Stroup-Benham, C. A., and Camp, M. G. (1997). The
     effect of PBL on students' perceptions of learning environment. Academic Medicine, 72, 10, Suppl. 1, 10-
     12.
Marshall, R. E. (1978). Measuring the medical school learning environment. Journal of Medical Education, 53,
     98-104.
McGrath, J. E. (1991). Time, Interaction, and Performance (TIP). A theory of groups. Small Group Research,
     22, 2, 147-174.
McGrath, J. E., and Hollingshead, A. B. (1994). Groups interacting with technology. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mühlenbrock, M. (2001). Action-based Collaboration Analysis for Group Learning. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Mühlenbrock, M., and Hoppe, U. (1999). Computer supported interaction analysis of group problem solving. In
     C. Hoadley and J. Roschelle (Eds.), Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Collabora-
     tive Learning (CSCL-99) (pp. 398-405). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Palinscar, A. S., and Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension fostering and comprehension-
     monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.
Pfister, R., and Mühlpfordt, M. (2002). Supporting Discourse in a Synchronous Learning Environment: The
     Learning Protocol Approach. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer Support for collaborative learning: Founda-
     tions for a CSCL community (pp. 581-582). Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.

                                                       
Reimann, P. (2003). How to support groups in learning: More than problem solving. In V. Aleven, et al. (Ed.),
     Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED 2003). Supplementary Proceedings (pp. 3-16). Sydney: Uni-
     versity of Sydney.
Reinmann-Rothmeier, G., andMandl, H. (1999). Teamlüge oder Individualisierungsfalle? Eine Analyse kollabo-
     rativen Lernens und dessen Bedeutung  für die Förderung von Lernprozessen in virtuellen Gruppen
     [Team lie or individualization trap? An analysis of collaborative learning and its meaning for the promo-
     tion of learning processes in virtual groups] (Forschungsbericht Nr. 115). München: Ludwig-
     Maximilians-Universität, Lehrstuhl für Empirische Pädagogik und Pädagogische Psychologie.
Reiser, B. (2002). Why Scaffolding Should Sometimes Makes Tasks More Difficult for Learners. In G. Stahl
     (Ed.), Computer Support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 255-264).
     Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Reiserer, M., Ertl, B., and Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering Collaborative Knowledge Construction in Desktop Vide-
     conferencing. Effects of Content Schemes and Cooperation Scripts in Peer-Teaching Settings. In G. Stahl
     (Ed.), Computer Support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 379-388).
     Boulder, CO: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Rummel, N., Spada, H., Hermann, F., Caspar, F., and Schornstein, K. (2002). Promoting the coordination of
     computer-mediated interdisciplinary collaboration. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer support for collaborative
     learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 558-560). Hillsdale, N.Y.: Erlbaum.
Soller, A. (2004). Computational modelling and analysis of knowledge sharing in collaborative distance learn-
     ing. User modeling and user-adapted interaction: The journal of personalisation research.
Soller, A., and Lesgold, A. (1999). Analyzing Peer Dialogue from an Active Learning Perspective [Internet].
     Retrieved October 30, 2004, from http://sra.itc.it/people/soller/documents/Soller-Lesgold-AI-ED-
     Workshop.pdf.
Soller, A., and Lesgold, A. (2000). Knowledge acquisition for adaptive collaborative learning environments. In
     American Association for Artificial Intelligence, Proceedings of the AAAI Fall Symposium: Learning
     How to Do Things (pp. 57-64). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Soller, A., Jermann, P., Muehlebrock, M., and Mones, A. M. (2003). From mirroring to guiding: a review of the
     state of the art technologyy for supporting collaborative learning. International Journal of Artificial Intel-
     ligence in Education.
Welch, M., and Tulbert, B. (2000). Practitioners' perspectives of collaboration: A social validation and factor
     analysis. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 11, 3-4, 357-378.
Zumbach, J., Hillers, A., and Reimann, P. (2003). Supporting Distributed Problem-Based Learning: The Use of
     Feedback in Online Learning. In T. Roberts (Ed.), Online Collaborative Learning: Theory and Practice
     (pp. 86-103). Hershey, PA: Idea.
Zumbach, J., Mühlenbrock, M., Jansen, M., Reimann, P., and Hoppe, H.-U. (2002). Multidimensional tracking
     in virtual learning teams. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer support for collaborative learning: Foundations
     for a CSCL community (pp. 650-651). Hillsdale, N.Y.: Erlbaum.
Zumbach, J., and Reimann, P. (2002). Enhancing learning from hypertext by inducing a goal orientation: com-
     paring different approaches. Instructional Science, 30, 243-267.
Zumbach, J., and Reimann, P. (2003). Influence of feedback on distributed problem based learning. In B.
     Wasson, S. Ludvigsen, and H.-U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for Change in Networked Learning Environ-
     ments (pp. 219-228). Dordrecht: Kluwer.

                                                       
