Coercing Knowledge Construction in Collaborative
                             Learning Environments

   Pieter J. Beers, Paul A. Kirschner,                                   Wim H. Gijselaers
            Henny P.A. Boshuizen                         Department of Educational Development and
 Educational Technology Expertise Center                             Educational Research
    Open University of the Netherlands                               Maastricht University
              pieter.beers@ou.nl

     Abstract. Multidisciplinary teams are often employed to solve complex problems, but research
     has    shown that using such   teams does    not guarantee arriving at good  solutions. Good team-
     solutions require team members possessing a good degree of common ground. In this contribution
     an ICT-tool based upon making individual perspectives explicit to other team members is studied.
     Two versions of the tool that differed in the extent to which users were coerced to adhere to
     embedded     support principles were  used,   in  both a laboratory  and  a  secondary  professional
     education setting. Coercion, as expected, increased negotiation of common ground in both settings.
     However, results were contradictory with regard the amount of common ground achieved. Overall,
     it can  be concluded   that NTool  and   its underlying  framework   affect negotiation of common
     ground, and that adding some coercion increases this effect. However, one should be careful with
     the specific task and audience before implementing NTool.

     Keywords:     Negotiation   of  meaning,  common     ground,  ICT-tools,    knowledge   construction,
     coercion

INTRODUCTION
Professional organisations expect multidisciplinary teams to to achieve improved problem
solving. Expectations are especially high in the case of solving complex problems, because
multidisciplinary teams can employ multiple problem perspectives. Indeed, research has
shown that engaging multiple perspectives may lead to richer solutions to complex problems
(Lomi, Larsen, & Ginsberg, 1997), and that neglecting relevant perspectives can lead to
solving the wrong problem, and in some cases even aggravate the problem (Hasan & Gould,
2001; Vennix, 1996). Research has also shown that individual team members have to engage
each other's thinking in order for these expectations to hold (Barron, 2003). In other words,
team members need to achieve a common cognitive frame of reference, or common ground
(Bromme, 2000; Clark & Brennan, 1991) in order to reap the benefits of multiple problem
perspectives. This contribution deals with the facilitation of grounding processes with an ICT-
tool called NTool.
  NTool is an online communication tool with embedded support of grounding processes.
Like other ICT-tools, NTool uses specific communication rules (a formalism) and constraints
(coercion) to attain this facilitation. These formalisms are tailored to facilitate specific aspects
complex problem solving and coerce1 (Dillenbourg, 2002) people to follow the formalism's
rules. However, whereas other ICT-tools that aimed at facilitation of problem solving
focussed mainly on structuring the problem or the argumentation (e.g., Buckingham Shum,
MacLean, Bellotti, & Hammond, 1997; Eden & Ackermann, 2001; Van Bruggen, 2003),

1 Some dictionary definitions (Webster's student Dictionary, 1996) of coercion hold that to coerce involves `to
 constrain or force to do something'. We wish to stress that this contribution uses it in the sense of constraint,
 not force.

                                                        
NTool is the first to address the grounding process at a more basic level. It does so by making
users explicate their private understanding of other's contributions.
   Researchers in the past have chosen to implement ICT-tools that use formalisms or constraints to structure
conversation and  discourse  among    collaborators   with    the aim    of  guiding   the exchange  of  knowledge  and
information. Such ICT-tools are being used in fields and topics as diverse as design activities (Buckingham
Shum et al., 1997), scientific reasoning (Suthers, 2001), and argumentation (Van Bruggen, 2003). Such tools
have attained good results on cognitive aspects of group learning by focusing on task aspects. However, they
have not explicitly addressed the problem of common ground.
   In this contribution we report on two experimental studies in which two versions of NTool
with different levels of coercion were tested. Study I was a laboratory experiment with
university students in their senior year, while Study II took place in a practical educational
setting with second year students of secondary vocational education. In Study II the effects of
NTool over time were also studied. The goal of this contribution is threefold, namely to report
on the effects of NTool on negotiation of common ground, to verify the laboratory findings in
an educational setting, and to explore differences between the laboratory and practical
educational settings.

A FRAMEWORK
Barron (2003) showed that team performance is related to team interaction, noting that willingness to construct
shared problem spaces is essential for engaging multiple perspectives. In her study (2003), members of high
performing teams engaged each other's thinking, while members of low performing teams typically ignored each
other's proposals. Performance depended on the negotiation of a shared problem space as basis for construction
of complex   problem    solutions. Teams   in which   the    members     critically explored  each other's thinking and
explicitly accepted, agreed, and subsequently documented contributions to the discussion, ultimately generated
better problem solutions. According to Johnson and Johnson (1994), synthesis of multiple perspectives may
result in better decisions and solutions to complex problems. Bromme (2000) argues that a team needs common
ground - a shared cognitive frame of reference - before it can attempt to synthesise perspectives. In other word,
members of multidisciplinary teams need some kind of commonality between their different perspectives in
order to benefit from them.
   In our framework, we address knowledge construction to reflect on how individual knowledge becomes part
of a solution to a complex problem, and group processes to reflect on the team processes that take knowledge
from being in the `mind' of one learner to becoming a team's constructed knowledge. It is inspired by research
and theory on social learning (e.g., Salomon & Perkins, 1998; Sullivan Palincsar, 1998), knowledge sharing
(e.g., Boland & Tenkasi, 1995; Walsh, 1995), and grounding (e.g., Baker, Hansen, Joiner, & Traum, 1999;
Bromme, 2000; Clark & Brennan, 1991). The route from unshared individual knowledge to team knowledge
goes through   three intermediate   forms  (external  knowledge,        shared  knowledge,   common    ground) via  four
processes (externalisation, internalisation, negotiation and integration) (see Figure 1).

                  Unshared
                  knowledge                         Unshared
                                                   knowledge
                                     External
                                    knowledge          Externalisation
                Externalisation
                                                       Shared
                                                      knowledge
                                   Internalisation
                                                                             Common
                                                                             ground
                                                      Negotiation
                                                                                            Constructed
                                                                                             knowledge
                                                                           Integration

                         Figure 1.  From unshared knowledge to constructed knowledge
Private knowledge    is externalised when   team    members    make      their, as  yet, unshared knowledge  explicit or
tangible to others (Leontjev, 1981), for example by contributing to a conversation. Once a team member has
made  such   a contribution, the    others can  try  to internalise      it. While   constructing  their own  individual

                                                             
understanding, the other tem members can consider knowledge of certain aspects such as the contributor's
background, the current situation, and views held to better "understand" the contribution. Also, their own beliefs
and assumptions play a role while trying to understand a contribution. A contribution is thus understood against
the presumed perspective of the other, as well as against one's own perspective (Bromme, 2000). Having shared
a contribution with a team does not mean that the team members all have arrived at the same understanding.
Representational differences can result from interpreting a contribution in one's own perspective only (e.g., a
graphical designer has a different understanding of the term "elegance" than a computer programmer) or from
minimising or rejecting its validity or plausibility due to differences in conviction or opinion.
  A shared contribution is the starting point for negotiation of common ground ­ the shared cognitive frame of
reference (Bromme, 2000). It is through the process of internalising others' contributions, and subsequently
providing feedback based on one's own perspective by word or action, that common ground can be negotiated
(Alpay, Giboin, & Dieng, 1998; Baker et al., 1999). Common ground is never absolute or complete, but is
continually accumulated and updated (Clark & Brennan, 1991).
  Negotiation of common ground is conceived of as a dual concept in our framework. The first concept is
negotiation of meaning which leads to an agreement regarding meaning and understanding of a contribution.
This entails making private understanding of some contribution public to others, verifying whether and to what
extent their own understanding of the contribution is different from what others intended, receiving feedback on
this (clarification), re-verifying, and so on, until "the contributor and the partners mutually believe that the
partners have understood what the contributor meant to a criterion sufficient for the current purpose" (Clark &
Schaefer, 1989, p. 262, the grounding criterion). Negotiation of position, the second concept, concerns people
making public to others their private opinion about a contribution, checking whether one's position is clear to
others, and vice versa. Note that neither of these concepts implies the more common, generic use of the term
negotiation, namely to discuss with an opposing or adversarial party until consensus or compromise is reached.
  Starting   from common     ground, new   knowledge  can   be built by   adding new   relations     and concepts to
common ground, via integration. Knowledge construction is based on the common ground the team has built,
and will broaden and deepen the common ground because the common constructed knowledge becomes part of
the common ground. With regard to problem solving, constructed knowledge represents the solution(s).

A FORMALISM TO SUPPORT NEGOTIATION
The steps from unshared to constructed knowledge in the above framework serve as a basis for a formalism for
the support of negotiation. The formalism consists of primitives of negotiation, and rules that prescribe the use of
these primitives. Primitives are basic building blocks that model a specific type of dialogue (Dillenbourg, 2002).
These primitives are coupled to a set of rules to mimic the negotiation process as explicitly as possible, which
results in a formalism for negotiation. Note that this formalism models an ideal negotiation process; in regular
communication, the status of people's statements in terms of negotiation primitives often remains implicit. The
formalism   must  enable  distinguishing between  original contributions, clarifications, verifications,   et cetera,
making the steps explicit. By doing so, individual differences in understanding and opinion should more easily
surface.
  First, negotiation starts with a contribution (Primitive 1) such as a hypothesis or a position, which is assumed
not to be part of a team's common ground (Rule 1). To detect differences between individual representations,
team members     must verify  (Primitive 2) their understanding  of  the  contribution (Rule      2) because  people
articulate and understand   a contribution  against their  own  background   knowledge    (Fischer,    Nakakoji,  &
Ostwald, 1995). Third, a contribution needs to be elucidated (clarification, Primitive 3), using the ideas upon
which it was based. For example, the educational background or the political orientation of the contributor may
shed light on the meaning of a contribution. Clarification need not always be made by the original contributor,
but may also be performed by another team member who feels knowledgeable. Rule 3 is that all verifications
require a clarification. Together, Rules 2 and 3 can be iterated until common understanding of the contribution is
reached. Note here that a correct clarification of a contribution of one team member can be seen as a successful
verification by another.
  The fourth primitive is acceptance/rejection of a contribution, whether one can judge a contribution as true
(acceptance), based on the explanation given, or untrue, or unintelligible (rejection). For example, the statement
1 + 1 = 10, is true only if we understand (through Rules 1 and 2) that the contributor is using the binary system.
A contribution should be accepted as part of the common ground if it is true, or after it has been modified so that
it has become true. Rule 4 is that every contribution needs to be accepted or rejected by the team members.
Finally, Rule 5 is that people must explicitly state their own position (position, Primitive 5) on the contribution.
In the case of irresolvable disagreement about previously accepted statements, Rule 5 may result in multiple
scenarios, each based on another position (i.e., agree to disagree). This means that one may accept a certain
contribution, but disagree all the same, for example when neither person can prove the other wrong. In such
cases, people can agree to disagree, and alternate representations that are equally legitimate can ensue. Table 1
summarises these rules.

                                                       
Table 1. Rules for a formalism for the facilitation of negotiation
1.  Every new issue is termed a contribution
2.  Contributions require a verification by the other team members
3.  Each verification is responded to with clarification by the original contributor
4.  When all verifications are clarified, and no new verifications are performed, all team members state whether
    they accept or reject the statement
5.  All team members state their position about accepted statements

The Negotiation Tool
The formalism for supporting negotiation was implemented in an ICT-tool called the NegotiationTool (NTool).
NTool is based on a newsgroup reader for asynchronous, distributed, text-based discussions. To optimise NTool
for negotiation of multiple representations, the formalism was implemented to structure the negotiation process
in two ways with different levels of coercion (cf. Dillenbourg, 2002).
   Coercion, a form of scripting, is defined as the degree of freedom participants have in following a formalism.
Coercion and formalism together constitute a collaboration script. The higher the coerciveness of a script, the
more  the participants  are required   to adhere  to  the formalism. Scripting requires "subjects  on  most or  all
occasions to make a particular type of speech act in a specific context." (Baker & Lund, 1997, p. 176). For
Dillenbourg (2002) a "script is a set of instructions regarding to how the group members should interact, how
they should collaborate and how they should solve the problem." (p. 64). This means that a script can be aimed
at either the  interaction and collaboration   level, for  example   by offering sentence openers   or prescribing
communicative acts (e.g., Baker & Lund, 1997; Barros & Verdejo, 1999; Soller, 2002) and/or the problem
solving process, for example in problem-based learning. In such cases, scripting results in the use of distinct
phases for  discussion, with  distinct  purposes  with regard  to  problem solving   (Barrows &   Tamblyn,  1980;
Dillenbourg, 2002; O'Donnell & Dansereau, 1992).
   A script that uses very little coercion leaves participants many degrees of freedom such that usage of the
formalism attains a high degree of idiosyncrasy. A script with a high level of coercion constrains the number of
options participants have, thus guiding them along the lines of the formalism. In the study reported here, two
different ICT-implementations of the formalism were implemented (see Methods). One implementation had very
little coercion and was called the Idiosyncratic version. This situation resembles giving a person a set of lines
and symbols to be used in constructing a diagram, but leaving it up to her/him to decide which symbols and lines
are used for what purpose. The other implementation used scripts aimed at interaction and collaboration (high
coercion)  and was called    Stringent.   In each implementation,   coercion was   aimed  at  the verification and
clarification primitives, that is, the extent to which people were required to verify and clarify contributions in
specific circumstances.
   NTool was expected to increase negotiation of both meaning and position because it forced team members to
make their private understandings and opinions public, making differences in understanding and opinion visible
or salient (Bromme, 2000). We hypothesised that (1) the higher the level of coercion, the more negotiation
would occur. We Likewise, we hypothesised that (2) common ground would be highest in the Stringent version
and lowest in the Idiosyncratic version. Both hypotheses presume that more coercion will make participants
follow more closely an ideal model of negotiation, as laid down in the formalism.

METHOD
Participants
Participants in Study I were senior students at Maastricht University from the departments of
Cultural Sciences, Economics and Business Administration, and Psychology. Participants in
Study II were second year secondary vocational education students from three different
programmes, High-tech Metal-Electricity, Infrastructure, and Architecture. In both studies,
participants were assigned to three-person multidisciplinary teams, which resulted in 12 teams
in Study I, and 22 teams in Study II.

Task
In Study I participants were required to solve a "school drop-out" case (Kirschner, Van Bruggen, & Duffy,
2003). They received the task description: "You have been asked by the government to advise the Minister of
Education how to solve the high school drop-out problem. At the end of the session you are expected to come up
with a viable solution that can be implemented as government policy."

                                                          
   In Study II participants were assigned the task of making a functional design of floating housing as a remedy
for sea-level rise. The task was designed in collaboration with teachers to ensure that the difficulty level was
appropriate for the participants, and that the task was interesting to the different programmes. The task was split
into two parts. In the first part ("Floating Houses") the participants designed a floating house. In the second part
("Amersfoort-by-the-Sea") additional information was given to keep the participants busy. Different though
these tasks may seem, they both are complex problems (see Conklin & Weil, 1997), requiring multidisciplinary
effort to solve them. In both cases the tasks were tailored to the various disciplines in the teams.

Formalism
Each team was supplied with one version of NTool. Each version was used by the same number of teams.
   Idiosyncratic version. This version used only the primitives. On-screen information was presented on every
contribution,  and  whether   it needed   verification or   a     decision (agreeing   or  disagreeing). Furthermore,
participants were informed when they had not verified all contributions, and when they had not decided on all
contributions.
   Stringent version. This version used the same primitives, but allowed negotiation of only one contribution at
a time. Furthermore, participants were not allowed to compose reject-, agree-, and disagree-messages before the
contribution had been verified. Participants were informed, via prompts, as to whether they had to verify or
decide on a contribution.

Procedure
Both experiments started with a practice phase. Study I had one experimental phase; Study II had two. The
general procedure for these phases was the same for both studies, differences in timing are presented in Table 2.
   Practice phase. Participants received a tutorial on the ICT-environment addressing the basics of NTool, and
the formalism rules and how they constrained communication. To ensure that participants were proficient with
NTool they received a practice case (about a problem of road traffic safety) to enable them to gain experience
with NTool.
   Experimental phase. After a 15-minute break, participants started working on the experimental cases. To
promote  the   construction of   an individual problem  representation,     as   well as  to allow the   researchers to
determine  what   this representation was, participants     first had to   carry out  the task individually  (pre-test).
Participants could take notes while working individually. Next, they solved the problem collaboratively, and
after that individually  gave  their solution  (post-test). All   resulting individual   problem   representations and
solutions, as well as the group discussion were recorded. In their post-test, participants were also asked to state
the points on which they felt that they had differences in opinion with their team members, to account for
agreeing to disagree.
   Study II had two experimental phases (a morning session and an afternoon session), with a 75-minute lunch-
break between the sessions.

Table 2. Timing differences between Study I and Study II
                                          Study I             Study II
Practice phase                            65 min              75 min
         Tutorial                         20 min              15 min
         Practice                         45 min              60 min
Experimental phase                      130 min               90 min
         Pre-test                         20 min              15 min
         Collaboration task               90 min              60 min
         Post-test                        20 min              15 min

Variables and Analysis
Negotiation   was  measured  by  analysis of   the collaboration.   Common     ground    was  measured   by comparing
individual representations before and after collaboration.
   A coding scheme for coding function and content of messages during collaboration was developed (cf., e.g.,
Avouris, Dimitracopoulou, & Komis, 2003; Fischer, Bruhn, Gräsel, & Mandl, 2002; Mulder, Swaak, & Kessels,
2002; Thomas, Bull, & Roger, 1982). All messages were coded with regard to:
x   Cognitive content - directly related to solving the problem.
x   Regulative content - related to monitoring the problem solving process, regulating the collaboration process,
    which also entailed tool use.
x   Other content - not in any other category or non-codeable.
Messages with cognitive content were specifically coded for function. The following subcategories were used:

                                                         
x   Contribution: A new topic of conversation that has not been discussed before is introduced.
x   Verification: Information directly or indirectly requested about the intended meaning of a contribution.
x   Clarification: A reaction to a verification or a perceived lack of understanding, where the intended meaning
    of a contribution or elaboration is elucidated.
x   Acceptance: A reaction to a contribution in which the contribution is judged intelligible and/or correct.
x   Rejection: A reaction to a contribution in which the contribution is judged unintelligible and/or incorrect.
x   Agreement: A reaction to a contribution in which the sender voices his/her agreement with the contribution.
x   Disagreement:  A  reaction  to a contribution    in   which   the sender  voices his/her   disagreement  with the
    contribution.
   In many cases, messages did not fit any of the above subcategories, for example if people built on each
other's communications, without explicitly negotiating meaning of, or position on a contribution. Such messages
were coded Elaboration: A contribution is elaborated upon by adding information or summarising. Verification
and clarification, in contrast to elaboration, were considered indicative of explicit negotiation activities. The
total number of contributions discussed was used as an indicator for the range of topics discussed.
   Research-assistants were trained to use the coding scheme using data from the practice phase. Each assistant
coded the data from one study. Comparing one randomly selected experimental session coded by the first author
and a research-assistant resulted in substantial (Landis & Koch, 1977) inter-rater reliability (Cohen's kappa) for
both studies, .70 (SE = .034) in Study I, and .73 (SE = .024) in Study II.
   Common ground. Common ground was operationalised as the extent to which the content of individual
representations was present in individual representations. The contributions identified in the coding procedure
were used to characterise the content of the individual representations.

                                         Tom                 Jane                  Mary

                                         1   3   6    8         2   3    5  7        1   2   4   9

                     Individual
                   representations
                                                        1  2 3    4   5 6   7 8  9 10
                                   Group
                                 discussion

                                         1 5  6  7    10      1   6   7   8 10     1   2 5   7  10

                    Figure 2. Analysis of common ground; numbers indicate contributions
Each contribution was first numbered and summarised. The next step involved characterising the content of all
individual representations, both initial (pre-test)  and   subsequent   to  collaboration  (post-test), and the group
representation. The summaries were used to identify the content within individual the representations. For every
individual representation the topics that were and were not represented were assessed. For example, in Figure 2
episode number 7 is present in Jane's initial individual representation, in the group discussion, and in all post-
tests. By repeating this procedure for each of the contributions in the discussion, the origin of each topic, whether
it was present in the group representation, and whether participants used it in their post-tests was determined.
Using these data we computed, for each group, the mean number of pre-tests and post-tests that a contribution
would end up in. This mean number of post-tests per contribution was used as a measure of common ground.
Statistical analyses
Statistical testing was done using various ANOVA techniques. Negotiation was analysed using ANOVA, and
common ground using ANCOVA, with the number of pre-tests per contribution (i.e., common ground prior to
collaboration) as a covariate. In Study II, these analyses were done using a repeated measures statistical model to
account for the two-session format. All analyses were performed with SPSS version 11. Due to no-show after the
first experimental phase in Study II, the number of groups used in the statistical analyses was lower than 22.
Data for 9 groups in the Idiosyncratic, and 5 in the Stringent conditions were eligible for statistical analysis.
Because of  the effects of  such   small sample     sizes on statistical   power we  feel  that reporting   marginally
significant effects (.05 <p <.10) is justified. Significant effects of phase I on phase II (effects of time) were not
considered relevant to our hypotheses, and are not discussed here.

                                                          
RESULTS

Study I
ANOVA       revealed   significant  differences  between   the   conditions  for   the   number     of  contributions,
F(1, 10) = 12.27, p < .01,  number   of verifications, F(1, 10) = 13.72, p < .005,  and   number    of  clarifications,
F(1, 10) = 7.25, p < .05. In other words the Idiosyncratic teams made significantly more contributions, whereas
the Stringent teams verified and clarified more often (see Table 3). Common ground was highest in the Stringent
groups F(1, 9) = 6.23, p < .05 with common ground prior to collaboration as a covariate. Eliminating the non-
significant  (p = .56) covariate   from  the    model  resulted   in a  significant main     effect from   condition
F(1, 10) = 7.14, p < .05.

Table 3. Negotiation Primitives and Common Ground in Study I
                                                 Condition
                            Idiosyncratic (n = 6)          Stringent (n = 6)
                               M             SD              M           SD
Contribution                   8.0           1.27            5.0        1.67
Verification                   8.8           4.36         16.7          2.81
Clarification                10.7            4.50         17.7          4.50
Elaboration                  56.6         22.42           48.5         21.52
Acceptance                     3.0           2.10            1.8        2.14
Rejection                      1.2           .98             1.7        2.73
Agreement                      8.7           2.66         11.7          7.74
Disagreement                   1.3           1.21            2.0        1.41
Regulation                   30.7         22.52           43.7         17.18
Other                          8.0           8.92            5.0        4.47

Common Ground                1.97            1.90         2.39           .33

Study II
Repeated measures ANOVA tests revealed a significant interaction between time and condition for the number
of verifications, F(1, 12) = 8.28,  p < .05. In   both sessions,  Stringent teams   made   more   verifications   than
Idiosyncratic teams, but in the Stringent teams' afternoon sessions have less verifications than morning sessions,
while in the Idiosyncratic teams it is the other way around. Noteworthy marginal interactions were the number of
contributions, F(1, 12) = 4.37, p = .06 and the number of elaborations, F(1, 12) = 4.38, p = .06. Both figures
dropped quite markedly between sessions in the Stringent groups compared to the Idiosyncratic groups.
   Noteworthy marginal main effects were revealed for the number of verifications, F(1, 12) = 4.35, p = .06, the
number of clarifications, F(1, 12) = 4.56, p = .05 the number of disagreements F(1, 12) = 3.75, p = .08, and the
number of regulations, F(1, 12) = 3.86, p = .07. These figures were highest in Stringent groups (see Table 4). In
other words,  the marginal  effects  suggest  a trend  in the  expected direction,  that is, more   verifications and
clarifications in the Stringent teams. Unexpectedly, common ground was highest in the Idiosyncratic teams
F(1, 11) = 7.83,  p < .05 with common     ground   prior  to collaboration  as a covariate.   Eliminating  the    non-
significant  (p = .80) covariate   from  the    model  resulted   in a  significant main     effect from   condition
F(1, 12) = 8.46, p < .05.

                                                          
Table 4. Negotiation Primitives and Common Ground in Study II
                                                                     Condition
                                      Idiosyncratic (n = 9)                              Stringent (n = 5)
                             Morning                 Afternoon                    Morning               Afternoon
                           M           SD           M            SD            M          SD           M           SD
Contribution               6.22        1.99        4.89          1.90       7.20         2.28       3.80           1.64
Verification               1.22        1.30        1.67          1.80       4.80         2.28       2.00           2.83
Clarification              1.89        1.97         .78          .67        3.60         1.67       2.40           3.21
Elaboration            27.44          16.36        27.11       14.43       46.00         23.05     20.40        18.15
Acceptance                 1.56        1.13        1.33          1.32       2.00         1.58       2.60           2.41
Rejection                  .44         1.01         .00          .00           .80       1.10          .20         .45
Agreement                  3.33        2.78        4.44          2.96       3.80         3.27       2.80           2.39
Disagreement               .44          .73         .44          .73        1.40          .89          .80         .84
Regulation             27.22          20.57        25.00       20.54       48.20         18.87     43.80        15.37
Other                  28.89          31.16        70.33       68.02       72.40         58.22    112.00        46.35

Common Ground              1.90         .65        2.02          .61        1.41          .39       1.55           .41

CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
This research studied the relationship between negotiation, the negotiation formalism, and coercion, with the
ultimate goal being to design an ICT environment that facilitates knowledge construction. The main approach
was the design of a formalism for the facilitation of common ground, which appears to be a prerequisite for
knowledge construction.
  The results showed that the two versions of NTool differed with regard to negotiation and common ground.
In both studies, coercion was shown to increase negotiation, as hypothesised. However, with regard to common
ground the   results are   contradictory. Whereas   high    coercion was associated  with high  common     ground  in
Study I, the idiosyncratic groups were shown to have the most common ground in Study II. Analyses showed
that the Idiosyncratic groups made significantly more contributions than the other versions. This may mean that
the range of topics was widest in the Idiosyncratic version, which could suggest a trade-off between topic range
and common ground. However, it may also be the case that participants in the Stringent versions, knowing that
they had less opportunity to post contributions, chose to word their contributions more broadly, in which case
fewer contributions would still cover the same topic range. Further, more qualitative research may shed some
light on these explanations.
  Disruption of collaboration (Dillenbourg, 2002), which can be caused by over-scripting collaboration, may
explain some of the results. The need for more regulation in the Scripted version (Study II) may have caused
some disruption in task performance. In that respect, the marked drop in contributions and elaborations in the
Stringent afternoon sessions and the lack thereof in the Idiosyncratic groups, may indicate a loss of attention to
the task in the Stringent groups that may have not occurred in the Idiosyncratic groups. This might show that
using NTool    was   quite taxing  in Study II. In Study I,  where   participants were university students, no such
differences were observed. In sum, NTool influences both negotiation of common ground and common ground
itself, and does so increasingly as coercion increases. The Stringent version may have caused some disruption in
Study II but not in Study I.
  The results are promising with regard to the facilitation of the grounding process, but they also indicate some
limitations in the   applicability of such  facilitation. In her study,  Barron   (2003) showed   that interaction is
important for problem solving, and that engaging in each other's thinking was related to better solutions. The
present study has shown that ICT-tools can be used to facilitate such interactions, by using a formalism for
negotiation, and coercing the user into following it. However, these results were more easily achieved in the
laboratory than in a secondary vocational education institution. Whereas in Study I all expected effects occurred,
in Study II some unexpected effects occurred as well. This shows that the ultimate implementation of a tool like
NTool should be weighed against the expected benefits, and the capacities of the intended audience.
  More research is required to test our ultimate aim of facilitating complex problem solving. The present study
does argue a relation between common ground and the quality of problem solutions, but does not explicitly
measure it. Overall, it can be concluded that NTool and its underlying framework affect negotiation of common
ground, and that adding some coercion increases this effect. However, one should be careful with the specific
task and audience before implementing NTool.

                                                            
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Piet Van den Bossche (Lic.) and Prof. dr. Mien Segers for their comments on the
study, Wim van der Vegt for his excellent job programming NTool, Jochem Westendorp and Aukje Schurer for
their assistance during the study. Last but not least we thank Rob Sars, Rene van der Meent, Bert van Dinter,
Gérard Opstelten, Yvonne Moerman, and especially Nico Stunnenberg from the Koning Willem I College for
their help with Study II.

REFERENCES
Alpay, L., Giboin, A., & Dieng, R. (1998). Accidentology: An example of problem solving by multiple agents
       with multiple representations. In M. W. Van Someren, P. Reimann, H. P. A. Boshuizen & T. De Jong
       (Eds.), Learning with multiple representations (pp. 152-174). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Avouris, N. M., Dimitracopoulou, A., & Komis, V. (2003). On analysis of collaborative problem solving: An
       object-oriented approach. Computers in Human Behavior, 19(2), 147-167.
Baker, M. J., Hansen, T., Joiner, R., & Traum, D. (1999). The role of grounding in collaborative learning tasks.
       In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 31-63).
       Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Pergamon / Elsevier Science.
Baker, M. J., & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a computer-supported collaborative
       learning environment. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 13, 175-193.
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Barros, B., & Verdejo, M. F. (1999, July). An approach to analyse collaboration when shared structured
       workspaces are used for carrying out group learning processes. Paper presented at the International
       Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, Le Mans, France.
Barrows, H. S., & Tamblyn, R. M. (1980). Problem-based learning. An approach to medical education.New
       York, USA: Springer.
Boland, R. J., & Tenkasi, R. V. (1995). Perspective making and perspective taking in communities of knowing.
       Organization Science, 6(4).
Bromme, R. (2000). Beyond one's own perspective: The psychology of cognitive interdisciplinarity. In P.
       Weingart & N. Stehr (Eds.), Practicing interdisciplinarity (pp. 115-133). Toronto, Canada: University
       of Toronto Press.
Buckingham Shum, S. J., MacLean, A., Bellotti, V. M. E., & Hammond, N. V. (1997). Graphical argumentation
       and design cognition. Human-Computer Interaction, 12, 267-300.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D.
       Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington DC, USA:
       American Psychological Association.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259-294.
Conklin, E. J., & Weil, W. (1997). Wicked problems: Naming the pain in organizations (White Paper): Group
       Decision Support Systems, Inc.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
       design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of cscl: Can we support cscl? (pp. 61-91). Heerlen, The
       Netherlands: Open Universiteit Nederland.
Eden, C., & Ackermann, F. (2001). Strategic options development and analysis: The principles. In J. Rosenhead
       & J. Mingers (Eds.), Rational analysis for a problematic world (2nd ed., pp. 21-42). Chichester, UK:
       John Wiley & Sons.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., & Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering collaborative knowledge construction with
       visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12, 213-232.
Fischer, G., Nakakoji, K., & Ostwald, J. (1995, August 23-25). Supporting the evolution of design artifacts with
       representation of context and intent. Paper presented at the Designing Interactive Systems 1995
       Conference, Ann Arbor, USA.
Hasan, H., & Gould, E. (2001). Support for the sense-making activity of managers. Decision Support Systems,
       31, 71-86.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1994). Structuring academic controversy. In S. Sharan (Ed.), Handbook of
       cooperative learning methods (pp. 66-81). Westport, US: Praeger.
Kirschner, P., Van Bruggen, J., & Duffy, T. (2003, June). Covase: Collaborative visualization for constructivist
       learning. Paper presented at the CSCL 2003, Bergen, Norway.
Landis, J., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics, 33,
       159-174.
Leontjev, A. N. (1981). The problem of activity in psychology. In J. V. Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of activity in
       soviet psychology (pp. 37-71). Armonk, USA: Sharp.

                                                      
Lomi, A., Larsen, E. R., & Ginsberg, A. (1997). Adaptive learning in organizations: A system-dynamics-based
       exploration. Journal of Management, 23(4), 561-582.
Mulder, I., Swaak, J., & Kessels, J. (2002). Assessing group learning and shared understanding in technology-
       mediated interaction. Educational Technology & Society, 5(1), 35-47.
O'Donnell, A. M., & Dansereau, D. F. (1992). Scripted cooperation in student dyads: A method for analyzing
       and enhancing academic learning and performance. In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz & N. Miller (Eds.),
       Interaction in cooperative groups: The theoretical anatomy of group learning (pp. 120-141). New
       York, USA: Cambridge University Press.
Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1998). Individual and social aspects of learning. Review of Research in
       Education, 23, 1-24.
Soller, A. L. (2002). Computational analysis of knowledge sharing in collaborative distance learning.
       Unpublished PhD-thesis, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA.
Sullivan Palincsar, A. (1998). Social constructivist perspectives on teaching and learning. Annual Review of
       Psychology, 49, 345-375.
Suthers, D. D. (2001). Towards a systematic study of representational guidance for collaborative learning
       discourse, Journal of Universal Computer Science (Vol. 7, pp. 254-277).
Thomas, A. P., Bull, P., & Roger, D. (1982). Conversational exchange analysis. Journal of Language and Social
       Psychology, 1(2), 141-155.
Van Bruggen, J. M. (2003). Explorations in graphical argumentation; the use of external representations in
       collaborative problem solving. Unpublished PhD-thesis, Open University of the Netherlands, Heerlen,
       The Netherlands.
Vennix, J. A. M. (1996). Group model building: Facilitating team learning using system dynamics. Chichester,
       UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Walsh, J. P. (1995). Managerial and organizational cognition: Notes from a trip down memory lane.
       Organization Science, 6(3), 280-321.

                                                    
