Why Member Portraits Can Undermine Participation

                                                 Ulrike Cress
     University of Tuebingen; Germany, Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and
                                             Media Psychology
                                            u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de

      Abstract. One possible way to support social awareness in virtual collaborative environments is
      to provide member portraits. Based on the SIDE-Model (Social Identity Model of Deindividuation
      Effect) it is argued that these portraits can have ambivalent effects for people who act according to
      the mode of personal identity and for people who act according to the mode of social identity. An
      experiment providing an information-exchange dilemma task confirmed these expectations.

      Keywords: Group-awareness tools; information-exchange dilemma; participation; member por-
      traits; anonymity; SIDE-Model

FREE-RIDING IN VIRTUAL GROUPS
A problem which is often reported when people exchange knowledge via e-forums or shared databases is low
participation. In online seminars, virtual classes or organizational knowledge management projects, many people
only passively participate in the information-exchange activity by reading the other participants' messages and
contributions, but they do not actively engage in making their own contributions. This high rate of free-riding
could have multiple reasons: The topic being dealt with may have low intrinsic value for the participants and
thus would not motivate all persons to engage in exchanging their knowledge. But even if group members are
motivated to make some contributions, there is a high message threshold. People perhaps are afraid of making
incorrect statements which they cannot delete afterwards, or they feel that they have not reflected upon their
contributions long enough to write them down. A further obstacle is that it takes additional time and effort to
externalize knowledge, because personal knowledge must be written down and worked out in a way that others
can understand it. And in many ­ mainly organizational ­ contexts unique knowledge serves as power, and
contributing it to a database and thus sharing it with others would mean losing this power. All these barriers for
contributing raise individual costs for a contributor. And these costs lead to the situation that the decision to
externalize knowledge  and   enter it in  a shared repository represents a kind  of social   dilemma  (Cabrera  &
Cabrera, 2002; Cress & Hesse, 2004; Dawes, 1980; Thorn & Connolly, 1987): A potential knowledge provider
receives no private benefit for entering information. Instead, s/he only incurs the private costs of investing time
and effort. So whereas all the other users can (at least potentially) benefit from his/her knowledge-sharing
behavior, the contributor personally has no direct benefit, only costs. This means that every person would
benefit more if s/he behaved unco-operatively and withheld their information. But if all individuals did this,
there would be no knowledge exchange and everyone would have more costs than if all had co-operated. In the
long run everyone would end up less well off.
  This  social   dilemma  is even   heightened   by the anonymity    of  computer-mediated     communication.   In
newsgroups or virtual classes group members typically are working at different places, they often do not even
know each other personally. Exchanging knowledge via shared repositories provides almost no social cues and
thus reduces  communication   to the  transfer of  information.  On the  one hand,  a sender   does not  know   the
recipients and is not informed about the information they need. This could lead to a contributor's subjective
perception that s/he sends a message to the database, not to other people. On the other hand, a recipient doesn't
have much information about a sender. S/he primarily feels that s/he is retrieving data and not that s/he is
obtaining information from a real person. Thus, databases provide an extremely low level of social presence.
This makes it even more difficult for each group member to feel him/herself as belonging to a group. A person
therefore may feel primarily motivated by his/her own needs, and not affected by the needs of the group,
because s/he is not really aware of the others. This low awareness of the group could even increase the tendency
of users to supply primarily their own wants, not the wants of others. Thus in a social dilemma, where the
individual's benefit opposes the group's benefit, a person will probably be even less co-operative. This carries
over into   the information-exchange     dilemma  where a  person   will contribute   less. Taking  this effect of
anonymity   into account, one way     to encourage  contributing information  to a  shared   database might be  to
implement database tools which enhance a person's awareness of the others and their needs.

                                                         
TOOLS FOR PROVIDING GROUP AWARENESS
In virtual environments Carroll, Neale, Isenhour, Bosson, and McCrickard (2003) differentiate among three
forms of awareness, which can be strengthened by specific tools. Social awareness is a user's awareness of the
presence of other group members. It reflects the question "Who is around?". It can be enhanced by any tool
which makes the presence of others visible, for example by portraits of others, by video or by avatars. Action
awareness provides information about "What is happening?". This kind of awareness considers not only the
presence of others, but also their interactions with the shared resource. Tools enhancing this kind of awareness
make the current action of the group members visible. The third kind of awareness is called activity awareness.
For this kind of awareness the common task of the group is central. Activity awareness does not only consider
who is around and what these people are doing, but it specifically relates the members' actions to the common
task. Activity awareness tools provide feedback about whether shared plans are created or changed, and they
show how much these shared goals have been reached at any given moment. They provide awareness about
"How things are proceeding?".
   If shared repositories are primarily used for information exchange in general and not for a joint task, then the
virtual environment should support at least the first two forms of awareness: Social and action awareness. In this
context many communication platforms allow integrating visual portraits of each group member and feedback
about the group's activity. These options are provided with the aim of giving the group members at least some
impression about the others and some awareness of the group as a whole. In line with this, current research
about  social awareness    normally   assumes   that awareness  enhances   individual participation.  This research
expects that being aware of the group members and having information about their behavior enhances the
feeling of being part of a group. It is expected that this awareness automatically makes the group and its interests
come a bit more to the fore, whereas it makes the individual interests less salient
   Indeed, experimental studies in our laboratory showed that providing people with information about others'
activities does not always have a positive effect (Cress & Hesse, 2004). In the information-exchange dilemma
people adjust  to   the   others' behavior. If they  receive the information  that  others   are contributing much
information then they increase their contribution rate, too. But if they become aware that the others are free-
riding, then they reduce their activity, too. So, activity awareness seems to satisfy a human's need for comparing
him/herself with others (Festinger, 1954). If people know how others are behaving they tend to assimilate their
own behavior to that of the others. For high contributors this leads to making fewer contributions in future.
   Based on this ambivalent effect of a tool for action awareness, we have to consider that a tool for social
awareness could perhaps also have an ambivalent effect. There is in fact some prominent theoretical evidence in
social psychology which indicates that reducing anonymity by providing member portraits could achieve an
ambivalent effect, too.

EXPECTED EFFECT OF MEMBER PORTRAITS
Providing member portraits reduces visual anonymity. In the last 10 years much research has been done in the
context of the Social Identity model of Deindividuation Effect (SIDE, Lea, Spears, & de Groot, 2001; Postmes,
Spears, Lea, & Reicher, 2000; Spears, Lea, & Postmes, 2000). The cognitive part of this research deals with the
visual anonymity in computer-mediated communication groups. The concept is based on the theory of Self-
Categorization (Turner, Hogg, Oakes, Reicher, & Wetherell, 1987), which postulates that in a group situation an
individual has two possibilities to categorize him/herself: One will view him/herself as an individual (personal
identity), or as  a group    member   (group   identity). These  two modes   of self-categorization   influence the
perception and cognitive representation of the group members and the schemas which are activated: In the mode
of personal   identity  a  person  accentuates the differences among   the group    members  and  the group   norms
become less relevant. Thus individual norms are salient and a person in the mode of personal identity will
primarily behave according to his/her own norms. In the mode of group identity, the group is salient and a
person primarily views himself as a group member. In this mode the group norm becomes salient and existing
differences between different group members are ignored. This leads to a higher conformity to the group norms.
   The SIDE model is grounded in this theory and postulates that visual anonymity has different effects for
people in the mode of group identity and for people in the mode of personal identity.

x  For people in the group identity mode anonymity ensures that the only information a person receives is the
   information that all group members belong to one common group. All individual differences between the
   group   members     are masked,   which  increases the  salience of a common     identity and  leads to stronger
   depersonalization. This strengthens a person's conformity to the group norm. In contrast, if anonymity is
   reduced (for example through the provision of member portraits), a user implicitly receives information
   about differences among the group members. The portraits, for example, show that the group members have
   different genders or different ages, and the portraits activate different stereotypes. These differences lead a

                                                           
   user to cognitively represent the others not only as group members, but also as idiosyncratic individuals with
   different personalities and motivations. This lowers the subjective perception of being part of one group.

x  For people in the mode of personal identity mode this effect of portraits is just the opposite: Here visual
   anonymity strengthens the perceived distance of a person to the group, because without any information
   about others, people do not have any cues about others at all. If portraits are given, then the others become at
   least a bit more "real" and relevant. This enhances the prominence of the group, and thus strengthens the
   significance of the group norm.

   This theory can be applied to the information-exchange dilemma discussed above. If groups exchange their
knowledge via databases, and if contributing information to the database is associated with any kind of costs for
the contributor (time, effort, loss of power), then individual interests differ from group interests. A person
individually is better  off, if s/he does   not  provide any information. Then   s/he saves   individual resources,
whereas s/he can nevertheless benefit from the others' contributions. Thus, the personal norm in this situation is
to withhold information, and the group norm is to contribute information and participate actively in knowledge
exchange. Because in a social dilemma individual interests conflict with group interests, both norms ­ the
individual norm  as    well  as the group   norm  ­ are  salient. We   suppose that then   a person's social value
orientation determines which norm is more influential. The social value orientation is a personal trait, stable
across time and situations. According to McClintock (1978) people can be classified into three types of social
value  orientation: individualistic  orientation (persons who  mainly   behave according   to maximize   their own
benefit), prosocial orientation (people who mainly behave according to maximize the group's benefit), and
competitive orientation (people who intend to maximize the distance between their own outcomes and those of
the others). About 43% of people belong to the first type, about 28% to the second type and about 8% to the
third type. About 20% can't be classified as belonging to one type (Van Lange, Otten, De Bruin, & Joiremann,
1997).
   Based on the SIDE-model, we expect that providing member portraits will lead to a higher number of
contributions for people with individualistic orientation individualists, but to a lower number of contributions
for people with prosocial orientation, revealing an ambivalent effect of member portraits as a group-awareness.

EXPERIMENT
The following experiment, providing a knowledge-exchange dilemma, was conducted to test this hypothesis.

Method
Participants and Design: Participants were 84 students of the University of Tuebingen, Germany (45 women,
mean age 23.8 years). They were randomly assigned to the two experimental conditions. Half of the participants
were provided with member portraits, half worked without such portraits. Based on the social-orientation test
the participants were classified as having a prosocial orientation or an individualistic orientation. This led to a 2
x 2- factorial design.

Material: For measuring the social value orientation we used the nine-item decomposed game measure of Van
Lange, Otten, De Bruin, and Joireman (1997). With each item a participant has to decide how many points s/he
and another   person   would    receive. The three  options  represent a prosocial  (large joint outcome,  and  no
difference between one's own and the other's outcomes), an individualistic (largest outcome for oneself), or a
competitive decision (large difference between one's own and the other's outcomes). Participants are classified
as prosocial, individualistic or competitive, if at least six choices are consistent with one of these social value
orientations. This test has generally revealed good internal consistency and test-retest reliability. In this study
only people with individualistic or prosocial orientation were considered.

Procedure: Upon arrival each participant had to complete the social value orientation test. Then the experiment
began: Each participant was told that s/he was a member of a group of six synchronous working team members
each working in a different room. This team had to calculate salaries of salesmen and each team member was
paid according to the number of salaries s/he managed to calculate. Each salary was composed of two values: a
base salary which had to be calculated in the first phase of a trial, and the provision, which had to be calculated
in the second phase. In the first phase a subject earned 0.25 Euro for each base salary s/he calculated. After each
calculation a person had to decide whether s/he wanted to contribute this result to the shared database. But the
transfer to the database cost time. And because the first phase was time-limited (9 Minutes), the more one
contributed, the fewer base salaries one could calculate, and - consequently - the less one earned.

                                                          
                                                                         contribution rate
   In the second phase, each group member had to calculate the total salary of as many salespeople as possible.
In this phase a participant earned 0.30 Euro for every total salary s/he calculated. But for the calculation of a
salesman's total salary the base salary was needed. If a participant did not calculate it in the first phase, and if
this value was not contributed to the database by at least one of the other group members, s/he had to calculate it
in the second phase. By doing this one lost time. And the second phase was also time limited (12 Minutes). Thus,
during the second phase, the more base salaries the database contained, the more one could earn. Thus, being
collaborative and contributing base salaries to the database in the first phase could facilitate the performance of
the other group members in the second phase. But according to his/her own payoff, a person had no benefit from
contributing a base salary to the database, because in the second phase a person had the base salaries s/he had
calculated in the first phase anyway. After the experiment participants were paid according to their individual
performance. A person got money for each base salary and total salary s/he calculated. For eliminating group
effects the teams were faked. (The task is described in detail in Cress, Barquero, Buder, & Hesse, i.p.).
    In the experiment half of the participants worked with a shared database providing member portraits, which
were visible during the whole experiment. The other half worked with a screen providing no portraits. At the
end   of  the  experiment   the participants   had  to   complete the  post-experimental                  questionnaire.     Then   each
participant was paid according to his/her individual performance.

Results
The social value orientation test classified 40 participants as prosocials, 23 participants as individualists, and 9
participants as competitors. The other 12 participants could not be classified as they had no stable tendency
across the 9 items of the Social value orientation test. (This proportion of prosocials, individualists, competitors,
and non-classifiable persons correspond with the findings of Van Lange et. al., 1997). For testing the hypothesis
only people with individualistic orientation and those with prosocial orientation were considered. This lead to
the following cell frequencies: 14 participants with individual orientation worked with portraits, nine worked
without portraits. Out of the people with prosocial orientation 20 worked with portraits and 19 without.

    For   testing  the expectation    a 2x2-factorial
ANOVA      with   the  between-factors    social  value                                        with portraits    without portraits
orientation    and  portraits was     calculated. The                                      0,8
contribution     rate  (number     of   results    one
contributed    distributed through    the  number   of                                     0,6
results   one   calculated)   served    as  dependent
variable,. The analysis revealed a significant main                                        0,4
effect     for      social     value       orientation,
F (1, 58) = 11.42; p < .001:   Individualists    contri-                                   0,2
buted less than prosocials. As expected, there was
no  main   effect  of  anonymity,  F (1,   58) = 0.25;                                       0
p > .05,   but there   was a  significant  interaction                                             individual         prosocial
between social value orientation and anonymity,                                                    orientation       orientation
F (1,  58) = 4.28; p < .05.   The mean     contribution
rates   of  the   four  conditions    describing   this           Figure 1: Mean contribution rates for participants
interaction are presented in Figure 1. It shows that              with different                 social value    orientation    working
for people     with   individualistic orientation  the            with a shared database providing portraits of the
portraits   lead   to  higher     contribution    rates,          others, or                with  a shared     database not providing
whereas for people with prosocial orientation they                any information about others.
lead to lower contribution rates.

Discussion
The study confirmed the hypothesis resulting from the SIDE-Model: In the information-exchange dilemma
member portraits have different effects for people with individualistic and for people with prosocial orientation.
For individualists portraits enhance contribution, whereas for prosocials they undermine contribution. This result
strengthens our argument that group awareness tools in virtual environments do not necessarily have the desired
effect of enhancing participation. Social awareness tools can make the group more prominent by reminding a
group member of the existence of other group members. But they also can provide the information that the other
group members have different needs and that they behave differently. This information, which can be implicitly
transported by a group awareness tool, could reduce one's perception of the group as a monolithic block. And
perceiving individual differences can reduce the motivation to act in favor of the group.

                                                             
  In this context, the study of Lee (2004) is interesting. His experiment is also based on the SIDE-model, and it
investigates different forms of member visualizations in computer-mediated communication. The participants of
a group were either visualized through same-character cartoons or through different-character cartoons. Lee
found that the same-character cartoons made the group more salient than the different-character cartoons. The
groups with the same-character cartoon depersonalized themselves more and showed more conformity to the
group norm during the discussion. So, even if both forms cartoons provided full anonymity, the same-character
cartoons made the group more salient than the different-character cartoons. Lee and Nass (2002) further showed
that even if people are fully aware that the characters are randomly assigned to the discussion partners, they
associate the attributes of the characters with anonymous communication partners.
  The results of our study raise the question as to whether there are alternative visualizations which could
avoid the undesired effects of the group awareness tools developed so far. Such visualizations should enhance
social awareness by making the existence of others more prominent. And simultaneously they should stress the
perception of homogeneity of the group members. In further experiments we therefore will investigate the use of
a pie chart which is programmed in a way that the pie piece of a member locks into place as soon as s/he is
online. If all group members are present the pie is complete and is visualized as a united entity. We assume that
such a chart could make the group salient by reminding a person about the existence of other group members. It
gives information about the number of people belonging to the group, and it presents their names. But these
persons are all visualized in the same manner, and the pie chart stresses their togetherness. It makes the group as
a whole salient and leads a person to a stronger feeling of being member of a group.

REFERENCES
Cabrera, A., & Cabrera, E. F. (2002). Knowledge-sharing dilemmas. Organization Studies, 23 (5), 687-710.
Carroll, J. M., Neale, D. C., Isenhour, P. L., Rossen, M. B., & McCrickard, D. S. (2003). Notification and
       awareness:  synchronizing   task-oriented  collaborative  activity.  International  Journal  of  Human-
       .Computer Studies, 58, 605-632.
Cress, U., Barquero, B., Buder, J. & Hesse, F. W. (in press). Social dilemmas in knowledge communication via
       shared databases. In R. Bromme, F. W. Hesse & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers and biases in computer-
       mediated knowledge communication - and how they may be overcome. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Cress, U. & Hesse, F. W. (2004). Knowledge sharing in groups: Experimental findings of how to overcome a
       social dilemma. In Y. Kafai, W. Sandoval, N. Enydey, A. S. Nixon & F. Herrera, Proceedings of the
       Sixth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (p. 150-157). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Dawes, R. M. (1980). Social dilemmas. Annual Review of Psychology, 31, 169-193.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7, 117-140.
Lea, M., Spears, R. & de Groot, D. (2001). Knowing me, knowing you: Anonymity effects on social identity
       processes within groups. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27 (5), 526-537.
Lee, E.-J. (2004). Effects of visual representation on social influence in computer-mediated communication.
       Experimental tets of  the  social identity model  of  Deindividuation  effects. Human    Communication
       Research, 30 (2), 234-259.
Lee, E.-J. & Nass, C. (2002). Experimental tests of normative group influence and representation effects in
       computer-mediated  communication:    When    interacting via  computers  differs   from interacting  with
       computers. Human Communication Research, 28 (3), 349-381.
McClintock, C. G. (1978). Social values: Their definition, measurement, and development. Journal of Research
       and Development in Education, 12k, 121-137.
Postmes, T., Spears, R., Lea, M. & Reicher, S. (2000). SIDE issues centre stage: Recent developments in studies
       of de-individuation in groups. Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Spears, R., Lea, M. & Postmes, T. (2000). One side: Purview, problems and prospects. In T. Postmes, R. Spears,
       M. Lea, &    S. Reicher   (Eds.), SIDE  issues  centre stage: Recent   developments   in studies  of de-
       individuation in groups (pp. 1-16). Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Thorn, B. K. &    Connolly, T. (1987).   Discretionary data bases: A theory   and some    experimental findings.
       Communication Research, 14 (5), 512-528.
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D. & Wetherell, M. S. (1987). Rediscovering the social
       group: A self-categorization theory. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Van Lange, P. V. M., Otten, W., De Bruin, E. M. N. & Joireman, J. A. (1997). Development of Prosocial,
       Individualistic, and Competitive Orientations: Theory and Preliminary Evidence. Journal of Personality
       and Social Psychology, 73 (4), 733-746.

                                                       
