               ICT Can Recover Collaborative Tutorial
 Conversation and Position It within Undergraduate
                                                 Curricula

                                                 Charles Crook
                       School of Education & Learning Sciences Research Institute
                                            Nottingham University
                                       charles.crook@nottingham.ac.uk

        Abstract.   A   procedure  is  described  for   mobilizing  ICT    resources in order   to   implement
        collaborative tutorial conversations with large undergraduate classes.   The method allows intense,
        intimate and regular face-to-face conversations the consequences of which are used as grounding
        for traditional lecture presentations. Data from focus group discussion, system logs, and measures
        of student  contribution  indicate  the intervention  ran   smoothly,  was   popular, economical  and
        effective.

        Keywords: University, tutorial conversation, interact ional practices

INTRODUCTION
What forms of collaborative learning should be most vigorously cultivated?       And how should such collaborative
encounters be effectively integrated with the wider experience of an undergraduate subject curriculum?

Arguably, the most precious from of collaborative learning is that arising in the (scaffolded) conversation of a
traditional tutorial group.  After all, it is within just such intimate exchanges that so much informal learning
takes place in our preschool years (Wood, 1988).        And it is just such conversations that we most anxiously
protect during,    for instance, postgraduate   supervision - and   within other apprenticeship  settings (Lave   and
Wenger,    1991).   Yet   in higher   education  these  encounters  have   now  been  rendered   almost  obsolete by
increasingly unfavourable staff-student ratios.

Computers have long been regarded (quite rightly) as a positive resource for promoting collaborative learning
(Crook, 1994, O'Malley, 1994).      Yet, if anything, this technology has tended to undermine rather than support
the form    of  collaborative    tutorial conversation   identified here.     Computers   facilitate  other sorts  of
collaboration  ­   and  do   so  very usefully.  But,   most  commonly     in conventional    higher education, these
collaborations are either asynchronous and text-mediated, or they are project-oriented peer interactions where
the computer provides learners with a shared problem space.

Yet asynchronous exchange may fail to capture the momentum of live tutorial conversation ­ and it has never
been attractive to full time students (Lightg, Nesbitt, Light and White, 2000).        And computer-mediated peer
interactions may not be practical to implement in many disciplinary contexts.      (Moreover, such interactions may
lack the conversational direction and momentum that a tutorial format can usefully bring.)         It is proposed here
that, however much we may wish these mainstream forms of CSCL to flourish, they should not be perceived as
inevitable substitutes for tutorial collaborative talk. So, this situation presents an empirical challenge: can ICT
provide a way of protecting and promoting such talk and, if so, how?       An ICT-mediated procedure for doing so
will be described in this paper.

A subsidiary concern here is with the effective integration of conversational learning encounters: getting them
linked to the wider undergraduate curriculum.       Too often, occasions of collaborative learning are decoupled
from a larger learning narrative in which they should be situated.    This can certainly be the case for research-led
interventions: where innovative mediated encounters (although novel and engaging) are often simply parachuted
into an ongoing curriculum.      In the present context, this concern for integration suggests asking both: "where
should the motivation for collaborative tutorial talk come from?" and, then, "where should it lead to next?"       In
other words, how do these encounters become "joined up" into the surrounding curriculum of other learning
events?

                                                           
The present   report describes   outcomes  from an    intervention that    mobilizes  ICT   to economically  achieve
collaborative tutorial conversation  within a large   class ­ while    integrating   that talk  into the  surrounding
curriculum of the course. The goal was to define a suitable ICT infrastructure to mediate these encounters. The
theoretical rationale for curriculum integration was taken from Schwartz and Bransford's (1998) account of
grounding lectures in prior activities of topic "differentiation".  In this account of good educational practice,
Schwartz and   Bransford  identify  "differentiation" with  periods   of   (usually hands-on)  experimentation   with
domain materials that serve to sharpen learner awareness of crucial discinplinary distinctions and processes.
This differentiation then becomes a firm platform for engaging with the "telling" that will go on within lectures
and other sessions of teacher exposition.

CONTEXT
The starting circumstances for implementing tutorial collaborations were familiar (and daunting): a class of
more than 80 traditionally full-time Psychology undergraduates allocated a weekly timetable slot (for instruction
in "Social Development").   Five hours private study per week was also assumed.           In sympathy with Schwartz
and Bransford (1998), it was felt important to protect one of these two hours in order to organize the "time for
telling" that was to be built on the experience of topic differentiations. This meant that any tutorial conversation
would need to be orchestrated by the two instructors and two postgraduate assistants such that small (N=3/4)
self-selected groups could meet fortnightly for discussion. This could only   work if  two conditions  obtained.  (1)
The traditional one-hour  discussion  format  was  replaced   by   an intense  20-minute    format.   (2) Tutors and
students could be orchestrated to be suitably prepared for discussion and suitably informed as to when and
where they should be for such a tightly framed encounter.    Shared ICT resources made this possible in relation
to three organizational issues.

These "prompts" for the conversations might be photographs, artifacts or formalisms such as diagrams or data
summaries.    Examples are shown in Figure 1 (although each may have been one among several).

                Figure 1: Image, artifact and formalism examples of web-based tutorial prompts

The first is a photograph, and it is aimed to help differentiate the topic of infant attachment.     The second is a
child's drawing and is intended to help differentiate the topic of graphic representational development.         The
third is a formalized description of playground affiliation and is intended to prompt a discussion of friendship
and status in early school years peer groups. Once again, a shared ICT infrastructure of web pages makes the
preparation and presentation of these prompts straightforward.      While the email system eases the process of
alerting students to the location of the material they are to make the basis of reflection.

METHOD
The class was organized into 24 self-allocated tutorial groupings.    Each would meet once every two weeks, the
conversation being led by one of the four tutors, on a rotating basis.     Institutionally shared ICT resources were
recruited to coordinate these encounters in the following manner.
1. Attendance: students rotated around tutors on a fortnightly basis.       An excel-based process was created to
email individual reminders two days in advance.    The process calculated each student's destination that week,
specified it, and incorporated a direct link to a web page that contained the preparatory material.

                                                         
2. Preparation: the web page provided grounding for discussion. It typically contained images that requested
informal psychological interpretation. Each student was primed to speak for up to 2 minutes each on how they
understood the images presented.  A tutorial discussion then developed this.
3. Reflection: one group member acted as scribe and, by the following day, entered notes in a course web page
text box. These were collated  such that combined notes from all 12 groups meeting in a week were made visible
for the whole class.

FINDINGS
The initiative was   evaluated in terms  of sustaining attendance, quality   of  scribe summaries, use of these
summaries,  and  focus  group  commentary   by student  and tutor  participants.  Although  attendance was  not
policed, it averaged 92% across the semester with most absences being accounted for by illness.    Scribe reports
were reliably presented within two days and, as shown in Figure 2, were typically substantial for a 20-minute
confersation: around 400 words in length (a little shorter than the Introduction to this report), a commitment that
remained steady across the 14 weeks.

                Figure 2: Length of scribe reports across the 14 weeks taken from two semesters

The collated   sets of summaries  were available on a  single web  page.   These received a moderate level of
consultation by other students (the average posting attracting attention from around 30% of the class).   Focus
group discussion suggested many students felt their own conversation had covered what the wanted to know, or
they would rely on the start-of-lecture summary to bring them up to date.  Yet other students reported finding it
refreshing (and sometimes surprising) to see what other groups had decided and discussed.     In some cases the
discussions had taken very different directions and convergences.  No pressure was put on students to make use
of these resources yet the way in which those that did reacted to them suggest that this is a potent source of
supplementary material that is worth knitting into the mainstream of a course curriculum.

                                                         
           Figure 2: Average percent of class referring to a web page containing collated scribe reports.

In a group discussion, tutors confirmed that discussions had been universally on-task, well prepared, thoughtful
and animated. In three focus group discussions, comprising volunteer members of randomly invited groups, a
number of recurring themes surfaced.     Students felt that the opportunity for academic conversation with staff ­
albeit short and occasional ­ created a stronger sense of being "recognized" within the normal anonymity of
large class degree programs.     It was also felt that the conversations located the more abstract content of the
lectures in a grounding of common sense familiarity ­ as furnished by the everyday nature of some of the web
images that served as discussion prompts.   Conversations were experienced as harmonious and "collaborative"
or "problem solving" in tone.

DISCUSSION
The study has illustrated a realistic and economical structure for recovering the tradition of small group tutorial
conversation.   These have been characterized here as "collaborative", as this is the spirit in which they were
introduced to the students and managed by the tutors.   Moreover, the style of conversation that actually evolved
was described by the participants during the focus groups as equable and exploratory.        However, it must be
stressed that these collaborations were crucially "computer-supported" collaborations, in that they could not
have occurred without the infrastructure of email servers, database management tools,    and shared institutional
web pages (including facilities for uploading text).  It is also important to stress that none of these facilities are
technically sophisticated. The general procedure described here is within the reach of the ICT infrastructure
enjoyed by most higher education institutions.

Although others have explored the use of ICT for small group discussion (e.g., Anderson et al, 2000), the
present intervention    extends previous initiatives by  establishing a system  for resourcing,  assembling,  and
documenting these meetings that is sufficiently automated to support large classes economically.   Yet the actual
meeting    successfully protects  the familiar genre   of conversation   associated with small   group    tutorials.
Traditionally, such tutorials would last around an hour.  The short and intense meetings developed here became
known as "speed tutorials".  Both tutor and student participants found them, if anything,    more productive than
the traditional format. They kicked off more sharply, discussion remained on task, and there was strong    sense of
needing to converge on a set of questions or uncertainties.

Of course, these were integrated with the following lecture session: the two stage process was an attractive
structure  to realise Schwartz  and   Bransford's (1998)  agenda of    topic differentiation proceding expository
"telling".  The public web posting of the summaries gave the lecturer time to shape his lecture such as to
accommodate and make explicit reference to the issue raised in the tutorials.     This created a strong sense of
informal and intimate collaborative discussion being integrated into the evolving body of a traditional course.

                                                         
Arguably, it is unusual for the products of collaborative learning encounters to be knitted into the overall fabric
of a course in this manner. The technique reinforces Schwartz and Bransford's proposal that lectures ("times for
telling") are  most effective when    they  are resourced by  prior   experience in  which  students have  actively
differentiated the subject matter that is to be systematized or theorized in the lectures. Schwartz and Bransford
achieve their student preparation through exploratory practical work.      For the present topic, student practical
work involving young children would be ambitious to organise.         Thus our version of  topic differentiation was
achieved in collaborative conversation, although grounded in everyday images.

In sum,   this report has   presented a credible   basis for prompting,    supporting and   integrating a  form   of
collaborative conversation that is increasingly becoming lost under pressure of large class teaching.   It might be
argued that the "tutorial" dimension of these meetings is a luxury.     That groups might be convened on a self-
managing basis and the system remain just as successful.     Our previous experience of such initiatives have not
been encouraging.     Moreover,  in   focus group  discussion, students   reinforced  the  value of having a    tutor
presence within these groups.  We suspect it is a significant presence for both sustaining the direction and target
of the talk ­ as well as for reinforcing and developing its insights.

REFERENCES
Anderson, A; Cheyne, W; Foot, H; Howe, C; Low, J; Tolmie, A. (2000) Computer support for peer-based
methodology tutorials.  Journal of Computer Assisted Learning., 16,1, 41-53

Crook, C.K. (1994) Computers and the collaborative experience of learning.       London: Routledge.

Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Light, P., Nesbitt, E., Light, V., & White, S. (2000). Variety is the spice of life: student use of CMC in the
context of campus based study. Computers and Education, 34, 257-267.

O'Malley, C. (1994). Computer-supported cooperative learning. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Schwartz, D.L., and Bransford, J.D. (1998) A time for telling, Cognition and Instruction, 16, 475-522.

Wood, D. (1988). How children think and learn. Oxford: Basil Blackwell

                                                         
