   RoBallet: Exploring Learning through Expression in the Arts
through Constructing in a Technologically Immersive Environment

  David Cavallo, Arnan Sipitakiat, Anindita Basu, Shaundra Bryant, Larissa Welti-Santos, John Maloney, Siyu
                        Chen, Erik Asmussen, Cynthia Solomon & Edith Ackermann
                        MIT Media Lab, 20 Ames St. E15-446 Cambridge, MA 02139
                                          Tel: 617.253.8897, Fax: 617.253.
        Email: [cavallo, arnans, anindita, bryant, lwelti, sychen, easmussen, cynthia, edith]@media.mit.edu

        Abstract: We present the RoBallet environment as an interesting area for learning in a variety
        of domains through augmenting performing arts with technology. In the RoBallet environment
        children choreograph dance movements while wearing sensors and wireless microcontroller
        boards as well as having more sensors and devices in the environment. The children build
        robots, and program them, animations, light, and music they compose to respond to their
        movements. We have a few primary goals in this endeavor; to open new areas for exploration,
        to use technology  to augment       expression, and to open  creative    and expressive  uses  of
        technology, mathematics and science to children who may otherwise have no interest. We
        describe a workshop we ran in conjunction with the National Dance Institute, discuss what we
        learned, and present our ideas for future development.

Introduction
        The Epistemology and Learning Group at the MIT Media Lab pioneered development and application
of robotic and programming environments for learning [Papert, 1980, Resnick et. al., 1996]. In recent years some
of us have focused on integrated approaches to change in the learning environment for children in both formal
and non-formal settings. When we presented opportunities for children to choose their own projects using
robotics, children created many wonderful projects of robots and devices along rather familiar lines. These
include a wide variety of vehicles, many     optimized  for speed, devices     optimized for strength along  some
dimension, others for control, and so on.

        However, recently we observed what we found to be an extremely interesting phenomenon that we
chose to explore and support at a much more focused level. A growing number of children, girls in particular,
were building highly interactive projects, for example robots with which they could dance, or pets with whom
they could play. Without demeaning the design and construction of fast vehicles or strong devices, we found the
highly interactive dancers and pets to be extremely sophisticated and demanding endeavors. It is not trivial to
sense movement so that another object can interact in real-time. Nor is it trivial to construct a robot to move in a
delicate and responsive enough manner that one could consider its movements "dance" and to dance interactively
with a person. Moreover, the sophistication of the programming required to control and interact in a variety of
ways is non-trivial as well. One can begin projects building dancers and companions in a rather straightforward
manner, but we observed that children would continue to develop, refine, and enhance these projects over quite
an extended period of time, truly enriching the experience. These projects had more "staying power" than the
typical vehicle. This provides an excellent example of Papert's design goal of "low threshold, high ceiling"
[Papert, 1980]. It also illustrates how technology and the "hard" sciences are not exclusive to any particular
gender or learning style, but can be open to a wider variety of people. It also illustrates how we, through our
choice of projects and our own tastes and previous experiences, can bias who is attracted and what counts as
meaningful projects and, often unwittingly, can drive others not like us away.

        RoBallet is an explicit attempt to access some of the ideas raised by these interactive, expressive
projects. We developed RoBallet as a new set of tools to open up new content areas for students to think about
both artistic expression and engineering. Another goal was to introduce new ways of thinking about art and
engineering to a wide range of people, who may be interested in particular aspects of the project, and who by
virtue of their participation in the environment, may create connections to other areas not previously considered.

                                                   105
        An important element of our design process was to create an environment that fostered intellectual
diversity by creating a space in which art and science share equal footing in the creation of a final product. This
is to be contrasted with the common approach of creating an environment where one provides a vehicle for the
other, an approach that ultimately trivializes both domains. One becomes subservient to the other, or becomes a
method of "tricking" students into enjoying the other.

        RoBallet  provides     a  place  for dancers   to incorporate  technology   to  enhance   their art. Similarly,
technology may   be used    to  full effect  without   being   "softened" by  the introduction  of performance.   This
combination serves to open up both the arts and technology to a wider range of students without trivializing
either domain. Instead, experience in one area can provide new insight into the other.

        Our goal was not necessarily for the children to become better dancers, choreographers, composers, or
performance artists. This is not our area of expertise. Rather, we focused on how this environment could
potentially be a rich learning environment for exploration of a wide variety of areas, not just the arts, but also
math, physics, programming. Our goal was also not to learn in a more connected way only the disciplines in and
of themselves, but also how their interconnections enrich each other. We wanted children to experience how
through technology we can extend artistic expressions that otherwise is difficult or even impossible; how more
people can make   these expressions      without   having   to follow the  traditional paths of mastering    a musical
instrument before composing. We also wanted children to experience how math, programming, and physics can
be expressive and have aesthetics, and are not dry, lifeless, or merely instrumental.

        We  drew  from      other sources    of inspiration  besides  our empirical  observations  of   children doing
robotics. Our colleague Tod Machover not only has a long history of innovative development of technologically-
augmented musical instruments (hyperinstruments), but also recently has developed tools such as Hyperscore for
his Toy  Symphony    project      [Farbood,     2001]. Our   colleague    Joe Paradiso  has   not  only  created  new
microcontrollers and sensing devices, but has worked in innovative ways with dancers on using dance to drive
musical expression [Paradiso, 2002]. One of the authors, Anindita Basu, developed the Full-Contact Poetry
environment as a means of extending multimedia creative expression for children [Basu, 2002]. MIT Media Lab
doctoral student Marc Downie along with Professor Bruce Blumberg in the Synthetic Characters group has
created tools and pieces in collaboration with Paul Kaiser, Bill T. Jones, and Merce Cunningham, developing
ideas in motor system representations and behavior-based music [Downie, 2002]. We find that many others are
incorporating similar technologies to create new forms of artistic expression in music and dance. Our focus
remains not only on how this is an especially rich domain for children to express themselves using technology,
thereby attracting more children who may not be so inclined, but also on how such technologically-augmented
expression creates new opportunities for learning.

RoBallet
        We designed our RoBallet environment so that children could choreograph dances, use and or build
sensors to place on their bodies and in the environments to control music they compose, robots they build,
animation they program, lights they control via programming, and other devices they can choose to place in the
environment. We do not expect them to learn by things happening and being presented to them in an immersive
space. The space should not control the children. The children should control the space. They design and decide
what should happen. We did not want to present the elements we used (i.e. music, robotics, programming) as
fixed and determined. We wanted them to explore movement through space in time, what sounds pleasant and
what not and which musical elements combine to create which types of feelings, how these could be different;
how lighting can be mixed, can be expressive, can combine with the other elements, and so on. We wanted the
children to have fine-grained design control over these elements so that they could explore the concepts in a non-
trivial, personally meaningful ways. The immersive environment serves to create a rich experiential space for
this exploration. We also chose to design our tools not just for direct manipulation, but in an environment for
expression that can later    be   built piece   by piece, taken  apart,   modified, reflected  upon,  modulated,   and
experimented with. However, with such ambitious design goals and not a lot of experience and domain expertise,
we chose to run a workshop and use that as an "object to think with," to help us to see the possibilities and
limitations [Papert, 1980].

                                                        106
        Thus, for our initial foray into this space, we decided to build some prototype tools and use some
existing software to experiment concretely early in the design process, knowing that we would in all likelihood
not use those specific tools. We used both Stack boards from Paradiso's group and GoGo boards designed by
Sipitakiat [Benabast et.al., 2003, Sipitakiat et.al., 2002]. The Stacks are more sophisticated and advanced, with
not just wireless communication but also accelerometers and gyroscopes on board. The GoGo board is simpler,
designed to be accessible by being low-cost,  using easily available components, and possible to assemble by
hand. We have used different versions of the GoGo board in a variety of learning projects to integrate robotic
control into other projects for learning. In this sense simpler and accessible       have some  advantages over
sophisticated and advanced even if giving something up in terms of power, speed and capability.

        We converted a traditional stage setting into a responsive environment that could dynamically interact
with lighting and music systems, and added an animation system that could be projected into the dance space
(Figure 1).  After beginning their choreography,   the group embedded        sensors in the stage floor and the
environment, allowing the students to program triggers for certain events. In addition, we provided a set of
sensors that students could wear on their bodies. The body sensors plugged into small wireless wearable devices,
both the Stacks (Figure 2), which students attached to belts and wore around their waists, and the GoGo boards.
The Stacks transmit data from the body sensors to a server that we programmed, which in turn sends the sensor
information to the computers that operated the lights, music and animation.

                                    Figure 1. The RoBallet environment.

        For music and animation we decided to use what would be closest to what we would want, but easy to
assemble rapidly for the workshop. We knew that for music nothing yet existed that would suit all of our design
goals. However, to build what we desired would take too long and would delay our initial workshop. So, for
music we programmed an environment in MaxMSP to enable the students to lay out what they wanted along
various dimensions such as melody, rhythm, pitch, etc., and then program what effect change in sensor values

                                                   107
should create. For animation we used both Microworlds Logo and an environment we built in Squeak. The
environments would respond to sensor data and change the animation as programmed. We also built an interface
in Squeak so that the lights could be programmed to respond to the sensor data as well.
Workshop
         Another reason to do a workshop with children early in the process was that we had the opportunity to
work with Jacques d'Amboise. d'Amboise is the former principal dancer of the New York City Ballet, and the
founder of the National Dance Institute (NDI). d'Amboise was accompanied by Dufftin Garcia, who runs the
NDI center in Trenton, New Jersey. Garcia is also a former student of d'Amboise's from the NDI work in New
York City, and is currently studying computer science. The two agreed to work with us in a workshop with
children in July, 2003 at MIT. We agreed that for the purposes of this workshop, we did not want children with
lots of experience in either dance or programming. We wanted to see what "average" children would make of our
space.

         During our design of RoBallet, we had an initial generative theme in mind: for students to create dance
pieces that expressed a particular emotion. We wanted children to think about how to express an emotion using
all of the various elements available to     them, from choreographing        movements, to   composing music, to
designing lights and creating animations, and also to consider how these different media best augment each
other.

         While the girls who were making robots to dance with inspired RoBallet, our first instantiation of the
project did not feature robots, as there were many other elements that we wanted to work with. Since we had an
extremely limited amount of time (8 days), and so many ambitions, we felt that if the children were to build
robots and program them that would use up a significant portion of the time. Because we have had many years of
experience working with children doing robotics, and wanted to maximize the talents of d'Amboise and Garcia
as well as test out the other elements of the environment that were new, we decided to omit the robotics for the
first workshop (an ironic decision given the name of the project). We began with a desire to provide students
with multiple expressive tools that related to dance, so we first examined various elements of a traditional dance
performance.

         Once the environment was constructed, we held a workshop with a group of nine 9-12 year old children.
The workshop was supposed to be a one-week event in which we could test the environment and have some
preliminary feedback on the ideas, but at the request of the children, we extended the workshop for another
week, and allowed them to invite friends to participate. During the first, "official" workshop, the NDI facilitators
helped the children learn to choreograph, to think about what steps can be appealing, to express themselves
through  movement,  to understand how    to   control movement        through space in  time, to match  music and
movement, and to keep in mind how a performance appears to an audience. Exposure to such expertise and
experience was critical to us all to bring an understanding of dance.

         Since the first workshop included professional dancers as part of the facilitating group, the students
were introduced to the methods used by dancers to develop steps and combinations. This exposed an interesting
similarity between dance and programming. d'Amboise taught by breaking dance steps into counts of eight and
naming the steps with something the children could understand. For example, running in a circle to the left with
knees high in the air was called the "pear." Running in the opposite direction was called "apple." Then he called
out the names of steps in sequences to create combinations, which were then given names such as "fruit salad."
This mapped directly to how the children were creating programs to run their music, lighting and animation.
They mapped environmental events either to particular dance events or to particular dancers and named events
accordingly. The programs were named like the step combinations, as a superset of the individual events. There
was even an overlap between trying out steps one at a time in various combinations, and once one is satisfied, to
name them and bundle them to be used in different combinations and variations. We were amazed by the
similarities between how Jacques introduced choreographing dance and how we introduce programming.

         In the second week, we encouraged the children to explore choreography on their own, to both invent
and name steps and to take a step combination and perform it with different intentions, such as happiness, anger
or frustration. We opened the workshop every day with a set of physical warm-ups and improvisation exercises
to encourage children to both experiment with how to express emotions and formalize what they were doing.

                                                    108
       The workshop in week two was completely open, so children chose their groups, emotions and how
they wanted to approach their projects. In some groups, children wanted to work on different elements in
parallel, so one would compose music for the emotion, while another worked on lights. In other groups, the
students wanted to execute every part together. All of the groups had to revise and debug their programs however
they approached them, however, since when they saw all of the elements combined, some aspects inevitably
clashed or were not coordinated. This led to many different discussions, from which sensors to use and how to
create effects most naturally to trying to more effectively convey an emotion through the combination of media.

       Glorianna Davenport, head of the Media Lab's Interactive Cinema group, and her students videotaped
the entire proceedings and ran a video weblog of the event. We kept it private to protect the security of the
children involved. Still, this provided a rich source of material for analyzing and debugging not only our
environment, but also how to run such workshops. The constant video presence also inspired us to see how it
could be used within the RoBallet environment itself, by videotaping and displaying images that also can be
interactive and computational.

Interaction
       Since the environment has so many parts, the easiest way to explain how it was used is to trace through
a project that a nine-year old participant, "Toby," created. While the example is fairly straightforward, there are
many other possibilities within the environment that will be explored further.

       The emotion that Toby decided to portray was anger. Instead of mapping out every aspect of the piece
before beginning, he decided to implement one part at a time before trying to merge all of the components. He
had a few ideas for steps that he might use, but did not begin with choreography. First, Toby composed creepy
sounding music in a minor key. As he worked on the music, he commented on particular steps he might perform
at various points in his composition. He then moved to the lighting computer to experiment with "angry" lights.
He chose a combination of red and white lights that would sometimes strobe. Then he created an animation of
dark red objects that would fly through a dark blue space "biting" other objects. He finished by trying to put all
of the pieces together with his movements.

       As he tried to pull the components together, he modified each part. He needed a way to trigger events
and experimented with floor sensors and body sensors and tried to figure out which would blend into his
choreography the best. Toby finally decided on two body sensors and placed them on his palms, so that he could
press them easily no matter how he was moving. As he began to put the pieces together, he went back to revise
the pieces he had already created so that they would mix together more effectively. Toby changed his lighting
sequence, for example, so that it would match the timing of the music and his movements. He also tested various
sensors and tried to see which would work best. When Toby began working on his project, one of his ideas was
that he wanted to use a bend sensor, which he would place on the inside of his elbow to control the lights. During
his implementation, however, he realized that a touch sensor would work better than a bend sensor for his piece.

       When the children worked on pieces individually or in groups, they had to negotiate between various
media and technologies to create these interactive pieces. While the example that we described is simple, the
environment was also used in more complicated ways, with children interacting with animations that they
programmed, or using a body sensor to dynamically control some aspect of the environment. A good example of
the latter is a project in which the students used a bend sensor to control an animated curtain, which lowered
itself when the dancers bent their elbows and raised itself as their arms straightened.

Discussion
       The RoBallet environment is new and we have held only the described two-week long preliminary
workshop.     Nevertheless, we  have  found   encouraging  evidence   that     Roballet   is a  compelling learning
environment. The first important aspect is that the environment was engaging to all of the children who worked
with us, in both workshop groups, despite their diverse backgrounds and interests. None of the children had
danced before, and most had limited programming experience. But during the workshop, all of the children both
danced and    programmed;    stepping out  of familiar territory to experiment     with    all of the environment's
capabilities.

                                                   109
          In this space, students must be truly interdisciplinary. They looked at the idea of emotion through many
lenses, from the many types of media they use to their own bodies. How do angry lights differ from angry
sounds? How do movements complement or detract from the mood one has created in the environment? How
does it feel to move angrily as opposed to joyously?

          While the stage is a responsive environment with sensors embedded in the floor, it is also a dynamic
exploration space for children. The children use components of the space as tools to create their interactive
expressions instead of choreographing their movements to fit predefined functions. This is important as it allows
children to engage with many levels of creation and to truly experiment with expression and programming.

          Since children were using sensors on their bodies and in the environment to drive the rest of the stage
setting, they needed to map sensor values to mood. How does amplitude relate to intensity? If an arm is bent in
an angry piece, should the pitch increase in the music, or the volume? Maybe the speed should change? Does it
have to change at all, or should that sensor control the strobe rate or color of the lights instead? Where should the
sensor be placed on the body and what should be sensed? Is it a simple trigger, or a continuous control? If it's a
trigger, should a floor sensor  be used,  or should    the dancer wear  the sensor?  How  does  that affect the
choreography of the piece?

          It is precisely because there are no "right" answers to such questions is why we find this area so
interesting. Students are free to express what they    think. In order to express, they explore thinking  about
elements of sound, light, and movement. In order to express what they want, they meet interesting mathematics,
physics, engineering, electronics. This creates a virtuous circle where they learn to think in these areas in order to
express what they want. As they incorporate this thinking, they are able to express more, which leads to deeper
thinking.

                           Figure 2. A wearable Stack computer modeled by a student.

          One interesting aspect was that there seemed to be a common language for expression by movement.
Acute angles expressed more conflict. Rounder forms were calmer. Sharp movements were more to express

                                                     110
anger. Slower movements were kinder. Expressing emotion through dance, music and light enabled eloquence in
a different way than words.

        The environment also returned to ideas raised by Seymour Papert in his early work with Logo. In this
work, Papert described why the turtle was a compelling character: Children could anthropomorphize it and
mentally map their bodies to the behaviors of the turtle. In the case of RoBallet, the students' bodies actually
drove the environment. If they changed their choreography, the environment would also change dynamically
instead of always performing the same canned set of actions. The children were breaking down and formalizing
their movements in order to describe and coordinate the other events in the environment.

        Using the body also gives a way of thinking of issues in physics and mathematics very concretely.
Dancers experience matters of force and tension through their movements and can associate these ideas with
intention in movement. They can clearly feel the difference between lifting their legs to a 45-degree angle versus
a 90-degree angle. While the connection between these feelings and concepts in physics do not arise simply from
movement    through space,     explicit connections can   be  made   in context by a facilitator as was described
previously in the connections made between choreography and programming. These connections serve the same
purpose as in any method of interdisciplinary study, that is, to provide the ability to examine something from
multiple perspectives simultaneously, allowing the knowledge from each domain to strengthen understanding of
a concept.

        The students spent a great deal of time "debugging" and "revising" their dance pieces. This formed
another concrete relationship between the performing arts and engineering and helped students understand each
concept more deeply. They had to debug their programs when using one sensor caused an unexpected result. The
child expected the  sensor     to trigger a change  in lighting, but instead, the music  grew louder.  Oftentimes
children's animations did not work the way they planned, either, because of an error in their code. But beyond
making a piece functional, working as planned, they revised their dances to make them either more cohesive or
more effective emotionally. Their dances had meaning and an intended effect, for the audience to understand and
feel the emotion they were trying to portray. Their projects went more deeply than simple functionality or simple
effect, but searched for an intersection between the two.

        We were struck by the potency of examples. The strength of Jacques's character and the beauty of his
choreography stuck with the children. In the second week of the workshop when they were free to do as each one
pleased, they used, modified and built upon his steps. However, they also utilized his means of using the sensors.
We expected the children would be more adventurous in their use of the technology. However, they stuck pretty
much with what Jacques did. One aspect of this was using familiar things when experimenting in unchartered
domains. Another aspect is that we had limited time and a multitude of tools. We eagerly look forward to
working with children in the next version of the RoBallet environment over longer periods of time.

        Finally, we noticed a certain "performance" bias. There was a much greater concern about how the
performance would appear to the audience than we are accustomed to. We usually work with children on projects
just for the sake of learning and doing, not for the sake of a performance. Although we appreciate the value of
public performance and certainly of final artifacts, this bias drove much of the workshop and diminished
possibilities for exploration.

Future Work
        As mentioned above, the workshop was the first feedback step in the process of designing RoBallet.
There  are three categories    for  future  development;  the development    environment, the    hardware, and the
connections to learning. Obviously, we would like to include robot building in the project, since that served as
the inspiration for RoBallet. However, we want to improve upon the materials used so that we have stepper
motors, a wider variety of mechanisms for movement, and the ability to mount artifacts on a scale large enough
for performances. We do not want to restrict ourselves only to performance spaces and scales. We still maintain
that a child making one robot with which to dance is incredibly compelling. We also will use new generation of
wireless chips that provide both greater capability and lower costs.

                                                       111
         We   plan  on modifying   the programming        environment   that the students used    in the preliminary
workshop by changing the interface and some of the interaction. We need to adapt Logo to be more open to
adding other objects to it as well as to improve its response time. We are still determining whether to base
everything in Squeak and Smalltalk, making a new interface specific to RoBallet. This has obvious advantages of
bringing in objects, running native and therefore fast, being open source, and having a community of developers
assisting us. We will develop an interface for handheld devices so that the child is not required to perform in one
space, then run off-stage to re-program, then run back on to test, and so on. We felt that this running back and
forth interrupts the beauty of using the body as the system's control.

         We need to determine what software we will use for music composition, or to write an application if we
find none suitable for our needs. The more seamless the programming of the animation, robotics, lights, music,
and video is, the more satisfied we would be.

         Perhaps most important from the standpoint of our potential contribution is the connections to powerful
ideas in mathematics. We believe that utilizing our sense of our body's movement in space as a means of
understanding the mathematics of movement in three dimensions, of coordination, of dynamics is an area rich in
possibilities. By sensing the movement and using it as parameters for functions mapped across a variety of
domains also can provide a concrete basis for other rich areas. We are currently examining what mathematical
content is applicable, and are using the ideas to inform our software language and environment design.

         Our first experiments with RoBallet were exciting, fun and interesting for the facilitators and the
participants alike. Although    we know   we   have   just  begun, we   are  convinced that  this is  a rich area for
exploration. The   workshop   experience  reveals     great potential  and, with these additions  in  place, we   feel
confident that our environment will become a rich environment suitable for deeply exploring a space where the
arts and engineering meet.

References
Basu, A., (2003). Full-Contact Poetry: Creating Space for Expression, In Proceeding from Eurologo 2003, Porto,
         Portugal.
Benbasat,   A.Y., Morris,  S.J, and Paradiso,     J.A  (2003).   A Wireless  Modular   Sensor  Architecture   and its
         Application in On-Shoe Gait Analysis. Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE International Conference on
         Sensors, October 21-24.
Downie, M, (2002). Loops: Sketches and applications, Proceedings of the 29th annual conference of Computer
         graphics and interactive techniques, SIGGRAPH.
Farbood, M. (2001). Hyperscore: A New Approach to Interactive Computer-Generated Music. M.S. Thesis.
         Cambridge, Ma.: MIT Media Laboratory.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, Computers and Powerful Ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Paradiso, J. (2002). FootNotes: Personal Reflections on the Development of Instrumented Dance Shoes and their
         Musical Applications., in Quinz, E., ed., Digital Performance, Anomalie, digital_arts Vol. 2, Anomos,
         Paris, pp. 34-49.
Resnick,  M., Berg,  R.,   Eisenberg, M., Turkle,     S., and  Martin,  F.  (1996). Beyond   Black   Boxes:  Bringing
         Transparency    and  Aesthetics  Back    to  Scientific Instruments.   Proposal  to the  National   Science
         Foundation.
Sipitakiat, A., Blikstein,  P., &  Cavallo,    D. (2002).   The  GoGo    Board:  Moving   towards    highly  available
         computational tools in learning environments. Proceedings of Interactive Computer Aided Learning
         International Workshop. Carinthia Technology Institute, Villach, Austria.

Acknowledgments
In particular we would like to thank Jacques d'Amboise and Dufftin Garcia from the National Dance Institute
without whose contributions we would have floundered. Their expertise, openness and enthusiasm brought a
level of accomplishment     we  could  never   have   attained   without them.   We  also wish    to thank  the Lego
Corporation for its generous support, as well as support from the Media Lab research consortia Things That
Think, Digital Life, I:O, and Digital Nations.

                                                       112
