                  Models of Learning and Theories of Practice for
                              Informal Learning Environments

             Sherry Hsi, Kevin Crowley, Richard Duschl, Coe Leta Finke, Heather King & Nora Sabelli
              First Author's Address: The Exploratorium, 3601 Lyon Street, San Francisco, CA 94123
                                      Tel: 415-674-2809, Fax: 415-561-0307
                                        Email: sherryh@exploratorium.edu

Overview of Symposium
          While studies of learning and learning environments have predominantly taken place in laboratories and
formal educational  settings, there  is a growing  community      of researchers   conducting studies  in non-school
settings  such as  museums,   after  school programs,    homes,    zoos, workplaces,   and other   informal   learning
environments (e.g., Callanan & Jipson, 2001; CILS; Leinhardt, Crowley, and Knutson, 2002; Martin, in press;
Museum Learning Collaborative). One goal of informal learning research is to contribute to an understanding of
how to support those students who fail to learn through traditional formal approaches to education.

          While  researchers and  practitioners  continue  to debate   the definition  of informal  learning   and its
relationship  to formal  education,  there  are some    core identifiable  features ­  learning is self-directed,  the
administration or sponsorship of the learning activity is not always present, activities have unsystematic, fluid
arrangements in participation, time, and space; and learners represent a diversity in groupings, age, race, and
ethnicities. Thus, will prior research on cognition, learning, and reform-based schooling be sufficient to conduct
research about informal learning, or is there something fundamentally different about the ways in which out-of-
school learning occurs that require a reconceptualization of the model of the learner and new infrastructures for
organizing informal activity systems? Will this necessitate the development of new theories of practice?

          This symposium shares examples of projects being addressed by researchers who have been designing,
studying, and practicing in informal settings as well as working at the intersection of formal and informal learning
institutions. Our goal is to draw upon examples of informal learning research, discuss key tensions in informal
learning research, and understand how and where this body of research fits into the larger educational research
landscape.   With our   discussants (Duschl &   Sabelli),  we invite  critique  of our discussions  in  light of prior
psychological, cognitive, and social-cultural traditions, as well as share policy implications for informal learning
research.

          We have identified three areas of discussion:

Formal-Informal Dualism
   ·      Are current models of learning derived from laboratory studies and studies of formal schooling sufficient
          for studying learning and teaching as it occurs in informal contexts?
   ·      Is the distinction and dualism created between informal and formal learning a productive one to make?

   The defining characteristics of the formal and informal learning environments have been well documented
(Hofstein & Rosenfeld, 1996: Wellington, 1990). However, the degree to which these two contexts can inform the
practice  of the  other and  the appropriateness  of    inferring theories and  methods   between   the two   remains
controversial. Wertsh (chapter 7, 2002) acknowledges that the informal setting is a different sociocultural setting
from classrooms and cautions researchers in the degree to which we infer findings from one context to the other.
Additionally, informal learning is largely concerned with the processes of learning and does not focus on product
outcomes such as test scores. Such products are not available or suited to the exploratory nature of museum
environments and studies suggest that such measures do not transfer well to the study of learning in informal
environments (Falk & Dierking, 1992; Hein, 1998).

   Perhaps clarifying similarities and differences between these two contexts is of little importance. Rather, the
informal space should be viewed as a "rich variation (Bartels & Hein, 2003)" that can offer unique perspectives

                                                        12
on learning such as how parents and children engage in everyday thinking (Crowley, Callanan, Jipson, Galco,
Topping, and Shrager, 2001) or how motivation and engagement influence self-directed learning (Paris, 1997).

Issues of Theory and Practice
    ·    Are social-cultural theories of learning or design-based research methods adequate to interpret, analyze,
         and build models of informal learning?
    ·    What are some `theories of practice' being generated by studies or enactments of practice in informal
         learning environments?
    ·    What practical interventions can be designed to improve learning, yet preserve the spatial, social, and,
         cultural context in which informal learning takes place?
    ·    How is `design for learning' or `teaching for understanding' achieved in environments in which activity
         is self-directed and/or occurs in family groups?

    While numerous studies have explored learning processes and outcomes of individual and groups in informal
settings (Allen, 2002; Crowley et al., 2001; Diamond, 1986), it is only recently that this field has begun to develop
more generalizable theories and models of informal learning. For example, Schauble, Leinhardt, and Martin
(1997) encourage museum researchers to study learning as informed by socio-cultural theory which "emphasizes
that meaning emerges in the interplay between individuals acting in social contexts and the mediators - including
tools, talk, activity structures, signs, and symbol systems - that are employed in those contexts."     Additionally,
Falk and Dierking (2000) promote a model of learning in museums that connects personal, socio-cultural and
physical contexts    together. George    Hein (Chapter   5, 1998)     encourages researchers to embrace  network,    as
opposed to linear, theories to model the learning process of visitors in museums and discusses at length (Chapter
2) how   different   theoretical  commitments    influence     the process   of  designing educational  artifacts  and
environments.

    Design-based research is an emerging paradigm to systematically study educational innovations outside of a
laboratory   setting in the natural, complex    activity space  (Brown,   1992;  Cobb,  Confrey,   diSessa, Lehrer,  &
Schauble, 2003; The Design-based Research Collective, 2003). This research approach is used to create and
assess educationally-relevant interventions in which designs embody hypotheses about learning, and interventions
are iteratively refinement and studied (DBRC, 2003). Rather than attempting to isolate particular variables to
study in   a complex    setting, salient variables  and  their interrelationships  are identified (Collins, Joseph,  &
Bielaczyc, 2000). Design-based research may be particularly relevant to the informal learning community as we
seek to study and design for learning based on theories that account for the unique characteristics of this context.
Examples of theory-informed design and iterative redesign to promote learning in the informal setting include
work by Schauble and Bartlett (1997) and Borun, Chambers, Dritsas, and Johnson (1997). Studies in progress by
Finke at the Lawrence Hall of Science in Berkeley and King at the Natural History Museum in London also
provide examples of design-based interventions.

Research Policy
    ·    What are the nature, attributes, strengths, and characteristics of effective informal learning environments
         that can influence and transform formal institutions, settings, student learning, and teacher practice?
    ·    What is the role of institutional policy, sponsorship, and administration to enable informal learning
         research between (or in) education institutions?
    ·    How does informal learning research fit into the learning sciences?

         General research in museums has a history of over 100 years (Hein, 1998), while studies that focus
specifically on learning and cognition have gained considerable momentum in the past 20 years (see Dierking &
Falk, 1994 and Ramey-Gassert, Walberg, & Walberg, 1994 for a review of the literature). Informal learning
research remains somewhat invisible to the larger educational research community (Bartels and Hein, 2003) and
our understanding of learning and facilitating in informal settings may, arguably, lag behind classroom-based
research by about 10 years (Schauble and Bartlett, 1997). To advance this field, several efforts are underway: the
Center for Informal Learning and School a partnership between Kings College London, UC Santa Cruz, and The
Exploratorium is supporting leadership development for effective informal science education and institutional
alliances,   as well as  synthesizing    a research framework      to define areas of  study about  informal  learning
environments and their links to learning in formal settings. Second, a recent policy statement was issued from the
informal learning community (Dierking, Falk, Rennie, Anderson, & Ellenbogen, 2003) to promote six avenues of

                                                         13
research: 1) exploring precursors to learning, 2) taking the physical setting into account, 3) exploring social and
cultural mediating factors, 4) promoting longitudinal research, 5) investigating the process of learning, and 6)
expanding our research methods. These will be discussed in the context of advancing the agenda for learning
sciences.

Islands of Expertise: Following the Child through Everyday, Informal, and Formal Learning
Environments
Kevin Crowley, University of Pittsburgh

          It has been common for learning theorists to recognize the simultaneous presence and impact of different
time scales in development. What is less clear is how these levels interact to produce individual development. The
everyday experiences that are the currency of development are small, mundane, and relatively simple. And yet the
changes that they shape over time can be large, extraordinary, and complex. Drawing upon examples of family
learning in museums, I will describe a model for the development of discipline specific literacy that can bridge
this problem of the mechanisms of learning operating on one time scale and outcomes emerging on another. The
theory, a synthesis of socio-cultural and information processing frameworks, develops the idea of "islands of
expertise" as shared family knowledge that can serve as a platform for advancing conversations about and
learning in the disciplines in museums and other informal environments.

Interaction, Mediation and Intervention in Investigate
Heather King, King's College London
In collaboration with staff at The Natural History Museum, London

          As the body of research concerned with maximizing learning opportunities in museums continues to
grow, there is limited mention of the role that museum educators, commonly known as Explainers, can play. To
address this gap, my research focuses on the role of Explainers in the hands-on gallery Investigate in London's
Natural History Museum. In this paper, I describe the existing patterns of social interaction and multiparty talk
that occur between Explainers and students. The analysis concentrates on the support for reflective discourse and
scientific enquiry within the space, which, while rich in stimuli, scientific tools and reference material, offers little
in the way of explicit guidance. The analytical framework builds on techniques developed to assess discourse in
the classroom  and in informal    settings. Finally,  I describe the implementation and impact of a series of
interventions, developed in partnership with Explainers using a design-based research methodology, aimed at
increasing the incidence of scientific enquiry.

Designing Exhibits for Collaborative Learning
Coe Leta Finke, University of California at Berkeley
Lawrence Hall of Science and UC Berkeley Graduate School of Education

          Through my work as both an exhibit developer and researcher, I seek to adapt a design-based research
approach to study and design for collaborative learning in informal settings. One of the challenges facing museum
staff is designing artifacts and exhibits that promote learning in the absence of a facilitator or expert. Through
iterative design of a multimedia exhibit and microanalysis of how groups mediate their collective understanding, I
am working to develop a theory of collaborative learning in the informal setting and a set of principles to aid
developers in the design process.

Learning that Transfers Across Multiple Settings: A Problem of Studying and Facilitating
Nomadic Inquiry
Sherry Hsi, The Exploratorium

          An on-going challenge faced by formal and informal science educators alike is the issue of knowledge
integration and learning transfer across multiple settings. Regardless of whether learning takes place in a setting
such as a science museum, school classroom, or outdoor nature area, effective inquiry-based science learning and
teaching require careful attention to the physical space, well-designed instructional resources, and highly skilled
facilitators who know when and how to offer guidance. Our educational hope is that learners will integrate
disparate ideas and experience across these multiple contexts into a coherent understanding. I report upon design

                                                      14
studies  conducted at  the Exploratorium  with a  wireless handheld  application  designed     to support  `nomadic
inquiry' for visitors and museum educators. As a nomadic inquirer, the learner travels through physical and
information landscapes, observes, asks personally-relevant questions, and seeks explanations. Based upon this
application, I describe one model of an informal learner with an eye towards advancing our overall understanding
of design for continuous learning.

References
Allen, S. (2002). Chapter 8: Looking for learning in visitor talk: A methodological exploration. In G. Leinhardt
     (Ed.), Learning Conversations in Museums (pp. 259-303): The Type House.
Bartels, D., &  Hein, G. (2003). Book  review: Learning in settings other  than schools. Educational   Researcher
     (August), 38-43.
Borun, M., Chambers, M. B., Dritsas, J., & Johnson, J. I. (1997). Enhancing family learning through exhibits.
     Curator, 40/4, 279-295.
Brown,   A.  L. (1992).  Design  experiments: Theoretical  and methodological    challenges    in creating complex
         interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Callanan, M., and Jipson, J. Explanatory conversations and young children's developing scientific literacy. In K.
     Crowley, C. Schunn, and T. Okada (Eds.), Designing for Science: Implications from Everyday, Classroom
     and Professional Settings, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2001.
Center for Informal Learning and Schools ­ http:/www.exploratorium.edu/cils
Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A. A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiements in educational
     research. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Collins, A., Bielaczyc, K., & Joseph, D. (2000). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. In J. C.
     Campione (Ed.), Volume in honor of Ann Brown.
Crowley, K., Callanan, M. A., Jipson, J., Galco, J., Topping, K., & Shrager, J. (2001). Shared scientific thinking
     in everyday parent-child activity. Science Education, 85(6), 712-732.
DBRC     The Design-Based   Research   Collective (2003).  Design-based    research: An  emerging     paradigm  for
     educational inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
Diamond, J. (1986). The behavior of family groups in science museums. Curator, 29/2, 139-154.
Dierking, L., & Falk, J. (1994). Family behavior and learning in informal science settings: A review of the
     research. Science Education, 78(1), 57-72.
Dierking, L. D., Falk, J. H., Rennie, L. J., Anderson, D., & Ellenbogen, K. (2003). Policy statement of the
     "Informal Science Education" ad hoc committee. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 40(2).
Falk, J. H., & Dierking, L. D. (1992). The museum experience. Washington, DC: Whalesback.
Falk, J. H., & Dierking, L. D. (2000). Learning from Museums. Walnut Creek: AltaMira Press.
Hein, G. (1998). Learning in the museum. London ; New York: Routledge.
Hofstein, A., & Rosenfeld, S. (1996). Bridging the gap between formal and informal science learning. Studies in
     Science Education, 28, 87-112.
Leinhardt, G. Crowley, K. & Knutson, K., Eds. (2002). Learning Conversations in Museums. Lawrence Erlbaum
     Associates, Publishers.
Martin, L. (in press) An Emerging Research Framework for Studying Informal Learning and Schools. Science
     Education.
Museum Learning Collaborative ­ http://museumlearning.com/default.html
Paris, S. (1997). Situated motivation and informal learning. Journal of Museum Education, 22(2, 3), 22-27.
Ramey-Gassert, L., Walberg, H. J. I., & Walberg, H. J. (1994). Reexamining connections: Museums as science
     learning environments. Science Education, 78(4), 345-363.
Schauble, L., & Bartlett, K. (1997). Constructing a science gallery for children and families: The role of research
     in an innovative design process. Science Education, 81(6), 781-793.
Schauble, L., Leinhardt, G., & Martin, L. (1997). A framework for organizing a cumulative research agenda in
     informal learning contexts. Journal of Museum Education, 22(2 & 3), 3-8.
Wellington, J. (1990). Formal and informal learning in science: The role of the interactive science centres. Physics
     Education, 25, 247-252.
Wertsch, J. (2002). Epistemological issues about objects. In S. G. Paris (Ed.), Perspectives on object-centered
     learning in museums. Mahwah, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.

                                                    15
