          Seeing Nacirema: How Students and Professors Interpret
                                           Ethnographic Film

                                        Eric Karl Chambers & Reed Stevens
                          Box 353600, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-3600
                                      Tel: 360-421-8818, Fax: 206-616-6311
                                           Email: ekc5@u.washington.edu

         Abstract: Students and professors of anthropology were asked to interpret two pieces of
         original ethnographic video, one from central Mexico, the other from the United States.          Both
         students and professors approached the interpretation of the video shot in Mexico in much the
         same  way;   they  made   few  judgments   and   frequent expression   of uncertainty.    However
         students made more judgments and more expressions of certainty than the professors when
         viewing  the  film shot  in the United   States.  We   posit these data suggest  a  developmental
         sequence of interpretive skills where the ability to interpret activities perceived as culturally
         strange develops before the ability to interpret activities perceived as culturally familiar.

         In 1956 Horace Miner published the essay Body ritual among the Nacirema in the AAA's flagship
publication, American Anthropologist.      Since this publication the Nacirema have held a ubiquitous presence
within anthropology.   Upon first exposure to the "exotic" Nacirema students are often shocked to learn of a
culture whose members

         have an almost pathological horror of and fascination with the mouth, the condition of which is
         believed to have a supernatural influence on all social relationships. Were it not for the rituals
         of the mouth, they believe that their teeth would fall out, their gums bleed, their jaws shrink,
         their friends desert  them,   and  their lovers  reject them.  They    also believe  that     a strong
         relationship  exists between   oral and  moral   characteristics.  For example,  there  is    a  ritual
         ablution of the mouth for children which is supposed to improve their moral fiber. (Miner,
         1956:505)

only  to learn that Nacirema    spelled  backwards  is American.      Thus, the story of the  Nacirema      is meant  to
demonstrate that our culture is inculcated with the same level of myth, ritual, magic, and superstition as the
"exotic other" that anthropologists have traditional studied (Rynkiewich & Spradley, 1975).            As a pedagogical
strategy, then, the Nacirema have helped teachers encourage students to see that all cultures can be made strange,
that "exotic" is a way of seeing rather than a category that resides in those seen, and that with practice we can
turn our ethnographic lens inward and see our culture just as we viewed others.

         But does the introduction to the Nacirema serve these purposes? We suggest that it does not.             In this
paper we argue that undergraduate students in anthropology have asymmetrical interpretative strategies for
representations they believe come from "our" culture and those they believe come from "other" cultures.              The
basis for this claim   is a study  of students and  professors   who   viewed   and  commented     on     two  pieces of
ethnographic film.  In this study, both students and professors tended to make few judgments, few linkages to
prior knowledge, and more expressions of uncertainty when viewing an ethnographic video they were told was
shot outside of the United States.   Conversely, while the professors tend to maintain these interpretive strategies
when viewing a film they were told was shot in the United States, students tended to make more judgments,
more linkages to prior knowledge, and more expressions of certainty when viewing the same film. We suggest
this imbalance  in  their  interpretations across  films  is an  important  marker   of their development        of their
development of ethnographic interpretation practices.

Theoretical Framework
         We know something of how expertise manifests in chess players (DeGroot, 1965), electricians (Egan &
Schwartz,   1979),  radiologists   (Lesgold,   1988),   computer    programmers      (Ehrlich  &   Soloway,       1984),

                                                     121
mathematicians (Hinsley, Hayes, and Simon 1977; Robinson & Hayes, 1978), physicists (Chi, Feltovich, and
Glaser 1981; Larkin, McDermott, Simon, & Simon, 1980), political scientists (Voss, Tyler, & Yengo, 1983) and
historians (Wineburg, 1991; 1998).      Similarly, we know something of how people become truck drivers (Agar,
1986), police officers (Manning, 1977), navigators (Hutchins, 1995), and even marijuana users (Becker, 1953)
yet we know little of how people become anthropologists in general, or more specifically how people become
experts in cultural interpretation.1

       This research contributes to the learning sciences in three ways.      First, this research contributes to a
growing body of studies of expertise in solving ill-structure problems yet is somewhat unique in its use of a
video elicitation paradigm and exclusive in its focus on the discipline of anthropology.      Second, understanding
something of what constitutes an expert form of cultural interpretation should be helpful in understanding our
own interpretive practices. Lastly, within a growing trend of using studies of expertise to inform K-12 education,
this study should contribute to our understanding of teaching and learning in the social studies.

       The purpose of this project is to better understand how people become cultural interpreters.          More
specifically, our aim is to understand the similarities and differences in the way the students of anthropology and
anthropologist interpret ethnographic film.

Method
       Three undergraduate students in anthropology and three professors of anthropology participated in this
study. We showed each participant two short pieces of original ethnographic video using the VideoTraces
software package and asked the participants to think aloud as they viewed the video segments. The first video,
The Rosary (see Figure 1) was shot in a church in a rural community in central Mexico; the second video, Shrimp
Fishing, (see Figure 2) was shot aboard a small boat in the waters of the Northwestern United States.

                            Figure 1. The Rosary                  Figure 2. Shrimp Fishing

Data Analysis
       The aim of data      analysis   was to describe the similarities and differences    in the  interpretations of
ethnographic film by undergraduate students in anthropology and professors of anthropology and to better
understand the relationships between the cognitive processes involved in these interpretations.       Data analysis
proceeded in three stages. First, protocols collected from the "think aloud" (Ericsson & Simon, 1984) procedure
were transcribed verbatim.   Second, following Wineburg (1998) protocols were parsed into "conceptual unit."
These units of speech ranged from monosyllabic to multi-line utterance that focused on a single idea.    Lastly, the
conceptual units were systematically reviewed and coded into six categories:    pauses, suspension of judgment,
creation of context, expressions of certainty/uncertainty, and references to task. This coding scheme accounted
for 87% (n=1356) of all conceptual units.

The Findings
       When anthropology students and professors viewed The Rosary they tended to make few judgments and
frequently expressed uncertainty of the subject matter. Conversely, students tended to make few make few
linkages to prior knowledge while professors made more frequent use of this strategy, implementing it is
multiple ways. Moreover, where student did make judgments or tentative knowledge claims, they tended to be
about objects in the film rather than about actions or intentions. For example, one student said: "...you have what
appears to be a candle..." (italics added throughout for emphasis) rather than "this is a candle." (see Figure 3).
In other cases, students qualified their claims with a question:

                                                    122
                                           Figure 3.   The "candle".

          23      ... you see this coffin...it looks like a coffin to me in the background
          24      and you wonder did someone die and--is this is this like something
          25      they worship?

Similarly,  professors of anthropology  frequently   hedged     their claims.  "...maybe we're getting ready for a
baptism..." or "...maybe this has something to do with Easter..." they say with some frequency.

          Likewise, students tended to make few links to prior knowledge.      In cases where they did, however, it
suggests that they specific personal experience with an aspect of the context or activity being viewed as in this
case of this student responding to a women in the middle of the church who makes the "sign of the cross", a
ritual preformed only by those associated with the Catholic Church.

          13      ...and this girl just made a motion like this is a Catholic event
          14      of some kind which tells me maybe this is a Hispanic speaking
          15      country...

          To make a link between the women's action and the context requires, in this case, at least three pieces
of prior knowledge--that the gesture the women made was the sign of the cross, that the sign of the cross is
Catholic ritual, and that a large number of Catholics reside in Spanish speaking countries--and the ability to
interpret (Geertz, 1973) that action in light of the activity. In this case it seems, the interpretation is limited to a
matching activity where prior knowledge is mapped directly unto the activity so that the interpretation becomes
self-evident.

          Since making this kind of link to prior knowledge presupposes an expansive fund of knowledge, we
would suspect that younger students do this with less frequency than older professors.        Indeed this seems to be
the case.   Students made on average 7 links to prior knowledge while watching The Rosary compared to an
average of 23 links from professors while they were watching the same video.             The issue, though, is more
complicated.   While professors tend to make more links to prior knowledge, they also use that knowledge in
ways quite different from the students. Thus, while one professor made the following comment

          5       ...maybe [the ethnographic context] is Hispanic or Latino or
          6       something `cause its kind of suggesting a church or Catholic
          7       school or something like that...

which suggests that he knows something of what churches and Catholic schools are like and, like the student
above, that a large number of Hispanics are Catholic.  In other cases, though, professors extrapolated links.    By
this I mean that the link is not the product of a direct overlay of prior knowledge unto activity.   Instead, the prior
knowledge is manipulated cognitively in such a way that the manipulation serves as a mediating force in their
subsequent interpretations. To explain, one professor while watching The Rosary remarked "...it sure does
remind me of places I've been in Latin America...."      As it turned out, this professor had never been to the
community where The Rosary had been filmed but had been to other parts of Latin America and was able to
extrapolate prior knowledge generated out of those experiences to aid in his interpretation of this video.    While
this was  a  frequent  strategy for professors, students tended    to  used   this  strategy rarely and only in their

                                                     123
interpretation of Shrimp Fishing suggesting that that the ability to generalize, as indicated by the ability to
extrapolate links from prior   knowledge to activities, may be a more sophisticate interpretive strategy.

         Both students and professors approach ambiguous context and action in similar ways: they approached
these scenes as a puzzle, tried to figure that puzzle out, and, in most cases, admitted when they could not find a
solution using structurally similar statements. When viewing a scene of children repeatedly placing flowers on a
table then taking them away, one student remarked,

         13       ...but still its like they're doing the same thing over and over
         14       again and it doesn't make sense why they are doing it...it just
         15       doesn't make sense...

When viewing the same scene a professor remarks,

    7         ...[she's] handing stuff out now, now this stuff is being brought
    8         back to the table [and] she's handing it out and they keep bringing it
    9         back to the table...this is...I don't know some kind of, I'm not sure what
    10        they're doing here...

Like their professors, students tended to frequently suspend judgment and express uncertainty when watching
ethnographic film depicting actors and events that are unfamiliar.           Unlike their professors, though, students
tended to make fewer references to prior knowledge while thinking through these films.        But what happens when
both students and professors view ethnographic film that depicts scenes closer to home?

         When viewing Shrimp Fishing, professors tended to think through this film in much the same way that
they approached The Rosary.      Specifically, they made few judgments but many linkages to prior knowledge, and
more expressions of uncertainty. Student's interpretations, however, tended to be different from those they made
while watching The Rosary.      Typically students made many judgments, many links to prior knowledge, and more
expressions of certainty.

         In this study a common adverbial modifier in students' interpretation of the Shrimp Fishing film was the
word "obviously" and its synonyms.      In describing the initial activity one student comments, "...there's this guy
and he   is obviously a crab   fisherman...." Later on in the film another student remarks, "...obviously they're
obviously out in the ocean..." and later the second student says, "...they have some technology and it's not high
tech or anything [so] obviously this is a small-time operation..."       Both of these student were noticeably more
circumspect when interpreting the The Rosary to the degree that words like "obviously" and its synonyms rarely
showed   in  the data   for these  students.    These   comments     are  in  marked   contrast to the  more  guarded
interpretations made by the professors.   For example, one professor remarked, "...and you have what looks like
an ocean, or a big lake, or a bay..." What for the students is "obvious" is less so for the professors.

         Semantically,    the  word-choice "obviously"     suggests    a high   degree of conviction in  the student's
interpretation. Indeed, this interpretive commitment is strong enough that when confronted with information that
directly challenges their interpretation students are more likely to dismiss the new information in order to sustain
their initial interpretations. For example, when viewing Shrimp Fishing, most students and professors judge the
film to be about crab fishing.     Structurally these   activities, at least as they manifest in the Puget Sound  are
similar. They both use similar equipment including boats, floats, lines, and pots, they both take place in similar
environments, and they both use similar crews. Indeed, they are similar enough that it becomes more interesting
when students or professors do not initially suggest that the activity depicted is about catching crab. There are,
however,    important socio-political  differences in    these activities.   Four  minutes  into Shrimp   Fishing the
fishermen pull up the first pot and the viewer has a chance to see the catch (see Figure 4).

                                                        124
                                          Figure 4. Bringing up the pots

       At this point, viewers who made the initial judgment that they were viewing a crab fishing operation are
provided with fairly clear visual information that contradicts this judgment. Specifically they see the pots being
brought out of the water and the "catch" dumped into a large bucket.        When the commitment was high (as
indicated by the use of words like "obviously" and its synonyms) the viewers (mostly students) tended to dismiss
competing evidence.  One student, for example, said,

       46      ...those didn't look like crab but maybe they were...
       47      the video isn't, I mean, real sharp...

This student continues her viewing making several more references to crab pots, never again addressing the
contrary evidence. In another case, a student said,

       42      okay they're the one guy just got the pot from the other guy and
       43      he's shaking it out en out come crab they don't look like crab they're
       44      small crab must be...should zoom in

       Like the first student, this student continued to refer to the activity as crab fishing on multiple occasions
over the last two minutes of video. Like the first two students, the third was unwilling to dismiss evidence that
contradicted her earlier assessment.

       48      whoaa he's taking out the crab from the bottom...I thought
       49      they came out from the top...[inaudible] but he shook them
       50      out shook them out from the bottom.       They're not very big crab
       51      maybe babies? Hmmm

       The same student was view a scene where one of the shrimp fishermen is sorting the shrimp into types
uses the fact that he throws some of the shrimp overboard as further support for her "baby crab" hypothesis.

       66      I see now he's throwing the babies overboard but keeping the
       67      bigger ones they're still small though

       In each case the students, when confronted with evidence that contradicted their early assumptions
dismissed competing evidence as either being due to poor videography or reframing the entire activity as was the
case of the student who say the sort by species activity as a sorting by size activity.

       In contrast,  when  the commitment      to   the interpretation was lower        (as with most professors) the
interpretation was more flexible.    One professor who made the initial crab fishing interpretation changes his
mind once he sees   the pots being    emptied: "...they   weren't doing  crab  they     were   doing fish..." he says.
Continuing, "...dang, I wish I could see what kind of animal it is they are taking in.        It sure looks like fish..."
Another professor had a similar response:

       62      holy...well I called that one wrong those aren't crab at all...
       63      something much smaller...what could it be...little lobsters?
       64      Shoot what are they called? those little French lobsters?   Or
       65      Crawfish? No they're not crayfish. Shrimp?

                                                      125
          In general, then, when confronted with information that challenges an early interpretation, professors
tend to deal directly with that new information and use it as bases for reformulating their prior interpretations, an
activity that was rare among the students.

          Both students and professors make multiple links to prior knowledge and schema when viewing Shrimp
Fishing. Similar differences that emerged in The Rosary interpretation were salient here as well; when students
made linkages they tended to be about concrete, specific things such as the boat or the physical environment.
The more experienced interpreters not only tried to understand specific events and objects displayed--something
the students did too--but they also tried to build a wider picture of a coherent set of social practices.           For
example, in reference to the floats the fisherman used to mark their pots, one professor remarked,

          36     ...the float, of course, is to tell them where his crab
          37     pots are when he wants to come back but I suspect
          38     also that those floats indicate to other fisherman out
          39     there who's crab pots they are `cause I use to see that
          40     with my own fieldwork...

          Here the link to the floats is specific but also suggests that the professor is thinking about the complex
social role--as adjunct to the fisherman's memory as well as the method of social control--that the floats might
play in the lives of the fisherman. Again, we suggest that this added complexity is suggestive of a developmental
difference in ethnographic interpretation.

          Finally, when compared to professors, students were more likely to make expression of certainty while
watching Shrimp Fishing and when they did they tended to be about specific objects and actions.        In contrast,
professors tended to approach the objects and actions in both of these films as puzzles to be solved and often
expressed puzzlement over their inability do solve them. For example, one professor said,

          17     ...well now, what's happening...this is puzzling...
          18     I don't know, I don't know what's happening here...

Indeed, it may be this notion of the puzzle that separates student's interpretation from that of the professors.

Discussion
          There are significant differences    in the way    that students    of anthropology   and  professors      of
anthropology interpret ethnographic film.    While both students and professors tend to make few judgments and
frequent  expressions of uncertainty   while  viewing  Shrimp     Fishing    students tend to make  fewer and       less
sophisticated uses of prior knowledge. This difference is likely related to the students' nascent understanding of
the practice of ethnographic interpretation. Mike Agar (1996:35) has suggested that ethnography is an abductive
process that involves the "imaginative construction" of frames that explain rich points in the data. This is, we
contend,  what  happens  when   the    professors demonstrate     the    use of related knowledge   to extrapolate
interpretations for which they have no practical experience. This requires the ability to determine what is relevant
but also what is not.  In this sense, we suggest that the ability to do so is a more sophisticated approach to
cultural interpretations then is making a direct link between prior experience and action as was the practice of the
students.

          A second significant difference in the interpretive strategies of students and professors is seen in the
level of commitment that these two   groups made  to earlier interpretations when viewing Shrimp   Fishing.      In their
work on attribution processes Ross and Anderson (1980) suggest that people tend to increase their commitment
to previous held beliefs even after exposure to mixed, often conflicting evidence and often continue holding onto
a belief even after it has been discredited. This seems to be the case among the students in this study.  That this
only occurred during the students' viewing of Shrimp Fishing suggests that for students, interpretive tasks seem
easier when the setting is one that they perceive as strange.   Contrary to the students approach, however, the
professors responded to uncertainty by continuing to question, evaluate, and often guess, readily abandoning

                                                     126
earlier interpretations if they could no longer reconcile them with the observed activities. In discussing a similar
approach among historians, Wineburg (1998) concludes that "how [a historian] responded in the face of what he
didn't know allowed him...to learn something new." (Wineburg, 1998:340)

         Sailors of old used a spyglass to scan the horizon in order to get a better view of where they were
heading. Those hapless enough to turn the spyglass around and gaze inward were left with a narrowly-focused,
diminutive view of themselves.      Anthropology students seem to us a little bit like the sailors of old when they try
to  turn their anthropological     lens inward.  In       doing so  they, they   miss the proverbial horizon    for the sea.
Professors of anthropology have learned to filter the images coming through the spyglass through a lens of the
Nacirema and in doing so are able to see their culture as strange; we suggest that once students see something as
culturally strange    it will  be  relatively easy   to    engage   them  in   some   important practices  of ethnographic
interpretation as evidenced by the productive practices of these undergraduate interpreters.               But, making the
familiar strange in the first place may be a much bigger challenge for teachers of ethnography.                     In future
research, we hope to explore whether this is really the case and if so, why this might be.

Endnotes
(1)  From Malinowski's (1922) introductory chapter in Argonauts which served for decades as the methodological text in
     anthropology to Geertz' (1973) call for an openly interpretive approach to ethnography,    anthropologists have been long
     interested in the nature of cultural interpretation. These accounts, and most others in anthropology, however, neglect the
     specific cognitive processes involved in these cultural interpretations.

References
Agar, M   (1986).    Independence  declared: The dilemmas       of independent  truck drivers Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
          Institute.
Becker, H. (1953). Becoming a marijuana user. American Journal of Sociology 59:235-242.
Chi, M.T.H., P.J. Feltovich, and R. Glaser (1981). Categorization and representation in physics problems by experts and
          novices. Cognitive Sciences 5:121-152.
DeGroot, C. S. (1965). Thought and choice in chess The Hague, the Netherlands, Mouton.
Egan, D. E. and B. J. Schwartz (1979). "Chunking and recall of symbolic drawings." Memory and Cognition 7: 149-158.
Ehrlich, K. and E. Soloway (1984). An empirical investigation of the tacit plan knowledge in programming. Human factors in
          computer systems J. Thomas and M. L. Schneider. (Eds.) Norwood, NJ, Ablex: 113-134.
Ericsson, K. A. and H. A. Simon (1984). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Geertz, C. (1973).    Thick description: Towards an interpretive theory of culture. In C. Geertz (Ed) The interpretation of
          cultures.  New York: basic Books pp. 3-30.
Hinsley, D.A., J.R. Hayes, and H.A. Simon (1977). From words to equations: Meaning and representation in algebra word
          problems. Cognitive processes in comprehension M. A. Just & P.A. Carpenter (Eds.) Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum: 89-
          106.
Larkin, J., J. McDermott, D. P. Simon, H.A. Simon (1980). Expert and novice performance in solving physics problems.
          Science 208:1335-1342.
Lesgold, A. M. (1988). Problem solving. The psychology of human thoughts R. J. Sternberg and E. E. Smith. (Eds.). New
          York, Cambridge University Press: 3 1-60.
Malinowski, B. (1922).   Argonauts of the Western Pacific.   New York, Dutton & Co.
Manning, P. K. (1977). Police work: The social organization of policing Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Robinson, C. S. and J.R. Hayes (1978). Making inferences about relevance in understanding problems. Human reasoning R.
          Revlin and R.E. Mayer (Eds.) Washington, D.C.: Winston.
Ross, L. & Anderson, C. A. (1982).    Shortcomings in the attribution process: The origins and maintenance of erroneous social
          assessments. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and bias.
          Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.       pp 129-152.
Rynkiewich, M.A. & Spradley, J. P. (1975).   The Nacirema: Readings on American culture. Boston, Little & Brown.
Voss, J. F., Tyler, S. W., & Yengo, L.A. (1983).   Individual differences in the solving of social science problems. In R. F.
          Dillon & R. R. Schmeck (Eds). Individual differences in cogntiiton: Vol. 1. New York: Academic Press. Pp 205-
          232.
Wineburg, S. (1998). "Reading Abraham Lincoln: An expert/expert study in the interpretation of historical texts." Cognitive
          Science 22(3): 319-346.

Acknowledgements
This project was    funded in part by the Program  for     Educational Transformation  Through  Technology (PETTTT)    at the
University of Washington.

                                                             127
