Passive Forum Behaviors (Lurking): A Community Perspective

                                                   Fei-ching Chen
                          Institute of Learning and Instruction, National Central University
                              No.300, Jung-da Rd., Jung-li City, Taoyuan, Taiwan 320
                                Tel: 886-3-4227151, ext. 4814, Fax: 886-3-4273371
                                             Email: fcc@cc.ncu.edu.tw

        Abstract: Utilizing an integration of social learning and situated learning approaches, this
        study identifying 89 of 487 members as lurkers in an inquiry-based online learning community
        consisting of 81 groups is designed to explore the characteristics and positions of lurkers from
        a community perspective by addressing three questions: why do they observe, what do they
        post, and are they non-participation learners?     Using log-in frequency counts and postings as
        the basis of analysis, together with interviews revealing the views of community members on
        lurkers, this study aims to clarify the perception of the lurkers and their lurking trajectories.
        The findings of this study reveal a tendency toward intentional learning on the part of the
        lurkers. Given the opportunities to observe other groups engaged in similar tasks and going
        through similar procedures of inquiry activity in the online community, these lurkers were
        attracted  to the  discussion   and, through unintentional   learning, benefited  their  respective
        groups. From a participation framework perspective, the high online frequencies do contribute
        to group cohesiveness. Lurking contexts in relation to the dimensions of observational learning
        are discussed.

Introduction
        As   collaborative    learning becomes   an important  component   of   learning activity  on  the  Internet,
evaluation of group learning in virtual communities becomes the major interest of most research studies. Few,
however, examine individual learners exhibiting diverse levels of participation (Wenger, 2002; Kim, 2000), the
drop-outs,  the lurkers,  the peripherals, etc. Of  these, lurkers are reported to make      up over 90%   of online
communities (Katz, 1998; Mason, 1999). Hence, understanding the behavior of lurkers becomes an essential part
of investigation in a virtual learning community.

        For most of the studies done in the CMC (computer-mediated communication) field, lurkers comprised
the majority of members in online groups and in Discussion Lists (DLs) in particular (Mason, 1999). In DLs, the
members receive messages automatically, and whether they are read or replied to is left to the discretion of the
recipient.  Aside from the "no subscription" process used by most BBSs and newsgroups, participation in a
membership oriented learning community, as in the present study, implies a distinct sense of responsibility to the
group. In the context of an online joint learning community, learners may not be able to remain silent all of the
time. There are, in fact, very few members who post little or nothing in such learning communities.

        According to The online Jargon Dictionary (1999), the term "lurker" is defined as: One of the `silent
majority' in an electronic forum; one who posts occasionally or not at all but is known to read the group's
postings regularly. From the perspective of participation, this definition presupposes two kinds of behavioral
patterns: a high level of commitment on the one hand and limited or absent article contribution on the other.
What interests us then, is the context in which learners login most of the time while posting relatively little.
Viewed  as   a  vicarious learning behavior   within a learning    community,   further exploration   is required to
determine what would define lurking as a type of learning behavior, and what this means from a community
perspective.

        The increase in prevalence of online groups, coupled with the relative ease with which persistent and
traceable messages can be gathered and analyzed, has made them fertile ground for research. Most studies have
used login data to create a profile of these learners. However, in order to understand the underlying group
dynamics and the role of lurking behavior, the use of data provided by transcripts as a unit of analysis cannot

                                                     128
reveal the entire picture. Instead, this study intends to take an interactive perspective (or provide an interactive
lens) to explore the lurking context.

          Given that the term "lurk" has normally been given a negative interpretation, (for example, Kollock and
Smith (1996)   describe lurkers as    "free-riders", noncontributing, resource-taking      members)   this study first
proposes to use the definition provided by The Online Jargon Dictionary (1999) and then places the specific
learners in each group of the community into categories. Based on an analysis of their postings and using
interview protocols from members of their respective groups, mentors, and from the lurkers themselves, the
lurkers' repertoires are revealed. The Lurker's habitus in a community will be uncovered and its stereotyped
negative impression will also be discussed.

Theoretical Background
          In the following section, we first explore the use of two social-cultural learning theories on the most
visible behavior of lurkers, observation. We also focus upon varied forms of participation. These issues were
addressed by Bandura's social learning theory (1977), and Lave and Wenger's work on situated learning theory
(1990). In the observational learning section, we attempt to create a synthesis of Bandura's notion of observation
and Lave and Wenger's unintentional learning. In the participation section, we discuss Bandura's ideas on the
importance   of reinforcement   and    modeling  and    Lave and  Wenger's      concept     of legitimate  peripheral
participation. Taken as a whole, our intent is to answer the research question: are lurkers non-participation
learners?

          Bandura (1977) states: "Learning would be exceedingly laborious, not to mention hazardous, if people
had to rely solely on the effects of their own actions to inform them what to do. Fortunately, most human
behavior is learned observationally through modeling: from observing others one forms an idea of how new
behaviors are performed, and on later occasions this coded information serves as a guide for action." Bandura
emphasizes the importance of observing and modeling the behavior, attitudes, and emotional reactions of others.
He describes human learning behavior as attention (including modeled events and observer characteristics)
retention (such as motor rehearsal, motor reproduction, including physical capabilities, or self-observation of
reproduction) and finally, motivation (including external and self-reinforcement).

          Lave argues that learning as it normally occurs is a function of the activity, context and culture in which
it occurs (i.e., situated). Social interaction is the most important aspect of situated learning, as learners become
involved in a "community of practice" which forces them to acquire certain beliefs and behaviors. As the student
moves from the border of this community to its center, s/he becomes more active and engaged within the culture
and assumes the role of expert. This process may be considered "legitimate peripheral participation."

          At a glance, both Bandura and Lave stress learning that occurs in the relationship between people and
their environment and in full participation within communities of practice and utilization of resources. But for
Bandura, knowledge is acquired through observation of the environment and social interaction which, in turn,
lead to modeling, or mirroring. In particular, social learning involves the observation of admirable things, which
are thus modeled, or mirrored. In slightly different view, situated learning involves observation and concerns the
effect of the environment (rather than that of other people) on the individual. In most cases, situated learning is
unintentional rather than deliberate, as in Banduar's concept of observational learning.

          Together with making this comparison, we are also interested in exploring how the lurkers in this study
are observing.  Do they find particular models to mirror in order to exhibit appropriate behavior? Or do they
observe other things besides people/models? What are they looking for? What things that they were not intended
to observe do they find useful and interesting? What are the attitudes of others toward their lurking behavior?

          On the other hand, in response to the popular negative notion of lurkers and their minimal discussion
forum contributions,  we  are   interested  in investigating  the type  and quantity        of their participation as
demonstrated in a co-constructive learning activity. In short, a community perspective is introduced in this study
as a lens to provide a richer picture of this particular group of learners--the lurkers.

                                                      129
Methods
The Community
        The online community is formed each year for a web-based science contest in an inquiry-based learning
environment called Learning Atmospheric sciences via the Internet (Lain), which is constructed mainly to allow
high school students in Taiwan to participate during the summer.       Those volunteer individuals who chose the
same topic from a list of five topics were sorted into a set of groups with 5-7 individuals per group. Members in
the same   group   did not  normally  know    each other, nor  did   they engage   in  face-to-face communication
throughout the contest.

        This web-based science contest lasted six weeks with one stage scheduled for each week. The six stages
were: Individual   claim   formulating,   Team  hypothesis   building,    Detailed planning,  Data   locating, Data
transforming, and Hypothesis justifying. Participants in this activity could receive a certificate if they completed
the process and all required tasks. As contributions varied among members of each group, those members were
charged with determining who should receive the certificate at end of the contest.

        The online community was constructed of several layers. At the bottom layer, each group had its own
discussion forum. Except for the assigned mentor, participants outside this group were not allowed to post
articles though they were permitted to lurk in all discussion forums. At the middle layer, two boards called
"Daily" and "The Mentor's Diary" were open to posting by mentors only and contained news or profiles on any
groups or individuals. At the top level, there was a public board open to everyone allowing communication
among  all  participants on  any subject.    Permission  to post  in this community     was restricted to registered
participants. To others, the forums were read-only.

Participants
        In this present study, the community was composed of 487 individuals in 81 total groups.        Participants
were sorted according to their non-ability rating as determined by a pretest on scientific reasoning ability in
general, and on the ability to utilize primary data related to atmospheric sciences in particular. The members in
each  group   were chosen  to reflect a similar combination   of  differing abilities.  Each group was assigned a
secondary science teacher as mentor.      In practice, many groups shared an identical mentor due to the limited
number of the mentors available.

Data Collection and Analysis
        There   were   four  major data   sources. 1) logging,    2) discussion forums,   3)  lurker's weekly  self-
statements, and 4) interviews. Each set of data was then analyzed.

1) Logging.
        The    frequency  of  participants' postings was  tallied and  analyzed  to  identify potential lurkers. As
participants could not post articles in the discussion forums of other groups, the extent of online postings per
individual was calculated as a percentage of postings within the group.   The three criteria used to identify lurkers
were:
        a. The lifespan consisted of six weeks during which each individual logged into the community every
           week through out the activity.
        b. The Z score of postings per week was below the average of the group members.
        c. The  Z  score  of postings  divided  by login  frequency   count was    above the  average  of the  group
           members.
Basic characteristics of these identified lurkers were displayed in relation to those of the community as a whole
in terms of online frequency and number of postings.

2) Discussion Forums.
        Content analysis of the postings of the lurkers was analyzed in the following three ways in order to
understand the nature of the postings of the lurkers and their interaction with group members.

        a .The   postings  were  sorted  into three  categories   (Chen,  &  Jiang,  2003):   i) coordination  about
           knowledge (the content), ii) coordination about scientific procedures and collaboration (the task), and

                                                      130
         iii) affective and supporting aspects (off-task), to demonstrate a general picture of the nature of the
         postings of these lurkers.
       b. To determine the lurker's role in threaded discourse, we classified the lurker's posts in each thread
         into the following four categories based on her appearance in the threads (Chen, & Jiang, 2003): i)
         Initiator, the one who throws the ball and begins the discussion. ii) Follower, the one who catches the
         ball and helps peers to continue their discussion. iii) Terminator. The thread is ended with a post by
         the lurker. iv) Soloist. The lurker initiates a post but gets no response.
       c. Lurkers' level of negotiation in each thread in which they posted was analyzed: the number of posts
         by a single lurker in each thread was tallied to determine the extent to which the lurker engaged in
         group negotiation. For example, one lurker made 31 posts total, with 25 threads containing only one
         post and 3 threads containing 2 posts.

3) Weekly Self-Statements.
       Each week, all the participants were required to share their impressions of the week. The size of these
articles ranged from several hundred to thousands of words.

4) Interview.
       Informal interviews were done with lurkers, group members, and the mentor individually. The lurkers
were asked to describe their life in the community. For example, they were asked how they felt, what they were
observing, when they felt free to post articles, their perception on group collaboration, etc. The group members
and mentors   were asked to describe      their perceptions of the lurkers in their     group as well as of group
collaboration. The mentors' observation notes on the online community were also collected and considered
supplementary.  One-third of lurkers were interviewed by phone conversation of open duration generally lasting
between 30 minutes and 2 hours, and focusing upon the interviewee's participation in online groups. Prompting
was minimal, and the interviewer did not validate whether a group or topic was worth discussing.

Results and Discussions
       The results are presented in two parts. First, comparisons of the lurkers and the whole community of
participants are made on the basis of quantitative summaries of the frequency of online posts. In the second part,
the role of the lurkers was investigated based on an analysis of their postings and on interviews of group
members as well as the lurkers themselves.

1. Identify the Lurkers
       Of the 487 registered members, 270 participants logged in every single week throughout the activity. Of
these, 89 were identified as lurkers. The lurkers were quite persistent in their participation in comparison with the
255 drop-outs.  The main reason for the high drop-out rate was the challenging nature of the task -- evidence-
based inquiry learning. This conclusion is supported by the fact that there were fewer certificates awarded (232)
than there were six-week sustained participants (270).

       There were 56 groups of which 30 contained only one lurker, 21 had two lurkers, and 3 groups had
more than 2 lurkers. Due to different collaborative styles within the groups, lurkers were identified by calculating
relative numbers of posts and online frequency within each group rather than across groups.        However, when
groups were categorized as units for the purpose of providing a general picture, the set of lurking groups does
show a marked difference from the rest of the community members (Table 1). Weekly variations were reported
in Figure 1. The post/online mean of non-lurkers doubled the number of lurkers. An interesting point is that,
although such differences were not that significant in themselves, the lurking group was composed of all six-
week sustained learners while the average life span averaged only 4.5 among non-lurkers. In other words, more
time was spent by the lurking group but it resulted in less productive performance. Detailed analysis was needed
to explore the context of the lurkers.

                                                     131
Online mean
                                                                        Post mean
            Table 1. Logging Comparisons between lurkers and non-lurkers

                                                      Lurkers (89 members)                Non-Lurkers (398members)
                         Post mean                    56.1                                93.5
                         Online mean                  75.2                                64.4
                         Post/Online mean             0.75                                1.45

             30   25.1                                                            25   20.5
             25                                                                   20            16.0    16.4                16.2
             20                                                                                               12.2   12.2
             15   22.5      11.0   10.2    9.6       9.0      10.3                15
             10                                                                   10   12.6
              50            9.9    9.3     7.3       6.9       8.5                 50                                       10.68.18.77.58.7
                   1         2      3       4        5         6 Week                    1       2       3      4      5      6 Week

                                                     non-Lurkers:398 membersLurkers:89 member
                         Figure 1. Comparisons of online frequency and postings between lurkers and non-lurkers

            2. What Do the Lurkers Post?
                   We randomly selected one third of all the lurkers for a category breakdown according to the nature of
            the articles posted. The postings were roughly distributed into the previously established three categories. A
            fourth category "sharing website information" was added as a sub-category of Knowledge due to the large
            number of posts containing "copy and paste" content from the website (Table 2). The fact that lurker postings
            were fairly evenly distributed over the three categories indicated moderate participation in all aspects of group
            interaction.

                   As to the position of lurker posts, they appeared predominantly in the middle of the thread (Table 3). In
            other words, the lurkers tended to be a follower.  Few of their posts appeared at the end of a thread or initiated a
            thread in which there were no responses.

            Table 2. The nature of the posts of the lurkers

                                       Aspects of coordination           Frequency         Percentage
                                       Procedures and collaboration                    270         .34
                                       Affective and supporting                        249         .31
                                       Knowledge                                       201         .25
                                       Sharing website information                      81         .10
                                       Total                                           801           1

            Table 3. The positions of postings of the lurkers

                                        Position of the post n a thread Frequency         Percentage
                                        Follower                                      537        .67
                                        Initiator                                     134        .17
                                        Terminator                                     75        .09
                                        Soloist                                        55        .07
                                        Total                                         801          1

                   In addition, an analysis of the extent to which these lurkers handled negotiation in each thread posted
            revealed that a total of 801 posts were from 443 threads. The distribution of the appearance of posts in each
            thread is reported in Table 4. 90% of the threads contained fewer than 3 posts by lurkers.     It seems that they were

                                                                 132
less skilled in negotiation and turn-taking than their colleagues. Together with playing the role of followers in a
thread, lurkers showed an inability to participate fully.

Table 4. The distribution of lurker's posts in a thread

             Number of     1     2     3      4    5      6    7     8    9    10    11    12    13
          post in a thread
             Frequency       295    74    26    22      9    4    4     1    2    1     2     2     1    443
             Percentage      66.6 16.7    5.8   5       2   .9   .9    .2   .5    .2    .5    .5    .5   100

3.Why Do They Observe Instead of Posting?
         It is clear that lurking is not a simple single behavior but a complex set of behaviors, rationales, and
activities within in a rich range of possibilities. In the context of a science contest, a shared enterprise is needed
in order to co-construct a project. Lurking behavior implies a lack of responsibility and minimal participation.
How do lurkers lead themselves in such trajectory?

         Interview data from 26 lurkers revealed that they were basically a group of low self-esteem individuals.
In many cases, they would hesitate to press the enter key when sending their written articles. Instead, they would
have doubts about the value of their ideas and, on occasion, gave up at the last moment leaving their contribution
unposted.   The superb articles and the level of negotiation carried on by their collaborative partners apparently
intimidated them, reducing them to lurking.     Similarly, when a lurker finally posted an article, s/he would quite
often log in to check if that article had received a reply. If it had been ignored for a period of time, the lurker
would feel disappointed and lose the confidence to post again. These situations lurkers encountered explain, at
least partly, the reason for the common lurker behavior pattern characterized by minimal postings and high login
frequency.   It seems clear that observation of intellectual models at work does not necessarily lead either to
performance or acquisition. Close collaboration with models may even cause withdrawal.

         Some interviewees admitted that they simply could not grasp the meaning of a post by another group
member and therefore preferred to function purely as observers.        Having marginalized themselves, a number of
interviewees mentioned experiencing a sense of engagement while lurking. In one example, the interviewee
stated:

    They were so desperate for data to support their hypothesis, to look for solutions to their problems
    around the clock. It really inspired me.

         They not only lurked in their own discussion forums, but also in others they found interesting.       In fact,
forums in which they were not members became major targets for lurking.         There were 81 groups, each with its
own respective forum and each group was following a similar procedure.         They became curious about how other
groups dealt with the same problems (i.e. modified their hypothesis to be workable, transformed three sets of
data into one figure, etc.) and found that by looking at the thoughts of others in the discussion forums, they came
up with  ideas  not previously  considered.     Observation    also had an  influence on   the   affective aspect. One
interviewee mentioned in her weekly self-statement:

    Each time when I observed their discussion forums, I realized that some group had given up..., others
    were barely sustained...., I was a little bit worried about them, at the same time I was so proud of
    myself being in such a cohesive group.

         Another place the interviewees frequented was the "The Mentor's Diary" in the middle layer of the
community. Most of the participants enjoyed reading the mentors' diary, especially when the mentor commented
on the  process and  unique   aspects  of certain  groups.   Such   mechanisms  provided    the  participants with  an
opportunity to be singled out for special mention. The lurkers sometimes followed "The Mentor's Diary" as a
tour guide for browsing.   Some interviewees mentioned that they paid attention to certain groups because they
had discovered that they had acquaintances in those groups while some groups, showing tight coordination,
developed a huge number of postings. Lurkers spent a lot of time in such places and some indicated that it helped
them a lot:

                                                        133
    After reading the work of other groups, I feel quite helpful and begin to think about our work. I did not
    simply copy and paste these artifacts to our discussion forum, instead, I often thought about them for
    one or two days, and then posted in our board.

         It appears that a strong sense of group identity can be developed with only limited postings. While
lurking elsewhere, lurkers may acquire varied resources and repertoires which, when posted in their own groups,
may be of significant benefit. This trajectory of learning mixes intentional learning (Bereiter & Scardamalia,
1989) together with unintentional learning. This unintentional learning aspect was a major factor in reducing the
drop out rate.

4. Lurkers in a Group
         Since lurking behavior is a social phenomenon, lurkers' accounts alone are not enough to provide a
complete picture of the lurking context. The perceptions of the group members around him/her also require
investigation. Our 32 interviewees described 26 groups containing lurkers. Six of them shared groups with
lurkers. As expected, there were two contrasting opinions about lurking behavior: some members criticized the
lurkers for being helpless and out of touch while others praised the faithful and supportive role lurkers played in
their groups.

         From    the point of  view of the  critic,  which can  be   easily understood,  lurkers were regarded    as
freeloaders who strove to avoid attention and responsibility. Group members also complained about the shallow
questions they asked, as well as their tendency to keep a low profile when tasks were assigned.       However, it
would be interesting to explore the level of acceptance lurkers would encounter in other groups.

          Analysis of the nature of postings, in which lurkers provided a very similar number of articles in
knowledge, procedure, and social support categories, suggested that there were two reasons for group members'
acceptance of lurkers. Firstly, the drop out rate of almost 50% always discouraged the residual group members.
As participants   dropped  out  gradually  over  the whole  six weeks,   group members    suffered uncertainty   and
insecurity.   Under such circumstances, the loyal remaining partners would be appreciated.       Some interviewees
agreed   that it was  not always  necessary   to post articles  with highly  valuable content  because    warm   and
encouraging postings were important as well. Even peripheral intermittent participation was better than none.
Secondly, we observed that these high school participants were used to having synchronous discussions, due
largely to the current pervasiveness of the MSN environment. However, participants did not adapt readily to the
asynchronous environment of the Lain project used in this study.   They were eager for their group members to be
online as in a chat room or MSN. Therefore whenever they logged in, they checked the names on the online list
first and if they found members of their own group there, they did not feel alone. Their lurking companions
provided  a   sense  of cohesion for them.  Although    lurkers   were  considered less  knowledgeable,   the  group
members were aware that they actively played a supporting role and demonstrated their engagement by sharing
website information.     Under such circumstances, peripheral participation itself qualifies as a dimension of
contribution to group learning.

Concluding Remarks
         Most    online communities  include  members     who   exhibit differing levels of participation (Wenger,
2002), such as coordinator, core members, active members, peripheral members, and even outsiders-to-be. It
would seem that their respective levels of importance would be easily identified. In this study, we explore a
specific group of lurkers and their varied lurking contexts. With an attempt to understand lurking behavior from
both Bandura's view of social and observational learning, and Lave and Wenger's view of legitimate peripheral
participation in situated learning, we summarize the characteristics of this expanded concept of the lurker.

         Lurking behavior has its roots in the context of group learning. In most cases, learners with low self-
esteem or less knowledge would have a greater chance to become involved as members of a lurking group.
However,    the  psychological  well-being of lurkers  is jointly determined  by  the group  context. Some     group
members are demanding and abrasive while others are more patient and accepting.       Lurkers, through observation
of the repertoires and performance of fellow group members, gradually develop their individual trajectories. It is
the intentional learning aspect that prevents them from dropping out but it is also intentional learning that keeps

                                                      134
them away from full participation. We suggest that it would be interesting to explore the role of reluctance and
reticence in observational learning, as compared with the role of reinforcement in Bandura's notion of social
learning.

          Another issue concerns the sustainability of these lurkers. What prompted them to assume a supporting
and lurking role online? In a community composed of dozens of groups engaged in similar learning tasks, there
are specific  communities   of practice  that  can be observed,  for example,    the evolving      forms    of mutual
engagement,   understanding  and    tuning the enterprise, and developing the repertoire,       styles, and discourse
(Wenger, 1998). Some students found that lurking could be considered a vicarious form of alternative learning
from a community perspective.

          Lurking and lurkers will continue to be an important area of study as more learning communities go
online and are investigated with not only a CMC approach, but also a learning perspective. In this study, we have
attempted to articulate the concept that the mix of participation and non-participation that shapes the identities
and roles of learners directly influences the communities to which they belong and within which they function.
Our next step will be to explore how this mix affects the ability (e.g. negotiability) of lurkers to shape the
foundations that define the community.

References
Bandura, A. (1977). Social Learning Theory. NJ: Prentice-Hall
Bereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M.(1989). Intentional learning as a goal of instruction. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.),
          Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Rober Glaser (pp. 361-392). Hillsdale, NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chen, F., Jiang, H.M_2003_Exploration of peer-facilitator dynamics in two contrasting groups. To be published
          in Instructional Science.
Jargon Dictionary. Lurker Definition. Available at http://www.netmeg.net/jargon.
Katz, J. (1998). Luring the Lurkers, Slashdot. Available: http://slashdot.org/features/98/12/28/1745252.shtml
Kim, A.J. (2000). Community building on the Web. Berkley: Peach pit Press.
Kollock,  P., &   Smith, M. (1996).    Managing  the  virtual commons:  cooperation   and       conflict in computer
          communities. In S. Herring (Ed.), Computer-Mediated Communication: Linguistic, Social, and Cross-
          Cultural Perspectives (pp. 109-128). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Lave, J. & Wenger (1990). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. New York: Cambridge U.
          Press.
Mason, B. (1999). Issues in virtual ethnography. Proc. Ethnographic Studies in Real and Virtual Environments:
          Inhabited Information Spaces and Connected Communities Con., Edinburgh.
Nonecke, B. (2000). Lurking in email-based discussion lists. Unpublished thesis. South Bank University.
Wenger, E., McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice: A guide to managing
          knowledge. MA: Cambridge Press.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. MA: Cambridge Press.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported, in part, by National Science Counsel Grants NSC 90-2520-S-008-018. We owe our
sincere acknowledgement to all the researchers, participating teachers, and research assistants in the Lain Project
for their crucial contributions. Special thanks to Denis Titchenell for editing the manuscript.

                                                     135
