 Learning to Participate in Disciplinary Discourses: What Happens
                             When the Conversation Ends?

                                              Lindsay L. Cornelius
                                            University of Washington
                                  P.O. Box 353600, Seattle, WA 98195-3600
                                  Tel: (206) 616-5255, Fax: (206) 543-8439
                                        Email: lindso@u.washington.edu

       Abstract:    Current  research    has  found     that participation in  meaningful,  disciplinary
       conversations in the classroom helps students develop their conceptual understandings of the
       subject matter. These findings are often shown through descriptions of design interventions
       that have taken place in ordinary classrooms. Little attention has been paid, however, to the
       diverse experiences of individual students within these contexts and what they take away from
       participation in such discourses. This longitudinal study followed two students who were
       active student participants in a design intervention that promoted disciplinary engagement in
       science and history through the following school year. The study found that the style of student
       participation in classroom discourses depended on the unique dispositions of the students
       themselves, but that this participation could be either encouraged or stifled by the participant
       structures that were made available by the curriculum and the teacher

       Recent work in education has explicated the importance of having students participate in classroom
discourses that reflect disciplinary thinking (Leslie R. Herrenkohl & Guerra, 1998; Lampert, 1990; Lemke, 1990;
Polman & Pea, 2001; Shulman & Quinlan, 1996). One underlying purpose of this pedagogy involves exposing
students to the intellectual practices of the disciplines. Another concerns student engagement and the importance
of attracting students to engage with some meaningful question or topic through inquiry. Classroom reforms and
design interventions involving "communities of learners" (Brown & Campione, 1994; Engle & Conant, 2002;
Rogoff, 1994), "writing workshops" (Lensmire, 2000), and other similar ideas under different names have
explored the potential of engaging students in knowledge-making practices which involve students in larger
communities of discourse in the disciplines. The presentation of findings from these research pursuits have
generally reflected positive changes that can occur in such classroom environments. Researchers report a high
incidence of participation across diverse student populations, leading to more sophisticated understandings of the
subject matter content and more disciplinary-appropriate ways of approaching new information.

       One    place in the  literature that illustrates how   disciplined inquiry can lead to   productive student
engagement in disciplinary discourses is Engle and Conant's (2002) analysis of a small group within a particular
fifth-grade class involved in a science unit on endangered species. According to these authors:

       "A controversy emerged in this group of students over whether killer whales (also called orcas) are
       whales or dolphins...Given the nature of the question and the students' initial lack of interest in whales,
       it may seem surprising that they were interested in discussing the orca's classification at all. The group
       nevertheless passionately argued the question of the orca's classification...for more than 27 min[utes] in
       class. This discussion was what one student later referred to as a `Big Ol' Argument'" (p. 412).

Engle and Conant go on to describe how the Big Ol' Argument (BOA) resurfaced many times over a period of
eight weeks, leading students to research further into scientific sources to settle the controversy. In analyzing the
potential sources of this engagement, these authors propose four principles for fostering productive disciplinary
engagement, and they carry out a detailed analysis of the classroom discourse data in light of these principles.
The analysis includes the roles of students and teachers in the process of inquiry, the norms of discourse, and the
disciplinary nature of  the tasks that   students were    given.  While   such an analysis usefully   furthers our
understandings of how "to make productive disciplinary engagement more likely" (Engle & Conant, 2002, p.

                                                    136
459), I will argue in this paper that an important consideration has been neglected in this piece of research and in
others like it: namely, the roles and contributions of individual students.

       What can we assume about students who participate in disciplinary discourses in the context of their
classroom lessons? Can we assume that the participant structures (Phillips, 1972) or the nature of the questions
played the largest role in shaping their engagement? Should we be skeptical and wonder whether students in fact
brought these intellectual dispositions with them into the classroom? Can we assume that these students have
"learned" a way of communicating that they will take with them into new settings? In Engle and Conant's (2002)
description of the students who were involved in the BOA, the characteristics of the students, their relationships
to each other, and their positions in the larger class receive no mention. In this paper, I will put forward an
argument that explores the potential problems that result when we do not understand and describe our students
with the same detail that we use to describe our teachers and our curriculum.

       My interest in these issues stems from my own research experience in a design intervention classroom
with a research project called PATHS, which in many ways resembled the classroom described above. As I have
analyzed the patterns of participation across the classroom, I have noticed that some students picked up and used
the disciplinary discourses made available by the curriculum more than others. Some students simply "shined"
more than others as they were creating their own theories or challenging others' assumptions. The questions that
this raises, as I have mentioned above, require thinking critically about the participants, how they fit into the
discourses of the classroom, and what different students take away from such an experience. To investigate this
issue, I have conducted a two-year longitudinal case study of two students who participated in the PATHS
research project during their sixth-grade year and followed them into their seventh-grade classes in middle
school. The two research questions that have guided this inquiry are: (a) What are the characteristics of students
who were active participants in disciplinary discourses? (b) Do these students spontaneously take up these ways
of participating in future forums of conversation?

Research Settings and Participants
       To investigate the above research questions, a case study involving two focal students was conducted.
The two students were sixth-grade participants in PATHS (Promoting Argumentation in the Teaching of History
and Science), a NSF funded study that aimed to explore students' epistemological understandings of history and
science, and to find ways that pedagogical structures in the classroom could foster connections across these
seemingly disparate disciplines (see Stevens, Wineburg, Herrenkohl, & Bell, in press). Through units of history
and science, students engaged in building and defending their own theories, talked about the nature of evidence,
and developed understandings of the topics introduced in the classroom. Curricular materials introduced in the
classroom assisted students in these cognitive, social tasks. The classroom environment transformed the role of
students from passive listeners to active participants in the creation of meaning. The teacher in this classroom,
Mrs. Garrett, shared a similar educational philosophy     with the project      aims which emphasized supporting
students through the process of creating their own knowledge.

       The focal students in the current research study were originally chosen by their sixth-grade teacher to be
interviewed periodically throughout the year in conjunction with the PATHS study (Year 1). Because of the
extensive amount of data on each student obtained through these interviews (five 45-minute interviews across the
school year), these two students were desirable candidates for recruitment into the current, longitudinal study. In
addition, both students participated frequently in classroom discussions during Year 1, which further made them
subjects of interest for the current study. In the school year following the PATHS study (Year 2), I followed both
students into their seventh-grade classes, their first year of middle school.

Data Sources and Methods
       Data collection in Year 2 involved repeated observation of each of the focal students in the context of
their social studies and science classes. These two school subjects were chosen for their correspondence to the
subjects represented by the PATHS project, based on the assumption that similarities in participation and
discourse might be more likely to emerge in similar domains of knowledge. I observed approximately once
weekly for five or six weeks in each classroom. One student's social studies class is not included because the
teacher declined to participate in the study. Tape recordings were made when possible, but the data collection
was mostly comprised of my own field notes and observations. The purpose of this observation was first, to

                                                     137
observe the focal student and how he or she interacted and participated in classroom discourses, and secondly, to
understand the social context itself.

         Because of my interest in further understanding the personal characteristics of these students and also
the meanings that they were constructing about their own selves in the context of particular school settings
(Bruner, 1990; Holland, Lachicotte, Skinner, & Cain, 1998), I conducted interviews with each of them at two
points during Year 2. The interviews were conducted at the students' homes, and followed a semi-structured
interview format involving questions about current classroom experiences, perceptions of themselves as students,
and about their activities and relationships in and outside of school. Interviews with each focal student's parents
and with their social studies and science teachers were also conducted. These multiple data points served the
purpose of triangulating my observations of the students' participation in their classes (Erickson, 1986; Yin,
1984) with the students' own perceptions of that participation and with the insights of others who knew the
students personally.

A Description of the Participants
Alicia: Sixth Grade
         Alicia,   a Caucasian  female,   stood out  immediately    in  the   sixth-grade classroom    as we  began   our
PATHS curriculum. She asked insightful questions and often went beyond the material at hand to make sense of
the subject matter. During a mid-year science unit on Sinking and Floating, Alicia emerged as one of the major
contributors to classroom discussion. In this science unit, where students worked in groups to create and define
their own theories about why things sink and float, Alicia's engagement in defending her own theory and
challenging  other   students' theories   defined   her  as a particularly    "motivated"    student. Alicia spent   time
researching the concepts involved in Sinking and Floating on her own time in an attempt to make sense of it.
Following this unit, when asked during an interview whether she could imagine herself becoming a scientist
someday,    Alicia reflected: "Yeah,  because   I  like science a  lot.  It's really fun  to do experiments     and make
theories and have evidence and stuff.   It's fun."

         For Alicia, having a chance to explore her own ideas in detail, and having these ideas challenged by
others, was an exciting experience. Her teacher, Mrs. Garrett, attributed Alicia's engagement in terms of her own
disposition as a student, stating that Alicia "was so curious and so willing to put herself out there and make a
mistake, and work through it, and sort of celebrate from that." Given Mrs. Garrett's description of Alicia as a
student and the observations of how Alicia interacted with the substance of the PATHS curriculum, one can draw
the conclusion that a high level of compatibility between this student and context existed and enriched her
experiences.

Alicia: Seventh Grade
         In seventh grade, Alicia's levels of participation in her science and her social studies classes looked
quite different in each of these contexts, but a discussion of this makes little sense without considering the
contexts themselves. First, it is important to note that Alicia chose honors level offerings in both social studies
and science.1 According to both of her teachers, the students who took honors level courses not only came to the
classroom with stronger academic backgrounds and more parental support, but they were also expected to
perform  at  a higher   level  than   was expected   of  students  in   the regular  classes.  Despite    these differing
expectations, however, both teachers admitted that the curriculum for honors classes did not differ significantly,
apart from the inclusion of more "higher level" questions. The activities in science class involved reading the
textbook  for  new    information,    completing   worksheets     for learning   and  review,   doing   labs,   watching
demonstrations,    and  taking tests. The  discourse    that  the teacher,  Mr.  Ormrod,     utilized during  classroom
conversations resembled the traditional I-R-E sequences that have been illuminated in numerous place in the
literature (Cazden, 1988; Lemke, 1990). Alicia's social studies class was comprised of a number of different,
traditional and  non-traditional,    classroom  activities, including   textbook  reading,   completing   maps,   library
research for projects, Socratic seminars, and social activities that demonstrated key concepts. Mr. Magnuson, the
teacher, utilized  different  styles of discourses   within  these discourse   activities, sometimes    resembling   Mr.
Ormrod in his I-R-E like control of the conversation, sometimes taking a hands-off approach during activities
like the Socratic seminars.

                                                        138
         As stated before, Alicia's participation in these two contexts differed from each other to some degree,
and  from  her sixth-grade  experiences  to a greater   degree.  In science, she  rarely participated  in classroom
discussions of scientific concepts. She sometimes raised her hand to supply an answer as the teacher was
reviewing the material but this participation rarely exceeded a few words or a sentence. Mr. Ormrod classified
Alicia as an average student among this honors class, perhaps above average in the seventh-grade, and described
her as being a "chatty" student, meaning that she spent more time socializing than focusing on schoolwork.

         Participation in social studies for Alicia occurred more frequently and also involved considerably more
interjection of her own ideas and opinions into the classroom conversations. As Mr. Magnuson describes her,
Alicia is "very energetic" and "has a lot to say". This class generally was more energetic and outspoken than the
science class, and they were also given more opportunities to express themselves. Mr. Magnuson mentioned
Socratic seminars, in which particular books were discussed, as the activity in which Alicia really stood out
among   her  peers. During  more  textbook   and   worksheet-centered    work, however,   Alicia  participated        less
frequently and according to her teacher, sometimes handed in less than satisfactory written work. Alicia reflected
on this difference in herself in middle school, stating during a Year 2 interview, "I really don't pay that much
attention in class because these days, it's not that interesting...It's just laid out and you breeze through it."

Jeremy: Sixth-Grade
         Jeremy is a Caucasian, male student. Unlike Alicia, he did not immediately stand out as one of the main
participators in the classroom conversations for any of the five PATHS units, and similarly his teacher stated that
he did not engage as much as she had expected. A closer analysis of the data set, however, has found that Jeremy
participated deeply  in several  key controversies   that transpired  in  several of the  units. His   role       in these
discussions less often took the form of theory-building or proposing new explanations, as Alicia's did, but rather
as a challenger to others' propositions and claims. These challenges, however, were theoretical and focused. In
addition to the publicly spoken statements that he made, Jeremy can also be observed, through careful review of
the videotaped class sessions, making side comments on what was being said. These comments, which often
involved   making   remarks  to students sitting   near him, show    that often   throughout the  course          of these
conversations, Jeremy was quite engaged with what was being said. In his own description of his participation
after one of the units, however, Jeremy did not identify himself as someone who participated much, stating that
he mostly listened to the arguments that others were making. Additionally, as found through his interviews,
Jeremy did not identify himself as someone who might become a scientist or a historian someday. Thus, while
engaged in pertinent disciplinary discourses, he did not see himself in these disciplinary roles, in present or in
future imagined contexts.

Jeremy: Seventh-Grade2
         Jeremy, unlike Alicia, did not opt into the honors classes during his seventh-grade year. However, as
stated before, regular level science classes were found to be similar in format and content to the honors classes.
Ms. Kabinski, Jeremy's science teacher, reflected that her regular science classes compared with the honors level
in that "the honors class...is a lot more, they go a lot more in depth with whatever we're talking about. They can
take it to another  level." The similar  attitudes between   all of  the teachers interviewed    about this       topic is
interesting to consider in light of the way that classroom expectations for particular students and for groups of
students get construed. Although Ms. Kabinski's class, according to my observations, included all of the same
elements of activity and discourse (worksheets, two-person labs with lab notebooks, textbook reading and going
over answers in class in an I-R-E type dialogue) as did the honors science class, students in the honors sections
were viewed as more capable of extending the discussion and answering more complicated questions. In both
contexts, however, the students' main means of entering into scientific conversations was by answering specific
questions posed by the teacher, usually during the task of reviewing or filling out homework assignments or
other worksheets.

         The changes observed in Jeremy's patterns of participation within this context as compared to the
context of the sixth-grade PATHS units were not as dramatic as in the case of Alicia, but were nonetheless
noticeable and present. In seventh grade science Jeremy became a much quieter member of the classroom.
During my period of observation, he did not once voluntarily participate in whole class conversations. According
to Jeremy, he participated more at the beginning of the year, but had stopped doing so over time (my period of
observation began in the winter). He did not give any direct explanations for why he thought this was the case.
When asked about participation in social studies, he said that his involvement depended: "If I know what I'm

                                                     139
talking about and somebody's saying something wrong, then I'll participate a lot until they change their mind."
Although I was not present in his social studies class to make my own observations of his actions, I have noted
that this reflection matches his patterns of participation observed during his sixth-grade year. In seventh-grade
science, it seems the lack of opportunity to engage with the material and with others in this way may have left
Jeremy with very few avenues of personally meaningful participation.

Research Findings: Analysis and Implications
        These    student descriptions,   which admittedly are sketchier    that  I would  prefer given  the space
constraints of this paper, have thus far answered the research questions very indirectly. In this section, I will lay
out more explicitly what conclusions are to be drawn from these two cases. First, to answer the question about
what are the characteristics of students who actively participated in the disciplinary discourses during the
PATHS implementation, some similarities and differences between Alicia and Jeremy can be discussed. In terms
of similarities, controversy should be noted as something that encited participation. Both Alicia and Jeremy
showed up in the conversation most often when the topic being discussed was contentious in some way. As
Alicia has stated in interviews, she likes arguing. Interestingly, although Jeremy did not identify with arguing in
quite this same way, he displayed many of the same dispositions throughout the course of the conversations.
Another similarity, which should not be overlooked, is the fact that both of these students are white. While their
sixth-grade classroom was diverse, and certainly not only white students had important roles in the conversation,
we must be aware of the fact that as white students, these students potentially brought more cultural capital to the
classroom situation than perhaps some of their peers. A third point, considering possible cognitive similarities,
both students displayed an ability and willingness to grapple with the open-ended nature of the questions that
were presented through the curriculum.

        The differences between these two students during Year 1 involve divergent levels of identification with
the particular questions being explored. Alicia was highly motivated to find answers to the questions that the
curriculum posed. This was evident in her struggling to provide and defend plausible explanations and in her
work outside of the class to make sense of the issues. Jeremy, on the other hand, was less involved in providing
or finding these explanations (as following Sinking & Floating he claimed "I don't really have a theory"). What
did motivate him to participate, it seems, were the discrepancies in others' thinking that he could pick up on and
argue cogently against. Thus, even students with different levels of interest and investment in a particular topic
or disciplinary approach can come to a conversation with room to participate, given that the participant structures
of the classroom are at least conducive to the student's style of communicating.

        The second research question asks: what happens when students who participated in these discourses
move to a new social context? My research findings in Year 2 suggest that neither student spontaneously took up
the discourses and ways of participating utilized during Year 1. Even though both students attained a certain
level of proficiency in Year 1 with questioning ideas and sources, proposing new explanations, and evaluating
theories in light of disciplinary norms, they did not simply engage in this way during their seventh-grade classes.
This  finding is  not totally surprising given what we  know   about   the social   and cultural nature of  human
interaction (Cole & Means, 1981; L. R. Herrenkohl & Wertsch, 1999; Wertsch, 1998). However, I suggest that
this finding  is important for  bringing a new  awareness  to both   researchers   who  innovate  these classroom
environments and to their critics. In Year 1, when these two students were given the opportunity to participate
extensively in the creation of meaning in the classroom, both engaged in ways unique to their own personal
dispositions. In Year 2, especially in science, these differences were concealed as students generally became
defined by the extent to which they fit the teachers' mode of questioning. Thus, while the dispositions of both
students undoubtedly contributed to their style of participation in Year 1, the lack of appropriate learning
environments in Year 2 would have made these differences less visible had I only encountered these students in
the second year. Both focal students, for instance, were viewed as pretty average kids in their seventh-grade
science and social studies classes when their favored ways of participating were not represented or encouraged in
the discourses of the classroom. What I am suggesting here is that important, complex interactions between
students and their social contexts occur, and we should not reduce our explanations to favor either internal
student dispositions or environmental affordances and constraints.

        The findings obtained in this study are limited by the nature of this case study approach to the problem.
Ideally, a range of students who both did and did not participate regularly during Year 1 would have been studied

                                                    140
in their seventh-grade contexts. Unfortunately, the data collected on these students during Year 1 was lacking.
My current research involves exploring and thinking critically about the student positions of a range of students
in the classroom, how, given their different histories and dispositions, they come to experience classroom
participant structures differently, and thus engage   with others   and   with the subject matter in    qualitatively
different ways.

Endnotes
(1) The middle    school offered honors   English   and math     courses, which  students  had to qualify  to  take.
    Additionally, at the time this study was conducted, the school also began offering honors social studies and
    science classes, which students could opt into.
(2) Unfortunately, due to a teacher's inability to participate in the study, observational data does not exist for
    Jeremy's social studies class, although he did respond to questions about this class during his interviews.
    Reports here will involve only his participation in science.

References
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),
        Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-270). Cambridge,
        MA: MIT Press.
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of Meaning. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Cazden, C. B. (1988). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning. Portsmouth, NH:
        Heinemann Educational Books.
Cole, M., & Means, B. (1981). Comparative studies of how people think: An introduction. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.
Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding Principles for Fostering Productive Disciplinary Engagment:
        Explaining an Emergent Argument in a Community of Learners Classroom. Cognition and Instruction,
        20(4), 399-483.
Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In M. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on
        teaching (pp. 119-145). New York: MacMillan.
Herrenkohl, L. R., & Guerra, M. R. (1998). Participant structures, scientific discourse, and student engagement
        in fourth grade. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 431-473.
Herrenkohl, L. R., & Wertsch, J. V. (1999). The use of cultural tools: Mastery and appropriation. In I. Sigel
        (Ed.), Development of mental representation: Theories and Applications (pp. 415-435). Hillsdale, NJ:
        Erlbaum.
Holland, D., Lachicotte, W. J., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds.
        Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not the question and the solution is not the answer: Mathematical
        knowing nad teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27, 29-63.
Lemke, J. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning, and values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Lensmire, T. J. (2000). Powerful writing, responsible teaching. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Phillips, S. (1972). Participant structures and communicative competence: Warm Springs children in community
        and classroom. In D. Hymes (Ed.), Functions of language in the classroom (pp. 370-394). New York:
        Teachers College Press.
Polman, J. L., & Pea, R. D. (2001). Transformative communication as a cultural tool for guiding inquiry science.
        Science Education, 85(3), 223-238.
Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners. Mind, Culture, and Activity,
        1(1), 209-229.
Shulman, L. S., & Quinlan, K. M. (1996). The comparative psychology of school subjects. In R. C. Calfee (Ed.),
        Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 399-422). New York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.
Stevens, R., Wineburg, S., Herrenkohl, L., & Bell, P. (in press). The comparative understanding of school
        subjects: Past, present, and future. Review of Educational Research.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.
Yin, R. K. (1984). Case study research. Thousand Oaks: SAGE.

                                                     141
