             Supporting Students' Reasoning with Inscriptions

                            Jose Luis Cortina, Qing Zhao, Paul Cobb, Kay McClain
                       GPC Box 330, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 37203, USA
                                 Tel: +1 (615) 322-8049, Fax: +1 (615) 322-8999
                                     Email: Jose.Luis.Cortina@Vanderbilt.edu

        Abstract:     In this paper     we  look at how    students can be  supported   to reason  with  a
        mathematical inscription system. We do so by analyzing several episodes from a classroom
        design   experiment  that centered   on  supporting   middle  school students'   understanding  of
        proportional   relations  in the    context of measurement.     We   illustrate  how  the teacher
        orchestrated whole-class conversations that built on students' diverse ways of reasoning and
        how she used an inscription system to revoice their contributions. We explain that such efforts
        made it possible for students to start communicating and reasoning mathematically with the
        inscriptions.

        The  contention  that mathematical       inscriptions play  a key   role in the  development  of   students'
mathematical reasoning is widely accepted. Both Piagetian (e.g., Kaput, 1994; P. W. Thompson, 1992) and
socio-cultural (e. g., Dörfler, 1993; van Oers, 1996) accounts of mathematical learning recognize inscriptions as
paramount. In this paper, we contribute to the understanding of how students can be supported to reason with
mathematical  inscription-systems    in a  classroom  setting. We   do so by  analyzing  several  episodes  from a
classroom design experiment that centered on supporting middle school students' understanding of proportional
relations in the context of measurement. We illustrate how an inscription system became constituted--with the
proactive support of the teacher in whole-class conversations--as a pivotal tool for mathematical communication
and reasoning within the classroom community.

        Our interest in symbols derives from our work as classroom researchers who are concerned with issues
related to instructional design. The perspective we adopt towards symbol use (Nemirovsky, 1994) is consistent
with the basic Vygotskian insight that students' use of symbols profoundly influences both the process of their
mathematical development and its products, increasingly sophisticated mathematical ways of knowing (Dörfler,
1993; Kaput,  1994;   Meira,  1995;     van Oers,   1996). This  perspective contrasts   with instructional design
approaches  that view  inscriptions  as   external  representations   which students  internalize as they  develop
mathematical understandings. Instead, in the view we adopt, symbol use is considered an integral aspect of a
mathematical practice (Cobb, 2002), one that is constituted in the social interactions of a classroom community.
Previous analyses have shown how a focus on symbol use like the one we adopt can serve to trace the evolution
of mathematical   meaning   within   a  classroom   across  extended   periods   of time (cf. Cobb,  2002;  Cobb,
Gravemeijer, Yackel, McClain, & Whitenack, 1997). The purpose of this analysis is to further the agenda by
focusing on how an inscription system can become constituted within a classroom community as a tool for
mathematical communication and reasoning.

        In this paper, we start by briefly describing the classroom design experiment and then clarify the
methodological and instructional orientations of the study. Next we present an analysis of several classroom
episodes that took place during the first instructional session. These episodes illustrate how the use of an
inscription system became constituted in the classroom as the teacher orchestrated whole-class conversations.
We conclude by explaining how the bottom-up instructional approach followed by the teacher supported the
students in coming to view the inscription system as a collective resource for mathematical communication and
reasoning.

Setting and Data
        The classroom design experiment involved 10 teaching sessions conducted with a group of 7th grade
students at an urban public school in the southeast United States. The school served an ethnically diverse
population. In the case of the 10 participating students, five were Caucasian, four African Americans, and one

                                                     142
Indian American. The teaching sessions took place twice a week during the students' activity period (i.e. the last
period of the school day). A member of the research team assumed the role of the classroom teacher and was
assisted on numerous occasions by two additional researchers who also participated in planning the instruction.
During the classroom design experiment, the research team tested and revised a conjectured learning trajectory
(Simon, 1995) aimed at supporting middle-school students' understanding of proportional relations in the context
of measurement (cf. Freudenthal, 1983; Simon & Blume, 1996; A. G. Thompson & Thompson, 1996).                Central
to this conjectured trajectory was the use of an inscription system (Cobb, in press; McClain, 2002; Stephan,
Cobb, Gravemeijer, & Estes, 2001)based on a  double-scaled number line (Gravemeijer, 1998; Streefland,1984).

        As we began our development efforts, we drew on our previous research to frame the design of the
inscription system. We were guided by two requirements that are not easy to reconciliate (Cobb et al., 1997). On
the one hand, the inscriptions needed to be experienced by the students as providing a means of faithfully
representing their ways of thinking. When this is not the case, it becomes difficult for students to appropriate
them in building new understandings. On the other hand, the inscriptions needed to afford the possibility of
representing rather sophisticated mathematical ideas, or else the teacher would not be able to use them to address
key aspects of her mathematical agenda. For this reason, the tools were designed as means of support for the
teacher, not carriers of meaning (Kaput, 1994; Meira, 1995, 1998; van Oers, 1996).

        The data for our analysis consist of videotape recordings from two cameras, one focused on the teacher
and the other on the students. In addition, a set of field notes and copies of all student work are part of the data
corpus.

Analytical Framework
        Our analysis is guided by the emergent perspective (Cobb & Yackel, 1996).          The emergent perspective
involves coordinating constructivist analyses of individual students' activities and meanings with an analysis of
the communal mathematical practices in which they occur.    This framework was developed out of attempts to
coordinate individual students' mathematical development with the evolving social processes in which they
participate in order to account for learning in the social context of the classroom. It therefore places the students'
and teacher's activity in social context by explicitly coordinating sociological and psychological perspectives.

Method
        The approach followed for analyzing the whole class data generated during the design experiment
involves a method described by Cobb and Whitenack (1996) for analyzing sets of classroom data. This method is
an  adaptation of  Glaser  and  Strauss' (1967)  constant comparative  method.        The   initial orientation  for a
retrospective analysis is provided by the tentative and eminently revisable conjectures that are developed both
prior to and while actually conducting the classroom design experiment. The method involves continually testing
and revising   conjectures while  working   through  the data   chronologically.     This   constant  comparison     of
conjectures with data results in the formulation of claims or assertions that span the data set but yet remain
empirically grounded in the details of specific episodes (cf. Cobb, McClain, & Gravemeijer, 2003). Though in
this paper we only make reference to events that took place during the first instructional session, we look at them
with hindsight, taking into account the retrospective analysis of the entire data corpus.

        Our interest in proportional reasoning was motivated by previous experiences with middle grades
students in which they had difficulty making reasonable mathematical interpretations of data represented by
ratios (e.g., "price per ounce," "income per capita," etc.). Given the importance of phenomena that are commonly
organized into ratios in science and social studies, we considered developing the instructional approach an
important aspect of middle-school mathematics.

        In designing and conducting the instructional sessions, we followed a bottom-up instructional approach
(Cobb et al., 1997) that centered on the orchestration of whole-class conversations (McClain, 2002). The main
goal when following this approach is to capitalize on the diversity of students' reasoning, as it is reflected in their
contributions  to whole class  discussions, so that significant mathematical ideas        can  become--in  students'
eyes--sensible  topics of  conversation. This  approach  requires careful planning        that involves  anticipating
students' diverse ways of reasoning, and developing conjectures about how to capitalize upon them as they

                                                    143
become public during   whole             class conversations.           The image       that results is that of a teacher adjusting her
interventions as she pursues an instructional agenda, based on an ongoing interpretation of classroom events.

Results of Analysis
       In this section, we analyze several episodes that took place during the first instructional session. Our
purpose is to illustrate how the teacher made use of an inscription system as she introduced a problem to the
class, revoiced students' mathematical contributions, and addressed salient mathematical issues during the whole
class conversation. We also describe how students started to appropriate the inscription system introduced by the
teacher as they reasoned about the problem at hand and made contributions to the ongoing conversation.

Supporting Productive Interpretation of the Mathematical Problem
       The teacher's instructional goal for the first session was to engage students in thinking about the
proportional accumulation of two quantities (A. G. Thompson & Thompson, 1996). At the beginning of the first
session, the teacher introduced a problem that focused on the proportional relationship between miles driven and
gallons of gas consumed. She explained that normally she would drive 204 miles a week using 9 gallons of
gasoline, but because of a new schedule starting the next week she would be driving about 300 miles. She
wanted to know how much gasoline her car would consume weekly on this new schedule.                                While explaining the
problem, the teacher drew the double-scaled number line on the board (Gravemeijer, 1998; Streefland, 1984) as
shown in figure 1.

                                                                     9
                               gallons

                                miles
                                                                    204             300
                                               Figure 1. The double-scaled number line

       The teacher introduced the double-scaled number line to represent the proportional relations between
distance and amount of gasoline. Her intent was that the line would become constituted as a record (of a
narrative) of the event that was taking place for the students (i.e., a car covering distance). The vertical lines were
intended to represent the endpoints of the two accumulations that were simultaneously occurring as the car was
driven (i.e., driving distance and gasoline consumption). The teacher's expectation was that the students would
come to view these outcomes as being proportionally equivalent. If this occurred, they would take it as self-
evident that were the car to travel twice the distance as it did before, it would consume twice as much gasoline.
In this sense, the distance between the vertical marks was proportional to the values they represented. For
example, the mark 300 was about 3/2 as far from the origin of the line as the mark 204 because it represented a
value that was about 3/2 as big (see Figure 1).

       At the beginning of the discussion, there was no indication that the students considered the graph to be
related to the problem at hand. One of the students, Megan, for example, proposed to use cross multiplication to
solve the problem.

       Megan: I think you can put it in fraction, say 9 over 204 equals...and then compared it to X
           over 300?
       Teacher: What would that tell me?
       Megan: Huh...huh...If you make it into a fraction,
       Other students: Proportion...
       Megan: Oh, proportion, proportion! If you make it into a proportion... If you make 9 over 204
           and equals...or... I don't know, let's say equals, X over 300. You simplify the bottom and
           cross multiply...

       Megan's approach was constituted as a reasonable strategy by the rest of the class as none of the other
students voiced a different opinion and some of them tried to further elaborate on the method of carrying out a
cross multiplication. This indicated to the teacher that the students did not view the double-scaled number line as
a useful resource for reasoning about the problem at hand. Instead, they seemed to interpret the mathematical
task to be that of using a known procedure (i.e., cross multiplication) to figure out the numerical result. Although

                                                                       144
this was a mathematically adequate way of dealing with the problem, it seemed that solving word problems was,
for the students, a process of identifying and applying a previously taught algorithmic method. The teacher's and
students' interpretations of the situation were therefore in conflict. From the teacher's perspective, the students'
procedural interpretation of the activity did not support the development of reasoning about the proportional
covariation of two quantities that was central to her mathematical agenda (i.e., the distance and the gasoline
consumption). Thus, the teacher was faced with the challenge of making the mathematical issues that she wanted
the students to reason about an explicit focus of discussion.

        The double-scaled number line (see Figure 1) became an important resource for the teacher as she
addressed this challenge. In an effort to support the students to reinterpret the problem situation, the teacher told
them that she was interested in knowing what the approximate amount of gas was needed for a 300 mile drive
before she conducted any precise calculations. She then guided a whole-class conversation that focused on
generating this estimate, in the course of which she made frequent use of the double-scaled number line.

        Teacher: I want to get a sense of what you think the answer is gonna be. How much gas you
             are going to use? We know when you drive that distance 204 miles [motioning along the
             double-scaled number line to indicate a distance of 204 miles], you watch the gas gauge
             you use 9 gallons and you then have to stop at the gas station and put 9 gallons in, right
             [pointing to the numbers]? Instead of driving that distance 204, you will be driving 300
             miles. Do you think you will be using twice as much gas as you used before?

        The teacher explained the problem again with the intent to redefine the nature of the activity. While
doing so, she developed a narrative by referring to a gas gauge moving and a gas refill. Her intent in doling so
was to make the problem situation experientially real for the students and, therefore, to enable them to view the
numbers involved as measured quantities. The teacher used the inscription to support the development of the
narrative by purposefully tracing with her hand the distance from the origin of the line to the mark 9/204 (see
Figure 1).

       Many students indicated "no" to the teacher's question about whether she would need twice as much gas
to drive a 300-mile distance, and Alice concluded by saying "It won't be twice as much, because you are not
going twice the distance." The teacher then asked if the students thought the car would use the same amount of
gasoline for both the distance of 204 miles and 300 miles, and another student responded:

        Amanda: I think it will be more than 9 gallons because if it is 9 gallons for 204 miles, 300
             miles is more than 204 miles, so it will probably be more than 9 gallons [pointing to the
             graph when she mentioned 204 miles, 300 mils and 9 gallons].
        Teacher: So you are going further. See I need some more gas in there [pointing to the distance
             between the 204 and 300], right? Yet it is not twice as far so you are not going to use twice
             as much gas [motioning with her arm back and forth along the number line].         So you are
             going to figure out how much more gas you are going to use.        Does that make sense?   We
             don't need the exact answer. We can just estimate.

        Amanda's contribution was the first in the whole class discussion in which a student referred to the
graph as she made a contribution. The teacher, by gesturing to the double-scaled number line as she recast
Amanda's argument, legitimized Amanda's way of thinking and oriented the group to use the double-scaled
number line as a means of communication. In doing so, the teacher attempted to help the students build an image
of the two quantities (i.e. distance and gasoline) simultaneously accumulating in a proportional way based on the
double-scaled number line. It was at this point in the episode that most of the students first seemed to view the
double-scaled  number  line as signifying an actual event,       and  started   to view  the inscribed  numbers  as
representing quantities that were relevant for them to solve the task as hand.

        The episodes we have presented illustrate how the purpose of the activity was redefined within the
group. It seemed that students started to view the activity as that of figuring out relations between real quantities
rather than manipulating numbers by applying algorithms. To make this shift possible, the teacher continually
used the double-scaled number line to develop the narrative of the actual event (i.e. a car covering distance) as
she intervened in the ongoing  whole-class conversation        and revoiced    students' contributions. As a result,

                                                145
students' interpretations of the double-scaled number line seemed to evolve, from seeing it as a graphical record
of the numbers involved in a calculational problem, to a representation that could be used to think about
quantitative relations involved in the situation at hand. As we explain below, during the whole-class conversation
that followed, the students started to focus on the proportional relations between the accumulations of two
quantities and did so by reasoning with the graph.

Reasoning with the Inscription System
       The teacher's efforts to support the redefinition of the problem situation proved to be effective. As the
session continued, the following exchange took place that indicates a shift in at least some of the students' ways
of thinking about the covariation in the accumulations of two quantities.

       Teacher: Ok, so we want to use this information [pointing to the "9/204" mark] to try to get
          this estimate [pointing to the "300" mark]. Right? Is that what you are saying. Ok. So does
          anybody want to try that? Ok, Megan.
       Megan: Ok, [pointing from her desk at different parts of the graph] since 300 is about 100
          more than 204, we need to find out how many gallons of gas you would use for say 100
          miles. So if you divide 204 by, in half, it's about 100. So you would divide 9 into half,
          which would be 4 and a half.
       Teacher: Ok
       Megan: And so I guess to get... it would be about 9 plus 4 and a half

Megan's approach was to find correspondences based on the proportional relations between the driving distance
and the gas consumption. Her approach can be considered a continuation of the type of reasoning supported by
the activity of estimating. As she explained her thinking to the group, Megan publicly used the double-scaled
number line as a resource to figure out relationships between different quantities. She seemed to reason that since
half the distance required half the amount of gasoline, one could find out how much gasoline was needed for the
additional 100 miles by halving the amount of gas needed for 200 miles.

       Megan's argument                 was important       to the      teacher's mathematical         agenda since it focused on the
proportional relations of two quantities (i.e. distance and gas consumption) as they accumulated simultaneously.
She indicated that she particularly valued Megan's reasoning by inscribing her approach on the double-scaled
number line, adding the inscriptions "9 + 4.5 = 13.5" and                    "4.5/100" (see Figure 2). She then asked the class if
they could explain "Megan's way."

                                                     4.5             9           9 + 4.5 = 13.5
                               gallons

                                miles
                                                     100            204             300

                                         Figure 2. The evolving double-scaled number line

       Nicolas: Ok, first she had to figure out how many miles she was using per100 miles. Right?
       Teacher: Ok I got a question for both of you guys [Nicolas and Megan] or anybody else. Why
          are you trying to find out about 100 miles [pointing to the "100" in the "4.5/100" mark;
          see figure 2]?
       Nicolas: Because it is about 100... 300 is close to 100 miles more, a little less than 100 miles,
          than 204 miles. So, ah, in order to find bout how much gas you'll be using with 300 miles,
          you have to find out what 100 miles more is.
       Teacher: Ok. So you are taking half of the 200 [indicating the distance between the "100" and
          the "204"] and then you are just finding out what half the gas is [indicating the distance
          between the "4.5" and the "9"]. Because that's like an extra half [indicating the distance
          between the "204" and the "300"]. So if that's 200, an extra half would be 300 [indicating
          again the distance between                     "204" and the "300"], so that's got to be an extra half there
          [indicating the distance between the "9" and the "13.5"]. Is that kind of how you are
          thinking about it?

                                                                       146
        By having students give explanations and by referring to the double-scaled number line as she recast
aspects of students' contributions that were salient to her mathematical agenda (i.e., half the distance, half the
gasoline), the teacher seemed to help the rest of the class make sense of both Megan's solution and of the
definition of the problem situation on which it was based.     This became evident as the session progressed. It
should be clear from the episode that even though it was the teacher who was constantly developing the double-
scaled number line to include more complicated inscriptions, these inscriptions signified students' contributions
and were integral to the ongoing whole-class conversation.

        The discussion continued as the teacher asked the students to estimate how much gasoline her car would
consume if she drove 500 miles. While doing so, she marked "500" on the double-scaled number line. Rashied
proposed to add the 9 gallons that corresponded to 204 miles, to the 13.5 gallons that corresponded to 300 miles.
In this way, he said, one could find out how much gas the car would consume for 500 miles (i.e. 204 + 300 = 500
miles [approximately]; hence, 9 + 13.5 = 22.5 gallons). Rashied's approach resembled Megan's in that it was
based on putting together "pieces" of known proportional correspondences (i.e. 9 gallons to 204 miles and 13.5
gallons to 300 miles) to figure out the unknown one (i.e. the gas needed for 500 miles). It is worth noting that the
known  proportional  correspondences     (such  as 13.5 gallons  and 300  miles) that  were  pivotal in Rashied's
reasoning were those that had been marked on the double-scaled number line during the previous whole-class
conversations.

        After  all the  students    indicated they  had understood   Rashied's   way,  Alice contributed   to the
conversation by proposing a different approach. Alice argued that because 500 miles was 5 times 100 miles, they
could multiply 4.5 gallons by five to find out how much gasoline the car would consume for 500 miles (i.e. since
5 times 100 miles equals 500 miles, the car would consume 5 times 4.5 gallons of gas). Alice's approach was
significant to the teacher's long-term mathematical agenda because it used a proportional correspondence as a
multiplicand to find a larger correspondence.    Similar to how she built on Megan's approach, the teacher asked
other students to explain Alice's way and meanwhile, she added to the graph 5x100=500 and 5x4.5=22.5 in an
effort to clarify this approach. In later sessions of the design experiment, the teacher capitalized on normalized-
ratio-like contributions of this    type (e.g., using a construct  like "gallons per  100  miles" to  find bigger
correspondences) to address issues related to using a ratio such as consumption per household to measure
phenomena that are dependent on the proportional relation between two quantities (e.g., the relative consumption
of a commodity). In achieving her goals, it seemed to be critical that the students had come to view the double-
scaled number line as a resource for reasoning and communicating mathematically about the situation at hand.

        In this episode, the double-scaled number line seemed to become a taken-for-granted resource for the
students to solve the mathematical tasks. It was used by the students to mathematize the problem not only to
produce correct numerical results but more so, to contextualize the calculations and give rise to new ways of
reasoning. As the students reasoned about the relationship between different quantities, they reasoned with the
double-scaled number line. In other words, the double-scaled number line constituted a central aspect of the
mathematical reality in which the students reasoned and acted. The emerging relationship between the students
and the double-scaled number line might seem miraculous if one did not take into consideration the proactive
efforts of the teacher throughout the session. As we may recall, by using and elaborating the double-scaled
number line as she developed a narrative of an event with the students, the teacher helped her students (Megan
for example) start to reason about quantities that were inscribed on the double-scaled number line.  Additionally,
the teacher used the graph to make different students' reasoning an explicit topic of the whole-class conversation
and by doing so, she seemed to help students (Rashied for example) come to think about the problem in terms of
proportional relations.  Moreover,     by documenting     the students' diverse  ways  of reasoning,  the  teacher
developed the double-scaled number line as a resource that they could use to build on each other's contribution.
For instance, the teacher's inquiry about the "100 mile correspondence" and the inscription she made of it on the
double-scaled number line seemed to lead Alice to develop her approach.

Conclusion
        In this paper we have illustrated how students can be supported to use an inscription system as a
resource for reasoning mathematically. The episodes we analyzed illustrate how, with the proactive support of
the teacher, the double-scaled number line became constituted in the classroom as a resource for reasoning about
the proportional   covariation   of two  accumulations.   The  teacher's effectiveness involved   supporting  the

                                                      147
redefinition of the instructional activity as a meaningful situation that involved dealing with quantities rather than
merely doing something with numbers. It was crucial to this process that students came to view the inscriptions
produced by the teacher as adequately representing the contributions they made.

         Key to this success was the bottom-up instructional approach followed by the teacher. She engaged in
instruction not with a fixed plan, but with an instructional agenda that allowed her to make adjustments based on
her continual assessment of how students were interpreting the ongoing classroom events. From the students'
perspective, it seemed to be their contributions that became topics of whole-class conversations, and their
thinking that  was inscribed    on the double-scaled   number   line. This  perception   oriented  them   to use   the
inscription system as they reasoned about new situations.

         Previous  investigations   have  recognized    the use   of  tools and  symbols    as integral   aspects  of
mathematical reasoning (e.g. Dörfler, 1993; Kaput, 1994; van Oers, 1996). These works have shown how the use
of symbols in a classroom can serve to trace the evolution of mathematical meaning. In this paper, we have
illustrated how students can come to view an inscription system as a resource for reasoning mathematically. This
can be possible when a skillful teacher pursues a mathematical agenda by using the system to meaningfully
represent students' contributions to whole-class discussions about--what in their eyes are--significant issues.

References
Cobb, P. (2002). Modeling, symbolizing, and tool use in statistical data analysis. In K. Gravemeijer, R. Lehrer,
         B. van Oers & L. Verschaffel (Eds.), Symbolizing, modeling and tool use in mathematics education (pp.
         171-195). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer.
Cobb, P. (in press). Reasoning with tools and inscriptions. Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Cobb, P., Gravemeijer, K., Yackel, E., McClain, K., & Whitenack, J. (1997). Symbolizing and mathematizing:
         The emergence of chains of signification in one first-grade classroom. In D. Kirshner & J. A. Whitson
         (Eds.), Situated cognition    theory: Social,  semiotic, and  neurological     perspectives. Hillsdale,  NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cobb,  P., McClain,   K., &  Gravemeijer,   K.  (2003).   Learning   about  statistical covariation.  Cognition  and
         Instruction, 21, 1-78.
Cobb, P., & Whitenack, J. (1996). A method for conducting longitudinal analyses of classroom videorecordings
         and transcripts. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 30, 213-238.
Cobb,  P., &  Yackel,  E. (1996).   Constructivist,  emergent, and   sociocultural  perspectives  in  the  context of
         developmental research. Educational Psychologist, 31, 175-190.
Dörfler, W. (1993). Computer use and views of the mind. In C. Keitel & K. Ruthven (Eds.), Learning from
         computers: Mathematics education and technology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Freudenthal, H. (1983). Didactical phenomenology of mathematical structures. Dordrecht, Holland: Kluwer.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.
         New York: Aldine.
Gravemeijer, K. (1998). Developmental research as a research method. In J. Kilpatrick & A. Sierpinska (Eds.),
         Mathematics Education as a Research Domain: A Search for Identity. An ICMI Study. Dordrecht, the
         Netherlands: Kluwer.
Kaput, J.  J. (1994). The  representational    roles of technology    in connecting     mathematics   with authentic
         experience.  In  R. Biehler,  R.  W.   Scholz,  R.  Strasser &   B.  Winkelmann      (Eds.), Diadactics   of
         mathematics as a scientific discipline. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.
McClain, K. (2002). Teacher's and students' understanding: The role of tools and inscriptions in supporting
         effective communication. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11(2&3), 217-249.
Meira, L. (1995). The microevolution of mathematical representations in children's activity. Cognition and
         Instruction, 13(2), 269-313.
Meira, L.  (1998). Making    sense  of instructional devices:  The   emergence   of transparency   in  mathematical
         activity. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 29, 121-142.
Nemirovsky,   R.  C. (1994). On    ways of symbolizing:   The   case  of Laura  and  the  velocity sign.   Journal of
         Mathematical Behavior, 13, 389-422.
Simon, M. A. (1995). Reconstructing mathematics pedagogy from a constructivist perspective. Journal for
         Research in Mathematics Education, 26, 114-145.

                                                     148
Simon, M. A., & Blume, G. W. (1996). Justification in the mathematics classroom: A study of prospective
         elementary teachers. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 15, 3-31.
Stephan, M.,  Cobb,   P., Gravemeijer, K., &  Estes,  B. (2001). The  role of tools     in supporting  students'
         development   of measuring conceptions.  In A.  Cuoco (Ed.), Yearbook  of     the National  Council of
         Teachers of Mathematics. Reston, VA: NCTM.
Streefland, L. (1984). Search for the roots of ratio: Some thoughts on the long term learning process (Towards ...
         a theory) Part I: Reflections on a teaching experiment. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 15, 327-
         348.
Thompson,  A.   G.,  & Thompson,  P.   W. (1996). Talking  about rates conceptually,      part II: Mathematical
         knowledge for teaching. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27, 2-24.
Thompson, P. W. (1992). Notations, principles, and constraints: Contributions to the effective use of concrete
         manipulatives in elementary mathematics. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 23, 123-147.
van Oers, B. (1996). Learning mathematics as meaningful activity. In P. Nesher, L. Steffe, P. Cobb, G. Goldin &
         B. Greer (Eds.), Theories of mathematical learning (pp. 91-114). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
         Associates.

Acknowledgments
The analysis presented in this paper was supported by the National Science Foundation under grants Nos. REC-
0231037 and REC-0135062, and by Office of Educational Research and Improvement under grant number
R305A60007. The opinions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the position, policy, or endorsement
of OERI or the Foundation.

                                                  149
