    Knowledge Sharing in Groups: Experimental Findings of How to
                                 Overcome a Social Dilemma

                                    Ulrike Cress & Friedrich-Wilhelm Hesse
     University of Tuebingen, Psychological Institute, Department for Applied Cognitive Psychology & Media
                                                   Psychology
                                 Tel: 0049 7071 979 346, Fax: 0049 7071 979 100
                                         Email: u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de

         Abstract: Shared databases are used for knowledge sharing in groups. The decision whether to
         contribute knowledge to such a database or to withhold it represents a public-goods dilemma.
         Each group member saves time and energy if s/he only uses the database to get information but
         does not contribute any information. But if all do so, the database is empty, and nobody has
         any  benefit of it.  An   experimental  environment   enabling the          study of  this dilemma  is
         described, and an overview of five experiments is given. They investigate the effect of the
         following  factors:  providing metaknowledge     about   the importance           of the   information,
         providing a bonus system to reward contributing, reducing costs for contribution, establishing
         prescriptive rules  for the number     of contributions, and  providing           feedback  about the
         teammates' contribution behavior.

Knowledge Sharing in Groups - A Social Dilemma
         The performance of a group working collaboratively depends on its ability to make use of the expertise
of its different members. Therefore they have to share their distributed knowledge. A tool for doing this is a
shared database. By entering information into the database, each group member can make his/her knowledge
available to others, and each one can make use from the information that others contributed. Hence, shared
databases can be especially useful in large organizations, in which similar tasks are accomplished by different
people and departments. Often its members are locally distributed and do not have face-to-face contact to each
other. Sometimes they even do not know each other personally.

         Indeed, when shared databases are implemented for knowledge exchange sometimes specific problems
arise. These are primarily of psychological nature. The main problem is that group members often are reluctant
to share their knowledge because knowledge in groups is often seen as a kind of power which people do not want
to give away. Considering this aspect, the decision to share knowledge with others by entering it into a shared
database represents a typical instance of social dilemma (Dawes, 1980): A potential knowledge provider has no
private benefit if s/he contributes information to the database. Instead, s/he only has private costs because s/he
has to invest time and effort for writing down the information and entering it into the database. Hence, whereas
all the other users can  (at least potentially) benefit  from one's knowledge-sharing           behavior,  the   provider
him/herself has no benefit at all. Instead s/he has personal costs. These costs lead to a situation where each
individual personally achieves a higher benefit by not contributing any information. But by not sharing his/her
personal knowledge a person behaves uncooperatively. And if all people behave in such a way, there is no
knowledge sharing at all, and all people end up less well off and have more costs than if they cooperated. Thus,
in terms of decision theory, withholding information is the dominant strategy. This means that it is the most
efficient strategy for each individual, independent of what the others do. But at the same time withholding is a
pareto-inferior Nash Equilibrium. This means that the group as a whole has a lower benefit if all group members
withhold information than if all cooperate. These two features define a typical social dilemma: According to an
individualistic rationality it is more efficient for each subject to withhold information, while according to the
group's rationality it is more efficient if all individuals share their information.

         Within the different types of social dilemmas, exchanging knowledge via shared databases is a public
goods   dilemma. Public   goods  are characterized   by their indivisibility (Barry        &  Hardin, 1982),   and non-
excludability (Head, 1972). Indivisibility means that the amount and the quality of the information in a database

                                                     150
(as public good) are not reduced if a person uses the information. Non-excludability means that the whole
content of the database is in principle accessible to all members. Thus, nobody can be prevented from using the
database ­ even if that individual contributed nothing. Because of this fact, a potential knowledge provider
cannot have any founded expectation of a direct balance between his/her costs and his/her benefits of knowledge
sharing. Thus, there is no reason for expecting reciprocity. An individual who contributes knowledge to a shared
database can't expect to reciprocally obtain information from those people who use his/her contributions. Instead
of such a direct exchange, there is a kind of generalized exchange (Markus, 1990; Yamagishi & Cook, 1993).
Here a knowledge provider can only have a slight hope to possibly benefit from the amount of all others'
contributions (Fulk, Flanagin, Kalman, Monge & Ryan, 1996; Markus & Connolly, 1990; Rafaeli & LaRose,
1993; Thorn & Connolly, 1987). Opposite to direct exchange, any member can benefit from his/her knowledge,
even if s/he did not contribute anything to the database. This kind of free riding typically occurs in the described
situation (Cress, Barquero, Buder & Hesse, i.p.). With respect to the individual rationality this is in fact the most
individually effective strategy. The question arises how people nevertheless can be motivated to behave contrary
to their individual rationality, and to share their knowledge - even if they reside in such a dilemma.

An Experimental Investigation of the Knowledge-sharing Dilemma
         Despite of the importance of this question for organizations, virtual seminars, newsgroups or mailing
lists, only little empirical research was done in controlled settings. And situations where shared databases are
used in the field are highly complex. There lots of factors determine the contribution behavior: For example,
group and sub-group influences, the topic of information exchange, or individual and group aims. In contrast, our
aim here is to introduce an experimental environment, where such different factors can be studied in a highly
controlled and experimental way. In dilemma research this is typically done by creating a situation where people
are paid off according to their decisions. By setting up such a pay-off matrix all costs and benefits people have
from cooperation or defection are made comparable.

         Thus we developed an experimental setting where sharing knowledge sets up such a dilemma. For each
subject the dilemma arises through the amount of money people can earn during the experiment. On the one side,
each subject earns the more, the less information s/he contributes to the shared database. Thus, withholding is a
dominant strategy. On the other side the mean payoff for all group members is higher if all decide to contribute
than if no one does. Thus, withholding information is a pareto-inferior Nash Equilibrium.

         These situational characteristics were realized through the following task: In the experiment of about
one hour each participant works in a six-person team on the task of calculating salaries of salespeople. Each
salary is composed of two values: a base salary which is calculated in the first phase of a trial, and the provision,
which is calculated in the second phase. In the first phase a subject earns 0.25 Euro for each base salary s/he
calculated. After each calculation a person has to decide whether s/he wants to contribute this result to the shared
database. The transfer to the database costs time (15 sec.). Because the two phases are time-limited (9 and 12
minutes), the more one contributes, the less base salaries one can calculate, and - consequently - the less one
earns.

         In the second phase, each group member has to calculate the total salary of as many salespeople as
possible. In this phase a participant gets 0.30 Euro for every total salary s/he calculated. But for the calculation of
a salesman's total salary the base salary is needed. If a participant did not calculate it in the first phase, and if this
value was not contributed to the database by at least one of the other group members, s/he has to calculate it in
the second phase. By doing this s/he will lose time. Thus, being collaborative and contributing base salaries to
the database in the first phase may facilitate the performance of the other group members in the second phase.
But according to his/her own payoff, a person has no benefit from contributing a base salary to the database. (In
the second phase a person has the base salaries s/he calculated in the first phase anyway). Concerning the benefit
of the others, it is not sure if others really need a specific base salary because a person doesn't know which total
salaries others will calculate in the second phase. Moreover, persons can't be sure that the information they
contribute is really unique because other group members could have calculated the base salaries of the same
salesperson, too. So it is possible that the database contribution of a base salary has no use for others. Therefore,
the experiment reproduces a typical feature of knowledge exchange where the information a person has might be
redundant or even unnecessary for others.

                                                   151
       In an experimental session each participant is presented three times with such a task (each task being
divided into two phases as described earlier). In fact, there are no real groups. Instead, the behavior of the other
five group members is simulated for each participant. By doing this, the interference of other factors deriving
from the variability of real groups can be avoided.

       After the experiment participants are paid according to their individual performance. They get money
for each calculated basic salary and total income. As the task is very easy and the amount of calculated salaries
and incomes   only  depends   on a  person's speed   and  his/her own  and the group's     (simulated) contribution
behavior, the payoff function can be mathematically set up (Cress, Barquero, Buder, Schwan & Hesse, 2003).
Figure 1 shows the money a participant earns as a function of his/her contribution rate xi (0: s/he does not
contribute anything; 1: s/he contributes every basic salary s/he calculated) and the mean contribution rate xo of
the other five group members.

             Figure 1. A subject's payoff (in ¤) as a function of the individual contribution rate xi and the mean
                               contribution rate xo of the other five group members.

       The figure illustrates the way the experimental situation represents a social dilemma: The subject's
payoff declines with growing xi but simultaneously grows with growing xo. That means, that a subject earns the
more, the more his/her group mates contribute. And s/he earns the less, the more s/he contributes herself. Thus,
his/her individual payoff is highest with xo=1 and xi=0. This is the situation in which all other group members
contribute every basic salary and the focused subject contributes nothing, and free-rides.

Overview of a Series of Experiments
       With this experimental environment we carried out a series of experiments, and tested the effect of the
following factors:
       - providing metaknowledge about the importance of the information
       - providing a bonus to reward contributing
       - reducing the costs for contribution
       - establishing prescriptive rules for the number of contributions
       - providing feedback about the teammates' contributions behavior.

          In the   following  we will in short describe    the experimental  manipulations    we  induced  for each
experiment.  Our primary aim is not to describe the experiments in detail; instead we want to give a broader
overview  of the   effects of these manipulations.    This allows  us to evaluate the  effectiveness   of different
treatments for reducing free-riding in the knowledge-sharing dilemma.

       In    all following  experiments  the  participants  were  university students  who     were paid  for  their
participation. We allowed no psychology students to take part in the experiment because we were afraid that they
could perhaps recognize that the groups were faked. The number of subjects in each experimental condition was
about 20.

                                                      152
                                            number of contributions
1. Providing Metaknowledge about the Importance of Information
        In a first experiment we varied the importance of the salary information. Therefore we introduced two
different kinds of base salaries: After calculation of a base salary in the first experimental phase, the result
appeared with a probability of 50% as red field. This red color denoted that this salary was above the mean. This
showed that this salary was of high importance because the subjects know that the total incomes of those
salesmen with high base salaries had to be calculated first in the second phase. Therefore, the probability that a
red base salary was needed in the second phase was higher than the probability that a non-red base salary was
needed. Salaries below the mean didn't change their color after calculation. This denoted that they were not as
important in the second phase.

        In the experiment the contributions of more and less important salaries were compared in a within-
design. As Figure 2 shows, the experiment revealed a significant main effect of importance. On average subjects
contributed much more important than less important salaries.

                                                                     5

                                                                     4

                                                                     3

                                                                     2

                                                                     1

                                                                     0
                                                                            less important        important
                                                                                     base   salaries

                Figure 2: Mean number of contributed less important and important base salaries.

        The very strong effect could be replicated in diverse other experiments. In situations where contribution
costs for more and less     important                                  information           were      equal,   subjects selected their database contributions
according to their importance. This reflects that a person's decision to contribute is not only based on considering
his/her individual payoff but also on considering the payoff of the others. By primarily contributing highly useful
information the contributors individually have no more costs, but they enable higher benefits for others. With
respect to the individual payoff, withholding important information is still dominant. But if one decided to
provide information at all, it is more effective to provide important than non-important information. Thus,
providing more important information than less important is in line with an individual rationality, too (Cress, i.p.;
Cress, Buder, Vogt & Hesse, subm.).

2. Providing a Bonus to Reward Contributing
        A second experiment dealt with the effect of a use-related bonus system. This is a kind of bonus-system
where people receive a bonus each time one of his/her contributions are used by one of their group mates. With
this bonus system it should be in the interest of each person to primarily contribute information that is useful for
others, because a contributor only receives the bonus, if his/her contributions are in fact needed by others.

        In the experiment three different bonus levels were compared:
        -   in the first condition no bonus was given at all,
        -   in the second condition a cost-compensating bonus was given (which was 5 Cent per each use), and
        -   in the third condition a cost-exceeding bonus was given (which was 10 Cent per each use).

        With the cost-compensating bonus an individual didn't have any incentive for withholding information.
With a cost-exceeding bonus the dilemma didn't actually exist any more. Instead, contributing all important
information was the most effective strategy. But in the experiment the subjects only knew that they would
receive a bonus of 5 or 10 Cent, but they weren't explicitly informed if the bonus level was higher or lower than
the costs for cooperation.

                                                                                              153
        number of contributions
                                                    number of contributions
       Figure 3 presents the number of contributed important and less important base salaries in all three
conditions. It shows that individuals with a bonus system contributed more base salaries of high importance but
fewer salaries of low importance than those without any bonus system. This indicates that subjects not receiving
a bonus tended to select their contributions with less attention to importance than subjects in the two bonus
conditions. Thus, providing a bonus can not enhance the quantity of database contents, but it enhances the
quality. With a use-related bonus system more information which is potentially useful for others is provided than
without such a bonus system.
                                                                             5

                                                                             4                                                                    cost-exceeding
                                                                                                                                                  bonus
                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                  cost-compensating
                                                                             2                                                                    bonus
                                                                                                                                                  no bonus
                                                                             1

                                                                             0
                                                                                    less important       more important

                                                                                              base salaries

  Figure 3: Mean number of contributed important and less important base salaries without a bonus, with a cost-
                                                                            compensating bonus, and with a cost-exceeding bonus.

3. Reducing the Costs for Contributions
       In                       the previous  experiment                            the payoff         structure        of the dilemma    was     manipulated         by reducing   the
dominance of withholding. With a bonus, contributing was made more efficient. The following experiment
manipulates the dilemma structure by reducing contribution costs. These costs (the time it takes to transfer a base
salary to the database) directly influence the dilemma. The higher the costs, the more dominant the withholding
strategy becomes.

       For investigating the effect of contribution costs two conditions were compared: one experimental
group with low contribution costs (5 seconds) and one with high contribution costs (15 seconds). As expected,
the experiment revealed a significant effect of costs. With high costs less information was contributed than with
low costs.                      Additionally to this main effect, the experiment revealed a different development of contribution
behavior over time. This is presented in Figure 4:

                                         Low costs                                                                       High costs
                                5                                                                       5
                                4                                                                       4                                                               more importantbase salaries
                                3                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                        less important base
                                2                                                                       2                                                               salaries

                                1                                                                       1

                                0                                                                       0
                                     trial 1   trial 2                             trial 3                     trial 1        trial 2     trial 3

   Figure 4: Mean number of contributed important and less important base salaries in each of the three trials.

       Subjects with low transaction costs showed a less selective contribution behavior in the first trial, which
constantly increased                     across                             the second  and         third   trial. In    contrast,    subjects with        high   costs  selected their
contributions to a higher degree already from the first trial on. This level of selection increased a bit in the
second trial and remained stable in the third trial.

                                                                                                          154
         number of contributions
4. Establishing Prescriptive Rules
        Is it possible to motivate people to share their knowledge by establishing rules which prescribe how
much information one has to contribute as a minimum? The next experiment investigated such prescriptive rules
and compared two groups: In one group the subjects were requested for at least eight contributions ("high rule")
and subjects of the other group were requested for at least three contributions ("low rule"). In both groups
subjects were aware that they could not be sanctioned if they violated the rule.

        Figure 5a (left figure) shows that subjects with the high prescriptive rule contributed more than those
with the low rule - but only in the first trial. The difference disappeared for the second and third trial. And even
during the first trial, subjects contributed much fewer base salaries than the rule required. Whereas the high rule
demanded eight contributions, they contributed only about five.

        In a following experiment we used a pop-up window to make the rule more salient. Whenever one
person had                       calculated    a base salary   it appeared  showing   the    following    text:    "During this trial you should
contribute 3 (respectively 8) base salaries. Till now you have contributed ... salaries". Thus, each time a subject
had to decide if s/he wanted to contribute, s/he was reminded on the rule and could realize to what degree s/he
had accomplished it. When a person fully accomplished the rule and had contributed 3 (respectively 8) salaries
the window didn't appear during that trial any more.

        The results of this experiment are shown in Figure 5b (right figure). Now a significant main effect
across all trials occurred. In all trials subjects with high rules contributed more than those with the low rules. But
even with the pop up window making the rule salient, subjects didn't fully accomplish to the high rule. They
entered significantly less than the eight prescribed contributions.

                                       prescriptive rule                          prescriptive rule/pop-up
                                 7                                                          window7
                                 6                                           6
                                 5                                           5
                                 4                                           4
                                 3                                           3
                                 2                                           2
                                 1                                           1
                                 0                                           0                                                   low rule
                                       trial 1     trial 2    trial 3              trial 1     trial 2     trial 3               high rule

         Figure 5a (left): Mean number of contributed base salaries of subjects with high and low rule.
Figure 5b (right):                     Mean number of contributed base salaries of subjects with high and low rule, which was made
                                                                salient through a pop-up window.

5. Providing Feedback about the Teammates' Contribution Behavior
        In                       the next experiment        we provided   subjects  with    feedback     about  their  teammates'     contribution
behavior. After each trial each subject received a histogram with two bars: the first showed the number of his/her
own contributions and the second showed the mean number of contributions made by the five teammates. This
feedback was intended to induce a social comparison between one's own behavior and the behavior of the others.
For studying the effect of this feedback the information of the teammates' cooperativeness was varied. In the
experimental group with highly cooperative teammates subjects received a feedback that the others on average
contributed eight salaries, whereas in the experimental group with less cooperative teammates subjects received a
feedback that the other on average contributed only three salaries.

        The experiment revealed a highly significant effect of this feedback. Figure 6 shows the mean number
of contributions in both conditions.

                                                                               155
                                          number of contributions
                                                                  7                                                  less  cooperative
                                                                  6                                                  teammates
                                                                  5
                                                                  4                                                  cooperative
                                                                                                                     teammates
                                                                  3
                                                                  2
                                                                  1
                                                                  0
                                                                       trial 1    trial 2    trial 3

 Figure 6: Mean number of contributed base salaries of subjects with feedback about cooperative teammates and
                                                                  less cooperative teammates.

        After the first trial - when the subjects got feedback about the others' behavior - the two groups
assimilated to their teammates'     behavior.                       Indeed,    persons with  highly   cooperative   teammates  didn't  fully
assimilate to their cooperativeness. In the second and third trial they still contributed significantly less than the
faked group members who contributed 8 salaries. In contrast, the groups with low-cooperation group members
fully assimilated to their  faked   teammates.                       In this   group   there was     no significant difference to the  three
contributions of their co-worker.

        These results show that people in the database situation in fact adapt to the behavior of their teammates.
If they perceive them as highly cooperative, people over time become more cooperative as well.                               If they perceive
them as very uncooperative, people become more egoistic, too. But the results show that this adaptation to the
cooperativeness of the others' isn't equally strong in both conditions. The assimilation to a low social norm of
cooperativeness seems to be stronger than the assimilation to a higher level. It could be interpreted in a way that
the sucker effect seems to be easier than the effect of social facilitation. This could perhaps be explained by the
specific features of knowledge exchange via shared databases. In this highly anonymous situation, where the
behavior of each group members can't be identified by the others, the group members can't detect the free riders.
Therefore, the social pressure for behaving as cooperatively as the others is reduced through anonymity. In
contrast, in situations, where the group behaves very uncooperatively, people assimilate to the group norm not
because of a feeling of social pressure, but because of a feeling of exploitation. But this feeling isn't reduced
through the high anonymity of database communication.

General Discussion
        All reported results show that free riding in fact is a serious problem in knowledge exchange via shared
databases.  Averaged     across all experiments,                      subjects   calculated   about     12 basic salaries in each trial and
contributed about 30%-50% of them. This means that they withheld the other 50%-70% of their information. But
some of the treatments which were introduced in the experiments could change this - at least a bit.

        First of all: In the first three experiments two different kinds of information were used (less and more
important information), and subjects contributed much more information of high importance than information of
low importance. Thus, if a subject once decided to contribute s/he did this in a way that the others had the highest
benefit. This shows that subjects didn't behave competitively with the motivation of maximizing the difference
between their own and the others' outcome. Instead, they selected their database contributions with consideration
of what the others need. This selection could be enhanced through a use-related bonus system. With low costs
this selection is reduced, but only at the beginning of the experiment. When the subjects get more experienced,
the selection increases.

        Second, we observed that none of our manipulations was able to eliminate free riding completely.
Neither a treatment, which objectively reduced the dominance of withholding by providing a cost-compensating
bonus, nor a cost-exceeding bonus, which objectively turned contribution into a dominant strategy, was able to
reduce free riding fully. It seems that subjects subjectively have a bias to perceive such a situation as a dilemma,
even if objectively it isn't. Thus, a bonus-system can't totally solve the dilemma. Instead, subjects assess the

                                                                          156
costs higher than the rewards they get through a bonus (Cress, Buder, Vogt & Hesse, sub.). This leads us to the
third point:

          Third: The possibility to influence subjects' contribution behavior through a structural change of the
dilemma (through reducing costs or providing bonuses) seems to be more limited than through social factors.
Here we   have    to  consider the strong   effect of  the feedback about    the cooperativeness of the  teammates.
Obviously, in the very anonymous situation of knowledge-exchange via database, social cues become highly
relevant.

          What do these results mean for actual knowledge-exchange settings where subjects are not paid? We
assume that subjects in real knowledge-exchange situations feel the dilemma even stronger: In the experiment
the payoff for contributors and defectors only differed in a few Euros. In real knowledge-exchange settings
benefits and costs are more multifaceted and thus they become even more relevant. For example, a person who
shares his knowledge in an organization does not only lose time. He could perhaps also lose social power
through having knowledge the others don't have. Additionally, in real groups the individual payoffs can vary
much stronger. In settings, where subjects have to cooperate with people they personally know, social factors
become more influential than in the presented experiment. If the feedback about the teammates' contribution
behavior is effective with strangers, it should be even more influential in settings with real groups and less
anonymity.

References
Barry, B., & Hardin, R. (1982). Rational Man and irrational Society. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Cress. U.    (i. p.). Strategic, metacognitive,    and social  aspects in resource-oriented    knowledge exchange.
          Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahawah, NJ: Lawrence
          Erlbaum.
Cress, U., Barquero, B., Buder, J., Schwan, S., & Hesse, F.W. (2003). Wissensaustausch mittels Datenbanken als
          Öffentliches-Gut-Dilemma.       Die  Wirkung     von Rückmeldungen       und    Belohnungen. (Knowledge
          communication via shared databases as public-goods dilemma. The effect of feedback and bonus-
          systems.). Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 211 (2), 75-85.
Cress, U., Barquero, B., Buder, J., & Hesse, F.W. (i.p.). Social barriers for knowledge communication via shared
          databases. In R. Bromme, F. Hesse, & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers and Biases in Computer-mediated
          Knowledge Communication - and how they may be overcome. Kluwer: Boston.
Cress, U., Buder, J., Vogt, K. & Hesse, F.W. (submitted):      Strategic withholding of knowledge - an experimental
          investigation of structural solutions for the information-pooling dilemma.
Dawes, R.M. (1980). Social dilemmas. Annual Review of Psychology, 31, 169-193.
Fulk, J., Flanagin, A.J., Kalman, M.E., Monge, P.R., & Ryan, T. (1996). Connective and communal public goods
          in interactive communication systems. Communication Theory, 6 (1), 60-87.
Head, J. G. (1972). Public goods: The polar case. In R. M. Bird, & J.G. Head (Eds.), Modern fiscal issues:
          Essays in Honour of Carl S. Shoup (pp. 7-16). Toronto, Ontario: University of Toronto Press.
Markus, M. L. (1990). Towards a "critical mass" theory of interactive media. In J. Fulk, & C. Steinfield (Eds.),
          Organizations and Communication (pp. 194-218): Sage.
Markus,   M.     L.,  & Connolly,  T.    (1990). Why    CSCW    Applications     fail: Problems in the  adoption of
          interdependent   work   tools. In CSCW    ´90. Proceedings   of the  Conference   on  Computer Supported
          Cooperative Work, October 7-10, 1990, Los Angeles. ACM.
Rafaeli, S., & LaRose, R. J. (1993). Electronic bulletin boards and "public goods" explanations of collaborative
          mass media. Communication Research, 20, 277-297.
Thorn, B. K., & Connolly, T. (1987). Discretionary data bases: A theory and some experimental findings.
          Communication Research, 14 (5), 512-528.
Yamagishi, T. & Cook, K.S. (1993). Generalized exchange and social dilemmas. Social Psychology Quarterly,
          56, 235-248.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grant of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) awarded to the F.W. Hesse and U. Cress.
The project is part of the DFG-Special Priority Program "Net-based Knowledge Communication in Groups".      We thank
Beatrice Barquero, Katrin Vogt and Juergen Buder for their work in this project, and Julia Wahl, Tatjana Taraszow, Tina
Betschinger, Kim Stalbovs and Michael Sobkiw for conducting the experiments.

                                                       157
