 Design-Based Research Strategies for Studying Situated Learning
                            in a Multi-user Virtual Environment

                  Chris Dede, Brian Nelson, Diane Jass Ketelhut, Jody Clarke & Cassie Bowman
                    Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     Tel: 617-495-3839; Fax: 617-495-9268
      Chris_Dede@.harvard.edu            Brian_Nelson@gse.harvard.edu                ketelhdi@gse.harvard.edu
                        clarkejo@gse.harvard.edu             bowmanca@gse.harvard.edu

         Abstract:   This National   Science Foundation    funded project   utilizes graphical   multi-user
         virtual environments (MUVEs) as a vehicle to study (1) classroom-based situated learning and
         (2) the ways in which virtual environments may aid the transfer of learning from classroom
         contexts into real world settings. In the project's River City curriculum, teams of middle school
         students  are asked  to collaboratively solve  a  simulated  19th century   city's problems   with
         illness, through interaction with   each others'  `avatars', digital  artifacts, tacit clues,    and
         computer-based `agents' acting as mentors and colleagues in a virtual community of practice.
         This paper describes the design-based research strategy by which we are currently extending an
         educational MUVE environment and curriculum developed with prior NSF funding. We are
         implementing a series of studies to determine if such virtual environments can sufficiently
         replicate authentic contexts and multi-leveled communities of practice to provide students with
         classroom experiences in situated learning.

Introduction
         Scientific literacy--the capabilities (1) to understand the interrelationships among the natural world,
technology, and science and (2) to apply scientific knowledge and skills to personal decision-making and the
analysis of societal  issues--is a major  goal  for  education in the 21st  century   (AAAS,    1993;     NRC, 1996).
Research suggests that, if all students are to become scientifically literate citizens, science instruction must
convey   greater  engagement  and  meaning   to them.   To achieve   this, we  believe that    science instruction   in
secondary schools must provide students with opportunities to explore the world; to apply scientific principles; to
sample and analyze data; and to make connections among these explorations, their personal lives, and their
communities. However, given the constraints of classroom settings, real world data collection is challenging to
orchestrate. Laboratory experiments are also difficult to conduct due to lack of equipment and safety issues. It is
no surprise that teachers report hypothesis formation and experimental design are among the most difficult
challenges they face with students who have a history of low achievement in science.

         With prior   NSF  funding,  we  have   created and  studied  graphical  multi-user    virtual environments
(MUVEs) that use digitized museum resources to enhance middle school students' motivation and learning about
science  and  society  (http://www.gse.harvard.edu/~dedech/muvees/).       Multi-user virtual  environments    enable
multiple simultaneous   participants to  access virtual contexts, to  interact with  digital   artifacts, to represent
themselves through "avatars," to communicate with other participants and with computer-based agents, and to
enact collaborative  learning activities of  various  types. Our  "River   City" MUVE       is centered   on  skills of
hypothesis  formation   and  experimental   design,  as well  as  on content   related to   national   standards  and
assessments in biology and ecology.

         Because MUVE research is still in its infancy, we are employing a design-based research (DBR)
approach to the development of the River City environment and curriculum. Design-based research was first
detailed by Brown (1992) and Collins (1992) as a way to study new learning environments in the context of the
classroom. "Design experiments were developed as a way to carry out formative research to test and refine
educational designs based on principles derived from prior research" (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, in press p.
4). We are implementing a series of studies to determine if virtual environments can sufficiently replicate
authentic contexts and multi-leveled communities of practice to provide students with classroom experiences in
situated learning. In this paper, we conduct a meta-level reflection of our design-based methodology and aims.

                                                     158
By offering a `glass-box' view into our research strategy, we hope to provide a guide to others interested in
conducting design-based research.

Design-based Research
         The  scholarly community    is still defining design-based   research. The purpose     of   creating such  a
methodology was to move educational research from laboratories into classrooms in order to gain insight into
how, when, and why innovations work in practice (The Design-Based Research Collective, 2003). Yet the focus
of DBR is not on specific designs and curricula, but on how the strengths and limits of a design inform theories
of learning. DBR combines quantitative and qualitative methods to view how designs work in the crucible of
practice and  to gain  insights into how  students learn in typical  school   contexts. The  DBR     Collective   has
identified 5 key characteristics of good design-based research:
   Goals  of designing   learning   environments  and  developing   theories or `prototheories'     of  learning are
    intertwined.
   Development    and  research  take  place  through continuous   cycles of   design, enactment,      analysis, and
    redesign.
   Research leads to theories that communicate relevant implications to practitioners and other designers.
   Research accounts for how designs function in authentic settings, not only documenting success or failure,
    but also focusing on interactions that refine our understanding of the learning issues involved.
   Research relies on methods that can document and connect process of enactment to outcomes of interest.

Moreover, Dede (2004) has articulated four challenges that good DBR should address:
   Collect a manageable amount of data that is focused on evaluating the consequences of key design choices.
   Separate  design   from  conditions  for   success  by ensuring   that the   latter are present     in the    pilot
    implementation.
   Determine what constitute reasonable criteria for "success" in declaring a design finished.
   Develop designs that meet the needs of practitioners and policymakers in the context of the No Child Left
    Behind initiative.
Our research focuses on strategies to meet these characteristics and challenges in evolving the River City
environment and curriculum via DBR.

First Implementation
         The initial pilot study of our project's `River City' educational environment extended typical MUVE
capabilities in order to study the science learning potential of immersive simulations, interactive virtual museum
exhibits, and "participatory" historical situations. Our goal was to promote learning for all students, particularly
those unengaged or low performing. Using a guided social constructivist design, students learned to behave as
scientists while they collaboratively identified problems through observation and inference, formed and tested
hypotheses, and deduced evidence-based conclusions about underlying causes.

         The River City virtual "world" consists of a city with a river running through it; different forms of
terrain that influence water runoff; and various neighborhoods, industries, and institutions, such as a hospital and
a university  (muve.gse.harvard.edu/muvees2003).       The learners  themselves  populate   the    city, along    with
computer-based agents, digital objects that can include audio or video clips, and the avatars of instructors (Figure
1). Content in the right-hand interface-window shifts based on what the participant encounters or activates in the
virtual environment (Figure 2). Dialogue is shown in the text box below these two windows; members of each
team can communicate regardless of distance, but intra-team dialogue is displayed only to members of that team.

         In our pilot research, students worked in teams to develop hypotheses regarding one of three strands of
illness in River City (water-borne, air-borne, and insect-borne). These three disease strands are integrated with
historical, social and geographical content to allow students to experience the realities of disentangling multi-
causal problems embedded within a complex environment. At the end of the project, students compared their
research with other teams of students to discover the many potential hypotheses and avenues of investigation to
explore.

                                                    159
Findings
         In our pilot implementations of River City, using two public school classrooms in Boston, MA, we
examined  usability, student    motivation, student learning, and   classroom  implementation  issues   (Dede     &
Ketelhut, 2003). One sixth- and one seventh-grade classroom in different schools with high percentages of ESL
students implemented the River City curriculum; control classrooms used a similar curriculum delivered via
paper-based materials rather than technology.

         Using design-based research methods, we collected both qualitative and quantitative data from students
and teachers  over the  three-week    implementation period.  Both  the Patterns for Adaptive  Learning       Survey
(Midgley, 2000)  and  a content   test were  administered to  students, pre- and post-intervention.  In addition,
demographic data and teachers' expectations of students' successes were collected. All teachers responded to a
pre and post questionnaire regarding their methods and comfort with technology. The experimental intervention
classroom teachers also wrote a narrative at the end of the project about their perceptions of the MUVE. We used
this data to analyze the learning outcomes for students and to inform our understanding of how the MUVE
worked, in order to refine the design of our next iteration. Students found the MUVE interface readily usable and
the learning experiences motivating, even after repeated exposures.

         Preliminary results indicated the MUVE is motivating for all students, including lower ability students
typically uninterested in classroom activities. Six out of seven experimental students scoring less than 35% on
the content pre-test improved their content knowledge above that level, while only two of five control students
did so. We also found that students discovered multiple intriguing situations in the MUVE to investigate. In the
seventh grade classroom, five different hypotheses about these situations emerged, with posited causes ranging
from population density to immigration to water pollution. Another finding is that the MUVE seemed to have the
most positive effects for students with high perceptions of their own thoughtfulness of inquiry. These students,
on average, scored higher on the post content test, controlling for SES, science GPA, ethnicity, and content pre-
test score (Dede & Ketelhut, op cit).

         Overall, these findings encourage further refinement and experimentation with curricular MUVEs as a
learning modality that can help teachers reach students struggling with motivation, self-worth, and lack of
content knowledge. These data are promising, but not conclusive about the curriculum's educational value or the
effectiveness of MUVEs for learning. By examining student interactions with the pilot curriculum, we saw ways
to strengthen our content and pedagogy. Despite the fact that students found the MUVE readily usable and the
learning experiences motivating, we found weaknesses in this design, both from a graphical and curricular
perspective.

Design Outcomes
         Based on these findings, we refined our underlying learning theory. In the pilot, students were immersed
in conducting an authentic task, similar to the goals of situated learning. Consequently, the next iteration of our
project was to extend our MUVE curriculum to study classroom-based situated learning in comparison to guided
social constructivist pedagogy.

         MUVEs are a promising medium for creating and studying situated learning because they can support
immersive, extended experiences, incorporating modeling and mentoring, about problems and contexts similar to
the real world. Our MUVE is based on a problem-solving community in which students gain knowledge and
skills through co-interpreting data with other participants at varied levels of skills. Our current research is
studying whether the River City MUVE can replicate authentic contexts and multi-leveled communities of
practice sufficiently well to provide students and teachers with classroom experiences in situated learning.

         We also found that teachers need more support for implementing this curriculum. Although both pilot
teachers professed to  have  a  constructivist pedagogical approach,    they struggled to find their role     in the
classroom--one feeling as if she should be more involved, the other less. As a result, we are creating a rigorous
8-hour program of professional development for our teachers.

                                                     160
Research Context
         Reports such as the National Research Council's study, How People Learn: Extended Edition (2000)
delineate alternative theoretical constructs for understanding teaching and learning. The three major schools of
thought cited are behaviorist theories of learning (e.g., presentational instruction), cognitivist theories of learning
(e.g., intelligent tutoring systems, guided constructivist instruction), and situated theories of learning (e.g.,
mentoring and apprenticeships in communities of practice).

         The least studied of these perspectives is situated learning, in part because conducting controlled
experiments about tacit, relatively unstructured learning in complex real-world settings is very difficult. Several
studies (Griffin, 1995; Young, 1993; Hendricks, 2001) attempted to validate parts of situated learning theory, but
were forced to modify the theoretical intent to match constraints of the classroom. For example, the Jasper Series
(Young, 1993; Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt, 1997) situates mathematics problems in an
authentic context, but the learner is still a student in a classroom rather than situated in the same context (Tripp,
1993).

Situated Learning Theory
         Brown,   Collins, &   Duguid  (1989)  and   Lave  &  Wenger   (1991) define situated  learning  theory     as
embedded within and inseparable from participating in a system of activity (Chaiklin & Lave, 1993; Lave, 1988)
deeply determined by a particular physical and cultural setting. The unit of analysis is neither the individual nor
the setting, but instead the relationship between the two, as indicated by the student's level of participation in the
setting (Barab   & Plucker,   2002).   Studies of apprenticeship  in  "communities   of   practice" (moving      from
newcomer to expert within a sociocultural structure of practices) are a central construct for situated learning
(McLellan, 1996; Kirshner & Whitson, 1997; Wenger, 1998; Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002). Brown,
Collins  and   Duguid  (1989)  proffer the graduate   student  experience as  an example   of  apprenticeship    in a
community of practice. As part of their academic program, graduate students evolve from pupils to researchers
through a series of learning activities embedded within a specific community of practice.

         In essence, situated learning requires authentic contexts, activities, and assessments coupled with
guidance based on expert modeling, situated mentoring, and legitimate peripheral participation. For example,
graduate students may work within the laboratories of expert researchers, who model the practice of scholarship.
These students will interact with experts in research, as well as with other members of the research team who
understand the complex processes of scholarship to varying degrees. While in these laboratory settings, students
gradually move from novice researchers to more advanced roles, with the skills and expectations for them
evolving (legitimate peripheral participation). In contrast to courses, students learn the knowledge and skills
expected of them in their future research careers through modeling, mentoring, and legitimate peripheral
participation.

MUVEs as a Research Method for Assessing Theories of Situated Learning
         Our   current River  City curriculum   unit  is based on students participating  in an elaborate    context
modeled on the real world, interacting with novices and experts who are part of its culture. Learners are not
passively observing this situation, but actively investigating multivariate problems with aid from community
members who have various types of expertise. The digital artifacts, computer-based agents, avatars, and virtual
contexts in  our  MUVE     can simulate  the communities    of practice envisioned  by    Lave & Wenger      (1991).
Proponents of situated theory approach mentoring in two different ways, either through direct guidance from an
expert or through the legitimate peripheral participation model proposed by Lave & Wenger (1991). The first, the
method used by Griffin (1995), employs an expert to model and then coach students while they learn the
techniques. The expert is not employing the techniques for his/her own benefit, but is using skills to show
novices  how   to apply  them.  In contrast,   within the  legitimate peripheral participation  model,   the    entire
community of practice is working on the product, and novices learn as much or more from observation of other,
somewhat more advanced participants as by direct guidance from an expert. One advantage of a MUVE is that it
can be modified to favor either form of guidance, allowing comparison of the two models.

Research Strategy
         Based upon what we learned from our prior design-based research, we are developing three variations
of the River City curriculum. Variant GST centers on a guided social constructivist (GST) model of learning, in

                                                      161
which guided inquiry experiences in the MUVE alternate with whole-class interpretive sessions. This variant is
currently undergoing testing and evaluation while the other two are developed. Variant EMC shifts the learning
model to center on expert modeling and coaching (EMC), based on expert agents embedded in the MUVE and
experts collaborating with teachers in facilitating the whole-class interpretive sessions. Variant LPP shifts the
learning model to focus on legitimate peripheral participation (LPP), in which the entire community of practice
in the MUVE works on problem-solving, and students learn more from observation of other, somewhat more
advanced participants (avatars, computer-based agents) than via direct guidance by experts. Our fourth "control"
condition utilizes a curriculum in which the same content and skills are taught in equivalent time to comparable
students in a paper-based format without technology, using a guided social constructivist-based pedagogy.
Where possible, teachers offer both the variants and the control.

          As they are developed, we are implementing these alternative curricula in small group settings to allow
us to go through continuous cycles of design, enactment, analysis, and redesign, as suggested by the DBR
collective (2003). As advocated by Dede (2004), we will determine the necessary criteria to declare a design
finished. At that point, later this spring, we will conduct a controlled implementation on a larger scale in Boston-
and Milwaukee-area classrooms with high proportions of ESL and free-and-reduced-lunch students, matching
experimental to control classrooms to determine the relative efficacy of our approach. To control for threats to
validity, all three variants will be randomly   assigned    to students within a single classroom, with teachers
instructed to minimize cross-contamination of treatments. We are also creating and delivering approximately
eight hours   of professional development   for teachers,    focused on  content review, alternative pedagogical
strategies based on different theories of learning, facilitation strategies while students are using the MUVE, and
interpretive strategies for leading class discussions.

Research Questions
1.  Can a MUVE simulate authentic contexts and multi-leveled communities of practice within a classroom
    setting? For variants EMC and LPP, to what extent do constellations of architectural, social, organizational,
    and material vectors that shape the setting provide a context that alters students' sociocultural interactions
    and   practices  of learning  to patterns characteristic    of  situated learning rather than  guided social
    constructivism (version GST)?
2.  When compared to the "control" version, what types of contrasting, significant gains in motivation and
    learning (if any) for various kinds of students do versions GST, EMC, and LPP produce? What are the
    complementarities (if any) between legitimate peripheral participation and expert mentoring as methods of
    situated learning?

Both in and out of MUVEs, insights obtained into these questions may enhance educators' and researchers'
understanding and application of situated learning theories and may increase students' abilities to transfer
knowledge from academic to real world settings.

Results from Two Cycles of DBR
          Our first implementation of the current MUVE curriculum was held in a focus group in December,
2003. At that time, we implemented changes based on our analysis of the first River City pilot study. Our
graphical interface had been improved to allow students to teleport, to have dialogues with computer agents, and
to select their avatar--all suggestions made by pupils in the first pilot study. By observing and conducting
interviews with focus group participants, these changes seemed to elicit `ah-ha' moments for students. We also
actively solicited focus group suggestions of changes students would like to see. From observations and these
interviews, we learned:

         Students needed time to experience the world before beginning the formal curriculum. This experience
          helps them to become immersed in the context.
         The MUVE interface's option of having two communication modes -- a chat and a whisper function --
          was confusing to students. As a result, most of them relied on the whisper function, which interfered
          with group collaborative work.
         Students were confused by the connection and relevance of the digitized Smithsonian artifacts in the
          world.
         Some students became easily lost in the world.

                                                        162
      Students sought to access the books in the virtual library of River City when they were confused.
      Students wondered why, if their avatars were in the world, they too weren't getting sick.

We made design changes based on this feedback (see below) and then conducted a full-scale pilot study in
January, 2004. As we implemented this new version, we determined that our alterations made significant
improvements to the curriculum likely to result in improvements in student engagement and learning outcomes.

      We  reorganized  our lab book    to allow students time to negotiate      the    interface, to learn how  to
       maneuver, and to constructively explore the world. We found that students were immediately engaged
       and used their exploration time both to become comfortable with the MUVE interface and to start
       understanding what problems existed in River City. When we handed out the lab book on the second
       day, the students used this to guide their investigation more readily than they had previously.
      We scaffolded proper use of the chat and whisper functions, renaming them: "Group chat" and "River
       City Resident Chat". Students now were able to identify their team members more easily using the
       "group chat" and used that in addition to the whisper mode, allowing for greater team collaboration.
      We added a section to our lab book that guides students in understanding the digital images and artifacts
       embedded in the world. Prior to creating this new section, we found that students were more likely to
       rely only on computer-based agents to understand the problems in River City. Since much of the
       curriculum is attached to embedded artifacts, students were limiting their understanding. After creating
       this section, students interacted with the digital pictures more than previously, thus increasing their
       involvement with the curriculum.
      We created a permanent link on the interface to our map that we had previously made interactive. The
       ease of finding where they were or where they wanted to go allowed students to access more of the
       curriculum than before, when it was more difficult to maneuver.
      Realizing that allowing students to locate background information on disease and on the scientific
       method would strengthen their learning outcomes, we created several clickable volumes in the library: a
       dictionary, encyclopedia, primers on microbes and scientific method, and background in pertinent
       algebraic concepts. Once the students discovered that they could "find answers" in the library (which to
       many middle-school   students is  another  ah-ha moment!),  it     became   a popular  place    to get more
       information.
      Although we would like to let students' avatars get sick, this is not yet technologically possible in our
       authoring system. Instead, we created a health meter that would rise and fall as students wandered close
       to polluted waters or stepped on manure. This health meter gives students an additional source for data
       in their experimentation. As they walked through the world, the movement of the meter intrigued
       students, and they sometimes explored ways to make it change. As a result, students realized where the
       pollution and contamination in River City was at an earlier stage.

The outcomes of these changes in our January implementation appear to enhance student learning. We are
cognizant of trying not to make changes just to improve the design, but instead to create different avenues for
student investigation that fit different learning styles. In a typical middle-school classroom faced with a diverse
set of learning styles, the teacher must alternate pedagogical strategies to aid each of these. Even under the best
of circumstances, at any single moment some students' learning styles block them from understanding the lesson.
In a MUVE, students can individualize their learning based on their own styles.

Conclusion
       Because of   the infancy of MUVE      research, and because     we   are   still evolving    curriculum and
articulating insights about MUVE-based situated learning in the crucible of practice, we are using a design-based
research (DBR) approach in our study. By engaging in DBR-inspired cycles of design, implementation, analysis,
and redesign, we have been able to refine both our curriculum and the MUVE environment prior to conducting
formal randomized experimental trials. In each iteration of our study, quantitative data are revealing findings
about the relative effectiveness of learning theories as instantiated in our environment/curriculum, and qualitative
data are providing insights about the reasons underlying those comparative differences.

       After several study iterations, substantial parts of the design (e.g., strategies for student motivation)
have remained relatively unchanged from the initial implementation because our analysis indicated these were

                                                 163
successful in meeting our objectives. Other parts of the design have changed based on feedback from the initial
studies. For example, we are increasing the number of tacit clues embedded in the learning environment to
ensure that high academic achievement students find continued interactions with the curricular unit challenging
and interesting. Our quantitative studies, including the use of a control curriculum, are helping us determine
whether the leverage for learning and engagement provided by our work are substantial enough to merit moving
beyond DBR to large-scale experimental research on implementation.

        An    important emphasis    in our research  is assisting students   across the  spectrum   of  academic
achievement gain in motivation, self-efficacy, and science knowledge and skills. In particular, educators need
help in engaging and teaching subpopulations of learners with special needs, students unmotivated by standard
instructional approaches, and pupils with learning styles more visual and kinesthetic than symbolic and auditory.
Our environment/curriculum is targeted specifically to narrowing the gaps among students by helping all learners
reach their full potential via methods particularly applicable to students who are currently underperforming
because of how they are taught in conventional classroom settings. DBR methodologies are providing a way of
identifying which elements of our curriculum and MUVE environment are best suited to this goal.

        We believe that this type of controlled evolution of DBR is important to its acceptance as a legitimate
methodology by the conservative end of the scholarly community in education. We hope to contribute to the field
and legitimacy of DBR by sharing our development strategy in the context of our MUVE science curriculum.

Figures

Figure 1: Talking with an Agent                      Figure 2: Collecting Water Quality Data

References
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1993). Benchmarks for science literacy. New York,
        NY: Oxford University Press.
Barab, S.  A., &  Plucker,   J. A. (2002). Smart  People  or Smart  Contexts?   Cognition,  Ability, and  Talent
        Development in an Age of Situated Approaches to knowing and Learning. Educational Psychologist,
        37(3), 165-182.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex
        interventions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2 (2), 141-178.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid. (1989). Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning. Educational
        Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Chaiklin, S., & Lave,   J. (1993). Understanding  practice:  Perspectives  on  activity and context. New   York:
        Cambridge University Press.
Cognition  and  Technology      Group  at  Vanderbilt.  (1997). The  Jasper   project:  Lessons  in  curriculum,
        instruction,assessment, and professional development. Hillsdale, NJ.
Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (in press). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. In J.
        Campione (Ed.), Volume in honor of Ann Brown.
Collins, A. (1992) Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.) New directions in
        educational technology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992.
Dede,  C. (2004). If Design-Based    Research is the Answer,  What  is   the Question?  Journal of  the Learning
        Sciences, 13(1), 105-114.

                                                    164
Dede, C., & Ketelhut, D. (2003). Motivation, Usability, and Learning Outcomes in a Prototype Museum-based
         Multi-User Virtual Environment. Presented at American Educational Research Conference April, 2003.
The Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-Based Research: An Emerging Paradigm for Educational
         Inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
Griffin, M. M.   (1995).   You Can't   Get There   from Here: Situated Learning,   Transfer, and Map       Skills.
         Contemporary Educational Psychology, 20, 65-87.
Hendricks, C. C. (2001). Teaching Causal Reasoning Through Cognitive Apprenticeship: What are Results from
         Situated Learning? Journal of Educational Research, 94(5), 302-311.
Kirshner, D.,  & Whitson,   J. A. (Eds.).  (1997). Situated cognition: Social,  semiotic,  and  psychological
         perspectives. Mahway, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
         University Press.
McLellan, H. (Ed.). (1996). Situated learning perspectives. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology
         Publications.
Midgley, C., Maehr, M. L., Hruda, L. Z., Anderman, E., Anderman, L., Freeman, K. E., Gheen, M., Kaplan, A.,
         Kumar, R., Middleton, M. J., Nelson, J., Roeser, R., & Urdan, T. (2000). Manual for the Patterns of
         Adaptive Learning Scales (PALS), Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
National Research Council (2000). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience and School: Extended Edition.
         Washington, DC.
National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC.
Tripp, S. D. (1993). Theories, Traditions, and Situated Learning. Educational Technology, 33(3), 71-77.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wenger, E., McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating Communities of Practice. Cambridge, MA:
         Harvard Business School Press.
Young,   M. F. (1993).   Instructional Design for  Situated Learning. Educational    Technology  Research      &
         Development, 41(1), 43-58.

                                                    165
