           `Cultural Mathematics' in the Oksapmin Curriculum:
                             Continuities and Discontinuities

                                      Indigo Esmonde & Geoffrey B. Saxe
                        4533 Tolman Hall #1670, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-1670
                                   Tel: (510) 643-4712, Fax: (510) 642-3769
                                         Email: esmonde@ berkeley.edu

        Abstract: We report an observational study of school mathematics instruction in Oksapmin, a
        remote Central Highlands community in Papua New Guinea. As a part of a national initiative,
        Papua New Guinea is engaged in implementing educational reforms that attempt to create
        strong links between activities in school and students' out-of-school lives. We show how
        reforms have mitigated some of the sharp discontinuities between activities in and out of
        school though at the same time they have created others. For example, the prior colonial-like
        system of education that did not allow use of indigenous languages in school classrooms          (a
        discontinuity between in and out of school) has given way to elementary schools in which
        children are not only encouraged to use their native language in school, they are taught the
        indigenous  mathematics   of   traditional life. However,   in the   process of incorporating   the
        traditional mathematics    into  school    instruction,  that  mathematics   is altered  in  some
        fundamental ways, as teachers create explicit links to the base 10 English counting system. The
        transformations   of out-of-school practices     raise questions about   the long-term  impact  of
        schooling on out-of-school mathematical practices and traditional ways.

        The purpose of this paper is to report an observational study of mathematics instruction in Oksapmin, a
remote community in Papua New Guinea (PNG) in which speakers use one of the more than 860 languages that
are indigenous to the country. Prior to ongoing educational reforms in PNG, there was a radical discontinuity for
Oksapmin children between activities in and outside of school. For example, the official language of instruction
for all of the nation's many grade schools (known as community schools) was English, a language unknown to
most parents of school children. The focus of the curriculum was academic ­ its function was to prepare students
to take on leadership roles in the nation, and school curricula included little that was relevant to everyday
community life in remote areas like Oksapmin. Further, teachers were not native to Oksapmin, did not speak the
indigenous language, and hence could not communicate with parents; teachers tended to stay in their positions in
Oksapmin for only 1-year stints, viewing assignments in remote rural areas as undesirable and not adequately
compensated.   As a result,  teachers knew little  of local knowledge    systems, and   they did   not know  of the
Oksapmin's indigenous 27-body part number system.

        The educational reform movement in Papua New Guinea and the availability of schooled Oksapmin
people to take on   the role of teachers marked    a  break with  the  past. With PNG    independence    in 1975, a
movement   for vernacular   education  gradually   grew  and   gained  influence with   provincial and  community
governments. In the 1990s, a change in PNG education policy decreed that each community should use their
indigenous language for instruction in the first three years of school, gradually bridging to English (for a
discussion of PNG education policy, see Litteral, 2000).

        In addition to a shift in language policy, educational reforms in Papua New Guinea elementary schools
led to changes in targets of instruction. One goal of the new national curriculum is for rural people like the
Oksapmin to develop "relevant knowledge, skills and attitudes" (p. 4) and "to respect and improve traditional
ways" (p. 6). In keeping with this goal, children are taught "cultural mathematics" in all elementary schools in
PNG. Including culturally-based materials in mathematics class is intended by policy makers to serve multiple
purposes. As indicated in documents like the National Curriculum Statement, reforms are intended to build on
the knowledge that children bring to school, resulting in education that is meaningful to them. Reforms also
support children's acquisition of skills that are relevant to life in their communities, however rural and remote
those communities may be (Papua New Guinea Department of Education, 2003); finally, through engaging with

                                                      174
and learning about knowledge systems of their own communities, reforms make efforts to support cultural
identities steeped in children's own cultural histories. Though reforms have mitigated some of the striking
discontinuities between life in and out of school, new discontinuities have emerged, ones that are more subtle
and nuanced. In this paper we examine the changing properties of these discontinuities. To point to these
discontinuities, we begin by noting some of Vygotsky's early observations on the characteristics of learning that
occurs in and out of school.

         As a part of his cultural treatment of learning, Vygotsky (1986) pointed to some important differences
between school instruction and learning outside of school (see also Gonzalez, Andrade, Civil, & Moll, 2001, who
incorporated some of Vygotsky's ideas in recent analyses of learning in and out of school). In school instruction,
concepts  are given explicit   definitions and  presented  as  a part of conceptual    systems.          For  example,   in
mathematics class, numbers are a potentially infinite set that can be represented with Hindu-Arabic numerals.
Students learn to exploit relationships between numbers by decomposing and recombining numbers. In contrast,
in their out-of-school lives, children often create meanings and learn as they solve local, practical problems.
Instruction, if it occurs, is often implicit in interactions and local to particular problems.

         In this paper, we focus on two related out-of-school practices ­ indigenous counting systems and
currency as a context for arithmetical reasoning and problem solving. We sketch these practices here, and
describe the ways in which these practices are transformed when they are imported into mathematics instruction
in Oksapmin elementary schools. We examine the shifting relationships in the community between cultural
forms (such as the traditional count system and English number words) and the functions they serve as people
engage in cultural practices. We will show that both the form and the function of the traditional count system are
altered through  their inclusion  in the  elementary  school   curriculum. We    argue         that  the  focus of  school
mathematics in Oksapmin is to systematize mathematical representations, to create mappings between varied
representation systems, and to develop specialized language for mathematics.

The Study
         This paper relies on data from a variety of studies undertaken in the summer of 2001 in Oksapmin,
Papua New Guinea. Several of these studies are described in detail in (Saxe & Esmonde, in press). We conducted
structured interviews with participants ranging in age from 3rd grade students to community elders. Participants
also had  varied educational    backgrounds;  many  had   no  formal  schooling, while          some    young   adults had
completed  high  school. The    interviews were   designed  to elicit information  about         counting     systems  and
knowledge of currency terms in Tok Ples (a term for the indigenous language of Oksapmin). A separate study
examined collective practices of economic exchange in tradestores.

         The bulk of the analysis presented here draws on fieldnotes from observations of elementary school
mathematics classes, combined with interview data from our frequent discussions with school teachers. With
teacher informants acting as translators, we visited elementary and primary schools and observed 6 mathematics
lessons. Our notes focused on mathematical instructional activities in the classroom and student strategies for
solving problems. As outsiders to Oksapmin communities and non-speakers of Tok Ples, we enlisted the help of
elementary and   community    school teachers  in our research;   we  conducted  structured          as  well as  informal
interviews with teachers in which we discussed Oksapmin mathematics and their mathematics lessons.

The Setting
         Oksapmin is a small region in the Western Province of Papua New Guinea, with a population of
approximately  18,000.  At   an elevation  of about 5000   feet, the  Oksapmin   people         live in   a terrain that is
mountainous,  rugged,  densely  vegetated  and  isolated, unconnected   by roads  to other          parts of  the country.
Traditional subsistence practices that are still practiced today include cultivating taro and sweet potato, keeping
pigs, and hunting with bow and arrow for birds and small mammals. People also collect other sources of protein,
including varied types of insects, worms, and tadpoles. Most adults residing in Oksapmin have gardens in which
they grow a variety of crops for subsistence purposes; excess vegetables are sold in local markets and to
vegetable brokers who export many tonnes of vegetables each year to nearby towns.

         The first government-run Community School in Oksapmin opened in 1968 (Weeks, 1981). The first
teachers were native to other parts of Papua New Guinea, primarily the coastal areas. They were unfamiliar with

                                                    175
Oksapmin language or cultural practices. English was the primary language of instruction, though teachers also
used some Tok Pisin in non-instructional contexts. It was not permitted for children to speak Tok Ples while on
school grounds (Gearhart, 1980). At the time of our visit in 2001, many aspects of local education had changed.
One   important  shift was that  all  teachers were  native   Oksapmin speakers   and long-time  members        of  the
communities in which they taught.

         In 1998,  Oksapmin     restructured   the local education  system,  in  response  to large-scale      national
educational reforms (as described in Papua New Guinea Department of Education, 2003). There are now three
levels of schooling in PNG: elementary (grades Prep, E1, and E2) where the language of instruction is the
community   Tok   Ples, bridging   to English  by  the end  of E2; primary   (grades 3-8)  where the       language of
instruction is primarily English with some Tok Ples; and secondary (grades 9-12), where the language of
instruction is English. In the summer of 2001, the first cohort of elementary school students had graduated to
attend 3rd grade at the community schools. Up to that point, there had been no official Tok Ples instruction in
Oksapmin schools and the curriculum did not include Oksapmin cultural practices. By contrast, under the
reforms, elementary schools are charged with teaching a full range of academic subjects in Tok Ples, including
`cultural mathematics.'

         Oksapmin communities have undergone rapid change over the last 20 to 30 years; as a result there is
great heterogeneity in the mathematical practices of varied groups within the Oksapmin community (Saxe &
Esmonde,    In press). Our brief sketch  provides   the  contours of traditional and  contemporary      mathematical
practices, but cannot cover all the complexity and variety of the mathematical practices in the region.

Oksapmin Practices involving Counting and Currency
         Traditionally, Oksapmin people use a body count system consisting of 27 body parts, as depicted in
Figure 1. To count as Oksapmin do, one begins with the thumb on one hand and enumerates 27 places around the
upper periphery of the body, ending on the little finger of the opposite hand (Moylan, 1982; Saxe, 1981). To
indicate a particular number, one points to the appropriate body part and says the body part name. For example,
to indicate the number 12, one points to the ear which is the 12th body part and says the word for ear, nata. To
count past the 27th body part, one continues up to the wrist, forearm, and on up and around the body. There is no
distinction between the name for the 21st body part and the 29th body part; both are called tan besa (`other
forearm,' indicating the forearm on the opposite side of the body from which the count was initiated).

            Figure 1. The Oksapmin counting system. In order of occurrence: (1) tip^na, (2) tipnarip,
          (3) bum rip, (4) h^tdip, (5) h^th^ta, (6) dopa, (7) besa, (8) kir, (9) tow^t, (10) kata, (11) gwer,
            (12) nata, (13) kina, (14) aruma, (15) tan-kina, (16) tan-nata, (17) tan-gwer, (18) tan-kata,
            (19) tan-tow^t, (20) tan-kir, (21) tan-besa,(22) tan-dopa, (23) tan-tip^na, (24) tan-tipnarip,
                         (25) tan-bum rip, (26) tan-h^tdip, (27) tan-h^th^ta (Saxe, 1981).

         The traditional version of the Tok Ples counting system does not appear to have a base structure. Today,
many people use variations of the traditional system that stop at the 20th body part (tan-kir), and are endowed
with a base structure that facilitates computations with currency (Saxe & Esmonde, in preparation). At the time
of our research, several variants of both the 27 body part counting system and the 20 part counting system were
widely used. However, structured interviews and informal conversations with 3rd grade schoolchildren revealed
that many were unfamiliar with Tok Ples counting beyond the conversational number words used for numbers up
to 5.

                                                       176
       Over  the last half-century,    Oksapmin    communities   have transitioned from    barter and subsistence
economies to an economic system reliant on currency exchange. Money is a necessity in Oksapmin life today
and almost all members of Oksapmin communities are involved with exchange of some form. Within the
structure of activity in tradestores and markets, there is great heterogeneity in the kinds of problems and goals
constructed by different groups within Oksapmin (Saxe & Esmonde, in press). A variety of cultural forms are
used to structure and accomplish mathematical goals in tradestore transactions. These cultural forms include
language for number in Tok Ples, Tok Pisin (a pidgin of English, spoken as a second language by many people in
PNG), or English, specialized terms for currency in these three languages, written numerals, currency itself,
electronic calculators, and record books.

       Several characteristics of economic exchange in the Oksapmin context are important to note here. It is
possible for transactions to take place without any explicit talk about number or prices; this frequently happens
when children make purchases in stores. In addition, many customers are unschooled and therefore unfamiliar
with the conventions of written prices. The ability to read price tags is not necessary in order to be a competent
participant in tradestore transactions. Finally, not all denominations of PNG currency are used in Oksapmin. All
tradestore prices are multiples of 10t. Although 1t, 2t and 5t coins exist in PNG and are used elsewhere, they are
rarely found in Oksapmin. In fact, in a series of interviews about currency names in Tok Ples, most adults did not
know a Tok Ples name for the 1t, 2t or 5t coins.

School Mathematics in Oksapmin Communities
       In this section, we report on the out-of-school knowledge included in elementary classes that we
observed in one village school, focusing     on  transformations of traditional cultural  practices as they were
accommodated within the structure of school mathematics. We argue that instruction in `cultural mathematics'
resulted in a) systematizing out-of-school mathematical representations, b) creating explicit mappings between
varied representational systems, and c) creating a specialized language for mathematics.

Counting and Currency in Elementary School Mathematics
       The elementary school is a two-room structure built with indigenous materials, set just off the major
path that serves as a road through the Oksapmin region. Children from three local hamlets sit on the dirt floor,
facing a blackboard fixed to one wall. Each child has a notebook with about 50 pages that they are to use for all
their school subjects. The notebook is intended to last for the entire school year. One area of the room is
designated as the `teacher's corner' and has a table covered with books and papers. In the opposite corner,
shelves hold a collection of books ­ local stories and legends, translated into Tok Ples by Marshall Lawrence, an
SIL linguist who had lived in the region for many years. These books, the Bible (which was translated by
Marshall Lawrence), and an English/Oksapmin dictionary are the only books to our knowledge ever to be written
in Tok Ples. The walls of the classroom hold several educational posters, two of which are mathematical in
nature. One poster contains multiplication tables written with Hindu-Arabic numerals. The other lists the first ten
body parts of the 27-body part counting system in Tok Ples, along with their matching Hindu-Arabic numerals.
There are no representations of Tok Ples counting words beyond the first ten, and no visual representations that
indicate the body parts of the counting system.

Tok Ples Counting
       In the mathematics lessons that we observed, the body part system was used in varied ways. We saw
students and teachers using Tok Ples to count, to describe currency, and to add, subtract, and multiply various
objects, including currency. The following fieldnote excerpt describes our first visit to the school, when the E2
children counted in Tok Ples for us.

       The first thing they do when we enter is to count in Tok Ples all around the body up to 27. The
       children count together, loudly and in unison, up until around 10 (kata). After that their unity
       falls apart. The boys next to me fall silent, occasionally saying a number word. The other
       children continue saying numbers, but I can't make out what any particular child is saying
       because everyone seems to be saying different things at once. (fieldnotes July 24, 2001)

This classroom performance demonstrates that the children in the E2 classroom were familiar with Tok Ples
numbers up until about 10, after which point their familiarity and proficiency dropped. One possible explanation

                                                     177
is that that the students simply had trouble counting to large numbers. This is probably not the case, since
whenever we asked groups of children to count for us in English, they proved their ability to memorize large
numbers by counting all the way to 100 loudly, rapidly, and in unison. It is more probable that in this classroom,
students used Tok Ples numbers up to ten more frequently than the higher Tok Ples numbers. The classroom
poster listing the first ten Tok Ples count words (thumb (1) to shoulder (10), each adjacent to the corresponding
Hindu-Arabic numeral) ) support this conjecture.

       The number ten has no special significance in the traditional Tok Ples number system, but in the
elementary school, the number ten was sometimes used in ways analogous to its use in Hindu-Arabic based
number systems. This use of the number ten (kata) to create a base system for Tok Ples counting is an innovation
that creates a link between the traditional counting system and English counting. It may also reflect attempts to
systematize the Tok Ples counting system by borrowing the base 10 structure of English counting. For example,
in one lesson plan, a teacher asks students to group large numbers of sticks into bundles of 10. In that particular
lesson, the teacher expressed 50 as "h^th^t kat-hai," meaning five (pinky) tens (shoulder). This adaptation of the
Tok Ples counting system occurred very rarely in our interviews about adult mathematical practices.

       Another notable aspect of the children's Tok Ples counting performance was its endpoint, 27 (tan-
h^th^ta). The traditional count system has 27 body parts, but one can count higher than 27 as demonstrated in
Figure 1 above. The modified count system used by many middle-aged adults has 20 body parts, and one counts
higher than 20 usually by continuing to the 21st body part (tan-besa) or by beginning again at the 1st body part
(tip^na). This instance of classroom interaction cannot definitively demonstrate the structure of the counting
system used there. However, we conducted interviews with 19 3rd grade children who had attended elementary
school and all of the children told us that one cannot count higher than 27 using Tok Ples counting.

Creating Mappings between Representational Systems
       Much of the elementary school curriculum that we observed focused on creating mappings between
different representational systems, including Tok Ples and English words for number, Hindu-Arabic numerals,
and pictures representing arithmetic problems. Figure 2 displays several addition problems as the teacher wrote
them on the blackboard.

                      Figure 2. Addition problems in symbols and Hindu-Arabic numerals

       The blackboard problems are presented in pictures and in numerals. The teacher proceeded to solve
these problems with the students. The picture problems were described using Tok Ples numbers, and solved by
counting with the body system. The answers to these Tok Ples problems were expressed with more pictures. For
example, for one problem the teacher drew 6 spaces and added them to 4 smiling faces. He drew the solution as a
representation of a bilum (a string bag) with 6 spades and 4 faces inside of it. The problems written in numerals
were described in English, and solved using English counting. The teacher explicitly instructed students in the
connections between the four representational systems in use. The connection between English and Tok Ples
counting is rarely made in children's out-of-school practices, yet it is a focal point of cultural mathematics
instruction.

                                                    178
          Later in the lesson, after the teacher had solved several problems with the students, he assigned some
arithmetic exercises for them to solve on their own. We observed the strategies that students used to solve these
problems. In visits to Oksapmin schools in 1978 and 1980, Saxe (1985) found that school children spontaneously
used the body count system to solve school arithmetic problems that were presented in English and Hindu-Arabic
numerals. This stands in marked contrast from the strategies used by students in 2001 when presented with
English or Tok Ples arithmetic problems. The students we observed often counted in Tok Pisin, used stones as
manipulatives, or counted tick marks on their papers to solve the problems. We did not witness any children
using body strategies to solve arithmetic problems. It appears that the teacher's efforts to make connections
between the representations for number allowed students to solve Tok Ples addition problems using English and
pictorial strategies. However,    it did not   appear   that children extended   their use of Tok    Ples to other
representations for number.

Language for Currency
          Currency is  frequently included    in mathematics     curricula as a bridge to  students' out-of-school
experiences and as useful knowledge for children,       though school currency tasks can be very different from
adults' or children's real world currency practices (Brenner 1998b). We observed one elementary lesson on
currency that demonstrated some interesting continuities and discontinuities with community practices. Though
the use of indigenous number in currency transactions has a long history in out-of-school practices, in school this
relation has taken on a quite different form.

          The elementary teacher began the lesson by having students identify the Tok Ples names for all the
coins and bills between 1t and K2. He wrote names in Tok Ples for these values, and then wrote the Hindu-
Arabic notation for the numerical value of each denomination. See Figure 3 for a blackboard representation that
was used to support the lesson. On the blackboard the teacher produced two entries beside 20t because the
teacher provided two different names for this coin.

                                                sup tan                  1t
                                                gamintan suptan        2t
                                                gadep                  5t
                                                wansring               10t
                                                wansring gamintan        20 t
                                                tusring                20 t
                                                gagagsi                50 t
                                                temsi                  K1.00
                                                wanpon                K2.00
                                  Figure 3.   Blackboard with currency names in Tok Ples

          The Tok  Ples  currency    words    presented by   the teacher represent a complete  system   of all the
denominations from 1t to K2.00. Recall that adults in Oksapmin very rarely if ever used (or saw) the 1t, 2t and 5t
coins. Adults generally regard the 10t coin as the basic unit of the currency system. The primacy of the 10t coin
is reflected in the term `gamintan' (meaning `married coin'), a common name for the 20t coin, referring to the
fact that it is equivalent to two (married) 10t coins. In the school system of currency, the 1t coin is the basic unit.
Therefore, the term gamintan is used twice ­ once to describe the 2t coin as equivalent to two 1t coins, and also
to describe 20t as two 10t coins. The schoolteacher here represents the Tok Ples words for currency as a coherent
system, using currency names that describe relationships between the varied denominations. He also adapts
ordinary Tok Ples words, such as `gamin' for `married,' and imbues them with specific mathematical meaning.

Addition of Currency
          During the currency lesson, students did some addition exercises with coins of different values. For
example, they added `gagasi + gagasi' (50t + 50t) to get `temsi' (K1). These addition type problems are similar
to the types of problems students might encounter as they negotiate a transaction in a tradestore in the local
market. However, the presentation of the problem with Hindu-Arabic numerals is an unfamiliar practice for
many Oksapmin people ­ just as it is an unfamiliar practice in U.S. convenience stores to use written notation to
figure out how many dollars are equivalent to four quarters.      As the teacher and students worked through the

                                                      179
exercises, they were presented in Tok Ples (with no written component) and in English (accompanied by Hindu-
Arabic numerals). Once again, creating mappings between the varied representation systems was an explicit
focus of instruction.

       Although this discussion of currency in elementary school mathematics is based on just one lesson (we
observed a number of others and interviewed teachers in some depth about additional lesson plans as well), we
can draw some  comparisons     between  currency practices     in school and   in economic  exchange.    The  use of
currency in the elementary classroom during this lesson is both like and unlike out-of-school practices involving
currency. Different denominational values are emphasized in school, creating a coherent system built up from the
1t coin; instruction emphasized equivalence relations between the different denominations.

       Students also solved arithmetic problems using currency, including some problems involving 1t, 2t and
5t coins. Although these coins are not used in Oksapmin, they are frequently used for purchases in urban centers
in PNG. These currency addition exercises may not have been immediately relevant to Oksapmin children, but a
familiarity with small denominations would be useful for any Oksapmin person who intended to travel to urban
centers far from their small community. The currency addition problems differed from tradestore or market
currency problems in other ways; they were presented in a novel form, using Hindu-Arabic numerals. Finally,
students received explicit instruction in equivalences although this was not the focus of instruction in everyday
practices involving currency.

Continuities and Discontinuities
       The apparent discontinuities between Tok Ples counting and arithmetic in and out of school suggest
some interesting questions. The education reform documents in PNG state that instruction in elementary schools
was intended to (a) build on the knowledge, skills and experience that children bring to school, and (b) preserve
and reproduce traditional knowledge. However, the discontinuities that we observed suggest that children were
not proficient (and in many cases, not even familiar) with Tok Ples counting or arithmetic before coming to
school. Furthermore, the structure of Tok Ples counting that they learned was very different from the traditional
system, and would perhaps be unrecognizable to a community elder. Efforts to extend traditional knowledge to
new problems (by teaching children arithmetic in Tok Ples) seemed relatively unsuccessful, since students
tended to use Tok Pisin or concrete objects to solve the problems, rather than use Tok Ples strategies.

Discussion
       In Oksapmin, the relationship between mathematical practices in and outside of school is anything but
simple. Throughout the history of schooling in the region, students have experienced discontinuities between
community and school cultural practices. In the early English-only schools, many students used the 27 body part
system to solve arithmetic problems presented in English and Hindu-Arabic numerals (Saxe, 1985). Despite the
fact that children imported their out-of-school practices into the school curriculum, the use of Tok Ples counting
in everyday practice declined. This was probably due at least in part to changing historical conditions and the
valued status of English for school (Saxe & Esmonde, 2004). By the time the elementary schools opened in
Oksapmin, the traditional  count system was rarely     used in public life. In fact, our interviews with  7th and 8th
grade students revealed that many of them could not count in Tok Ples, though they were proficient with English
and Tok Pisin counting. The 3rd grade students who had graduated from elementary schools had more knowledge
of indigenous counting systems than their older peers.

       This demonstrates that the education reforms were somewhat successful in their goals to "respect and
improve traditional ways." For many young children, school was their only exposure to traditional number
systems and Tok Ples language for currency. This caused a new kind of discontinuity, since schooled versions of
out-of-school mathematics were more compatible with `Western' mathematics, but also more distant from the
community's cultural practices, running the risk of seeming irrelevant or even incorrect to older community
members. It remains to be seen how the inception of elementary school mathematics will affect students' out-of-
school mathematical practices. Our snapshots of elementary school lessons cannot predict the future of Tok Ples
counting in Oksapmin. It may be that Tok Ples counting will continue its slow decline, gradually disappearing
from community life. On the other hand, the teaching of Tok Ples mathematics in elementary school may revive
the use of Tok Ples counting systems, while altering its structure and contributing to the continuing change in
Oksapmin mathematics.

                                                   180
         Although Oksapmin is a small, isolated community very far from the United States, the lessons learned
raise questions for the American context. Currently many researchers suggest that U.S. mathematics instruction
should include realistic problems and skills found in students' home communities (Brenner, 1998a; Gonzalez et
al., 2001). Such realistic problems would afford students an understanding of the relevance of mathematics to
their everyday interests  and  better engage  them  in mathematical   thinking. The  Oksapmin    case  presents a
cautionary  note in  this regard. Our   observations  suggest that out-of-school  problems    and approaches    to
accomplishing them may inevitably be changed when imported into school contexts, raising questions about a
simple application of this instructional practice. Further, there is no guarantee that students will find school
versions of their (or   their parents') out-of-school  practices more engaging    or relevant   than a traditional
curriculum. Indeed, students may not see the connection between school and community versions of what
educators view as the same or similar practices. We know little about students' perception of the `cultural
mathematics' that has been imported into American mathematics curricula. Though such curricula are taught
with the intention of drawing on and strengthening students' out-of-school knowledge, they should be examined
to understand better students' own views about the relevance and value of cultural mathematics.

References
Brenner, M. E. (1998a). Adding cognition to the formula for culturally relevant instruction in mathematics.
         Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 29(2), 214-244.
Brenner, M. E. (1998b). Meaning and money. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 36(2), 123-155.
Gearhart, M. (1980). Divanap Community School Field Report. In The Indigenous Mathematics Project (pp. 1-
         35). Ministry of Education, Papua New Guinea.
Gonzalez, N., Andrade, R., Civil, M., & Moll, L. (2001). Bridging funds of distributed knowledge: Creating
         zones of practices in mathematics. Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk (JESPAR), 6(1-2),
         115-132.
Litteral, R. (2000). Four decades of language policy in Papua New Guinea: The move towards the vernacular.
         Radical Pedagogy, 2(2).
Moylan,  T. (1982).  The   Oksapmin   Counting  System.    Paper presented at the Meeting   of  the  Northeastern
         Anthropological Association.
Papua New Guinea Department of Education. (2003). National Curriculum Statement for Papua New Guinea.
         Port Moresby: Department of Education.
Saxe, G. B. (1981). Body parts as numerals: A developmental analysis of numeration among the Oksapmin in
         Papua New Guinea. Child Development, 52(1), 306-316.
Saxe, G. B. (1985). Effects of Schooling on Arithmetical Understandings: Studies With Oksapmin Children in
         Papua New Guinea. Journal of Educational Psychology, 77(5), 503-513.
Saxe, G., B. & Esmonde, J. (in press). Making change in Oksapmin tradestores: A study of shifting practices of
         quantification under   conditions of rapid  shift towards a cash  economy.   South   Pacific  Journal  of
         Psychology.
Saxe, G. B., & Esmonde, I. (2004). Cognition in flux: The Case of `fu' in the social history of Oksapmin
         mathematics. Unpublished manuscript. University of California, Berkeley.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language (A. Kozulin, Trans.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Weeks, S. G. (1981). Oksapmin: Development and change. Port Moresby: Educational Research Unit, University
         of Papua New Guinea.

                                                     181
