                           How a Creative "System" Learns:
                    The Distributed Activity of Choreography

                                            Janice E. Fournier
                      University of Washington, Box 353080, Seattle, WA       98195-3080
                                            Tel. (206) 685-3571
                                      Email: fournier@u.washington.edu

    Abstract: Although the arts, and dance in particular, are underrepresented in studies of cognition,
    they provide rich opportunities to enlarge our understandings of how people learn, think, and
    accomplish    tasks, individually and collectively. In an   ethnographic       study   of professional
    choreographers and dancers composing in their studios, I sought to understand choreography as a
    case of distributed cognition, embodied knowledge, and creative work. In this paper, I present a
    model of the interactions between choreographer and dancers as a system of activity. I explain the
    specific contributions of each of these roles to the function of the system, and how both individual
    and joint cognitive activity help to move a composition from initial conception to final performance.
    I argue that the creative relationship between choreographer and dancers represents a unique model
    of collective learning, one that is not addressed in current research on cognition in practice.

Introduction
         What we know about cognition is constantly being expanded by studies of thinking and knowing in new
contexts. Research on cognition has, for the most part, not paid much attention to the arts as a way of thinking
and knowing. Yet choreography possesses multiple features that make it unique as a cognitive activity and
therefore rich with potential for enlarging understandings of cognition.

         The notion of cognition as distributed derives in large part from socio-historical approaches to the study
of mind. In this perspective, frameworks for thinking are developed through problem-solving activities and social
structures grounded in specific historical and cultural contexts. By examining different kinds of activity, different
uses of mediating tools or environmental features, social roles and divisions of labor, etc., we gain a broader
understanding of cognition as it is distributed within specific cultural practices (Cole & Engestrom, 1993).
Researchers  from anthropology  and   sociology have  expanded  notions       of cognition by  looking     at  people
"knowing" in a range of everyday settings and activities: engaged in daily tasks (Lave, 1988), at work (Goodwin,
1993; Harper, 1987; Hutchins, 1995; Scribner, 1997; Stevens, 1999), practicing a craft (Keller & Keller, 1996).
Central to these studies is the notion of cognition as a system of activity: inquiry is aimed at understanding how
social and environmental structures, use of particular tools, the spatial and temporal arrangements of people,
objects, and events contribute to the organization of mental processes,       the  achievement      of tasks, and the
development of conceptual understanding. Individuals learn through interactions with people and things. As
Stevens and Hall have pointed out (1998; Stevens, 1999), learning is not merely the development of mental
structures, but also the development of embodied knowledge and practice, or disciplined perception; through the
resources of talk, embodied action, particular tools and representations, practitioners learn and use their bodies in
coordinated ways that reflect characteristic modes of thought, verbal discourse, and ways of seeing within a
discipline. While Stevens and Hall focus their attention on visual practices central in a discipline, other studies
show that additional forms of perception may be central to knowing within a field.

         The majority of the studies noted above investigate how individuals or groups of individuals coordinate
their activities in accomplishing routine tasks or solving well-defined problems. One exception is Keller and
Keller's (1996a, 1996b) account of an artist blacksmith "thinking and acting with iron."            In this study, the
authors describe how a blacksmith creates a piece of ironwork by coordinating a number of visual, aural, and
sensorimotor "images." Like the composing process described in studies of writing (Bereiter & Scardamalia,
1987; Flower & Hayes, 1994), Keller and Keller's blacksmith engages in an iterative process of visualizing
goals, planning a means for creating those goals in form, and acting on the plan with a mind open to alterations

                                                  198
and new ideas as the form evolves. In this creative system, activity is distributed across the blacksmith and
specific tools and structures in his environment.

         Choreography, too, is a creative task, but one undertaken by multiple individuals. In this distributed
system of activity, the choreographer's tools and material are dancers with minds and bodies of their own.
Together, choreographer and dancers engage in reflection on the kinesthetic and visual effects of movement,
coordinating perceptual and intellectual ways of knowing across multiple minds and bodies. The multisensory
images developed, enacted, revised and coordinated within a single individual in Keller & Keller's study must be
developed, enacted, revised and coordinated among multiple individuals in the making of a dance. How does a
creative system (and individuals within the system) learn through the process of composing? The specific roles
of choreographer and dancer and the progressive nature of composing make choreography a good case for
understanding the relationship of individual cognitions to "system thinking" and to the learning of the whole.

         In this paper, I present a model of the interactions of choreographer and dancers as a distributed system
of activity. This model is based on an ethnographic study of choreographers and dancers composing in their
studios.

Study Design
         Participants in this study were ten professional choreographers and dancers in contemporary dance.
Each participant was videotaped at least once in rehearsal and/or teaching a class; studio sessions ranged from
1to 4 hours. Participants included a solo performer as well as groups ranging from 2-15 members; each was
videotaped   at a different  stage  in the rehearsal  process,  from initial start on  a dance  to  the    day before
performance. After the studio session, I later interviewed each participant, playing back selected studio clips to
stimulate recall and discussion of recorded events. When interviews were complete, all participants and their
ensemble members were invited to a group discussion about the composing process. At this meeting, each
participant also drew a timeline of the entire rehearsal process for the dance I had observed in progress.

         Data (video records, field notes, collected artifacts, and interview transcripts) were analyzed for major
tasks involved in composing a dance. Once these were identified, I examined how the roles of choreographer and
dancer,  the structure and   nature of  rehearsal  activities, and the discipline-specific   ways  of knowing    and
representing knowledge contributed to the accomplishment of these tasks and to changes within and across
different episodes of rehearsal. I analyzed the interactions of choreographers and dancers as a system of activity
and sought to understand the specific contributions of each of these roles to the function of the system, and how
both individual and joint cognitive activity helped to move a composition from initial conception to final
performance.

Choreography as a System of Activity
         Results of the study highlight ways that participants used rehearsal activities to reflect on, share, and
coordinate   both  kinesthetic and     visual perceptions  of   movement   and,    in so doing,   establish    mutual
understandings of the evolving dance. Choreographers and dancers working together create a dance, although
they have different roles and functions in the accomplishment of this task. One challenge for a theory of
cognition based on a distributed system is to show 1) how the products of the system change from one occasion
to another, and 2) how the relationships between the different "intellectual partners" in the system contribute to
this change (Salomon, 1993). In Figure 1, I summarize the distributed system of both individual and joint activity
in the making of a dance. The figure shows how the dance itself progresses from a few ideas to a polished
performance   and  how  the  relationships    between choreographer,   dancer(s),  and   the tools they    work  with
contribute to this change.

         The three columns in Figure 1 comprise the entire distributed system of activity in composing a dance.
The central column depicts the evolution of the dance over time and the joint activities of choreographer and
dancers that contribute to this change. I've listed in this column (bottom to top) the general stages of rehearsal
and the nature of activities at each stage. Choreographers essentially engage in the same activities that writers
engage in when composing--they plan, generate material, and revise multiple drafts--though in dance these are
largely social and embodied processes.

                                                      199
        The columns on the left and right in Figure 1 describe, respectively, the individual cognitive activities of
choreographer and dancer(s). These, too, change over time, and they have a reciprocal relationship with the
central joint activities as indicated by the arrows. Salomon (1993) has represented the reciprocal relationship
between individual and joint cognition as a spiral, explaining that "individuals' cognitions engage in activities
affording distributed  cognitions,   which   in turn cultivate  individual  cognitions" and   so forth (p.  119). In
Salomon's diagram there is a single spiral; I have used the spirals in Figure 1 to show how two specific roles in
this system  contribute to the     cognitive accomplishments     of the system    overall. Below   I describe  more
specifically the  distributed nature  of rehearsal   activities and the transformation     of relationships between
choreographer and dancers as a dance is composed.

             Figure 1. Diagram of how choreographer and dancer's individual and distributed activities
                                           contribute to composing a dance

Activities in Composing a Dance
        The   activity of "setting"   appears    in Figure 1    vertically in the central  column,   alongside  and
encompassing all phases of composing; this is an activity unique to dance.        Dancers commonly speak of "set
movement" or of choreographers "setting a dance on dancers."         When a dance is set, it exists (to greater and
lesser degrees) as a specified sequence of movements that can be repeatedly reconstructed during performance.
Because setting is more or less an infinite activity, encompassing the process of "settling on" decisions for the
composition as well as setting movement in and on bodies, I have used it here as an umbrella process over the
joint activity of choreographer and dancers as a whole. Like any artist, choreographers learn from working with
their medium, but in this case, the medium is human movement, and dancers must continually construct and
reconstruct the very art object being created. This "reciprocal learning"--the choreographer shaping the dance
even as it takes shape in the dancers--is an integral part of composing in dance.

Generating Material
        In   the same  way    that writers generate  words  and   sentences,  choreographers    generate movement
vocabulary and phrases. Movement material in dance may be generated in two ways: choreographers may seek
to embody a specific idea in movement (i.e. "sharp"), or they may simply experiment with movement to see what

                                                      200
ideas or images it connotes. From the start, however, choreographers rely on their dancers to represent their
ideas--to embody, remember, and perform their ideas back to them--so that they might be evaluated and
revised.

          Popular  images   of  choreography   suggest  that choreographers   come   into the  studio  with  all the
movement worked out ahead of time; the choreographer teaches the movement, and the dancers learn and
perform it. This was a rare occurrence in the rehearsals I observed. More often, choreographers engaged their
dancers   in any  number    of activities designed to  distribute the task of generating     material and orient  all
performers toward a common understanding of the composing goals. These activities quickly generated a pool of
available movement vocabulary, bearing the mark of each ensemble member. Whether through improvisational
exercises,   writing tasks, brainstorming   sessions, or  "thrown  material," dancers  generated      movement   that
represented them--their ideas and experiences, their physical attributes and abilities, their particular movement
habits or preferences. Thus choreographers regarded dancers not as passive clay for molding, but as active
problem solvers on whom they relied for generating original material.

Selecting and Developing Material
          During this phase in the composing process, participants moved from generating material to setting
particular phrases and then manipulating those phrases in a number of ways--extending or reorganizing them,
changing who would perform them, or how and where they would be performed in the space. Through practice
and multiple repetitions of movement sequences, dancers and choreographers explored the details and nuances of
movement, as well as its possible interpretations. In the process of deciding how the arms should be used in one
section to complement the legs, for example, a choreographer and her dancers found that a certain move with
elbows out and limp wrists created "scary hands"--an image they decided to develop further. These rehearsals
zigzagged between two different types of dialogue: an internal dialogue in which each dancer attended to her
individual   perceptions, and   an external  dialogue  in which   those  perceptions were    shared,  evaluated, and
negotiated by the group.

          During this stage, choreographers repeatedly stepped in and out of the roles of their performers in order
to understand the movement from inside; study participants explained that the process of alternating between
being "inside" an image, perceiving it kinesthetically, and being "outside" the image, observing as a spectator, is
essential in  choreography   for evaluating  movement     images  and/or clarifying  intent. Over  these  rehearsals,
dancers   added   to  an  ever-increasing   score  of multi-sensory   cues  they  would   use   to   reconstruct the
material--physical sensations and qualities of movement as well as spatial and temporal relationships to other
dancers and to features within the environment.

Organizing the Whole
          The number and complexity of design and logistical considerations increases when choreographers
reach the stage of organizing the dance as a whole. Attention in this stage moves away from development of
separate sections and exploration of material to more whole-text considerations: What is it the choreographer
wishes the audience to experience overall? What is the unifying structure that makes sense for the piece? To
answer these questions, choreographers consolidated knowledge gained over previous rehearsals and revisited or
revised goals for the dance as a whole. Choreographers at this stage of the composing process often used video
cameras, pen and paper as tools to think with--to record, represent, and coordinate a wide range of information
relevant to the organizing task. Dancers, too, acted not only as records/recorders of information, but also active
intellectual partners, joining the choreographer in thinking through the dance, proposing solutions as problems
were identified. In one rehearsal, for example, a choreographer shared with her dancers a sketch she had made of
a tentative structure for the dance as a whole. Here the sketch acted as a mediating tool; the choreographer not
only read from her sketch, but also modified it (crossed out sections, drew arrows, wrote notes in the margins) in
response to discussion with her dancers.

          Organizing the whole marks an important shift in the relationship between choreographer, dancers, and
the dance; what begins as an idea in the mind of the choreographer at the start of rehearsals must eventually
become a fully formed work performed independently by dancers. Organizing the whole marks a point at which
dancers   shift from  practicing and developing    movement   to  inhabiting  the movement     and   imbuing it  with
meaning.

                                                      201
Polishing the Performance
          At this stage in the composing process, the dance exists as a "complete draft" and can now be "run"
(repeatedly performed) from start to finish. Choreographer and dancers can begin to experience the dance as a
whole. The process of making final edits in dance is called "polishing" or "cleaning"; it is a process of clarifying
both the aesthetic intent of the dance as well as its physical execution. Choreographers often used video cameras
at this stage to gain an objective view, or called in trusted colleagues to provide editorial feedback. For both
dancers and choreographers, the final stage of rehearsal was a time to more clearly articulate ideas and intentions
for the dance, and  to subject all aspects of the  dance to the unifying   aesthetic that was  developed  while
organizing the whole.

          Dancers viewed this stage of composing as extremely generative, the stage in which they create "an
experience that goes kinesthetically and every way from the beginning through the end." During these rehearsals,
dancers developed an "internal fiction" to support a fully embodied performance of the dance. Like actors'
objectives that give credibility and purpose to their lines, dancers develop an elaborate subtext to provide
intentions for their movements, frequently constructed from remembered experiences from daily life (including
prior rehearsals), images visualized while performing, or invented dramatic scenarios with other dancers. These
were largely personal subtexts, rarely shared aloud. In the end, dancers consolidate in their lived performance all
that they and the group as a whole have learned over the rehearsal process, the history of the activity depicted in
Figure 1.

Roles & Function of Choreographer and Dancers
          The unique roles that choreographer and dancers play in composing a dance can be described in terms
of how they influence the operation of the distributed system as a whole. Hutchins (1995), for instance, has
distinguished between evolution and design in describing how a system changes over time. Evolution, Hutchins
argues, is adaptive change by a system in terms of itself. Such change can be characterized as "local adjustment"
by members of a system in relation to situations and events happening within the system. In contrast, design is a
process conducted by an "outsider" on representations of the system. Design in Hutchins' view includes a more
global perspective on the system; design "precedes and guides an implementation of changes that are intended to
be adaptive" (p. 349). Hutchins' comments were related to his study of crewmembers on a Navy ship and how
the task of navigation is distributed across multiple persons and technologies. Hutchins concluded that the
changes he observed in the organization of the navigation team were in part evolutionary and in part a process
between evolution and pure design.

          Such a combination of change processes can be seen in the functioning of a dance ensemble as well, yet
these processes are more clearly divided between the roles of choreographer and dancer. Choreographers must
keep in mind an executive view of the dance as a whole, projecting forward and casting back over rehearsals in
order to shape and develop movement material into a unified composition. While not necessarily "outsiders" of
the system, choreographers do (literally) step outside the constructions of the system in order to conduct design
operations. The changes they implement in the system are intentional, the result of supervisory reflections on the
whole. Choreographers are primarily responsible for the design function within the system; as shown in Figure 1,
they conduct executive activity: making choices about the options that will be explored, planning a path of
action, evaluating the results. When one of the choreographers, for example, engaged her dancers in "round
robin" watching, she did not forfeit the role of choreographer but rather engaged her dancers in the design
function of the system. This might also be said of choreographers who ask their dancers to generate material
independently  for the dance.  In these instances, dancers  essentially posed and solved   for themselves mini
compositional problems.

          In contrast, the changes dancers implement in the system are primarily evolutionary. Dancers adapt
locally to direction from outside. In learning movement, for instance, they learn how to execute it in their own
bodies, and they learn to make the movement their own. They make adjustments to their local views of the
dance, to their actions in relation to other dancers and to the environment as they rehearse. Through their
suggestions for changes, their spontaneous improvisations and/or mistakes, even the "internal fictions" they may
create to support the performance, dancers influence the composition of a dance within the terms of the system
itself. One example of this local adjustment is the self-monitoring and correction that dancers make as they
receive direction from the choreographer, or when they rehearse independently. Like the choreographer's actions,

                                                   202
dancers' actions,   too, further the process of composing    (the task of the  system) but    in a way that is less
intentional in terms of the overall design. In the joint activities of choreographer and dancers (the middle column
in Figure   1), the evolutionary  and  design functions   of the  system  are woven  together.   The  interpersonal
dependencies of the system in promoting change toward an end goal are most evident here. Choreographers
stepping into the role of dancer in order to understand how to modify or develop a phrase may be one example of
this interdependency; how dancers function as the choreographer's record of the evolving text is another.

How a Creative System Learns
         The relationship between choreographers and dancers that emerges from looking at choreography as a
distributed system is unique. This relationship represents a model of learning through creative work that has been
little explored in studies of cognition. Although there is much to say about the perceptual aspects of thinking and
problem solving in dance, I concentrate in this paper on the distributed qualities of the art form. Below I examine
what and how choreographer and dancers learn over the course of composing a dance in relation to current
theories of cognition and learning, in order to highlight what we might learn from this case.

A Unique Model of Collective Learning
         As a case of collective learning, the relationship between choreographer and dancers is unlike other
models of group learning currently recognized in cognitive research. The relationship between choreographer
and dancers does not fit, for instance, the traditional didactic model present in many classrooms. Choreographers
in this study rarely knew ahead of time the particular knowledge or skills they wanted their dancers to acquire.
As a result, they were often inventing and solving problems alongside their dancers. While direct instruction was
evident in rehearsals when specific movement was taught or corrected, it was used to accomplish particular tasks
in the making of a dance; it does not describe the general relationship between choreographer and dancers and
how the system learns.

         The composing process in dance is also not a true collaboration between choreographer and dancers. As
one choreographer in the study noted, proposals offered by each member of an ensemble do not carry equal
weight, and the group does not deliberate over creative decisions. While the dancers participate in the composing
process to varying degrees, it is the choreographer as I have described above who plays the executive role. He or
she creates  openings    for dancers  to participate in the  composing   process and decides     exactly how   their
contributions will be used.

         Apprenticeship is another model of how people learn from interactions with one another, but here, too,
the model is not appropriate to describe the relationship between choreographer and dancers. While dancers may
indeed learn something about choreography by participating in a dance, they are not apprenticing choreographers
in this situation. Nor is the choreographer (necessarily) a master teacher teaching dancers how to improve their
dancing. Lave and Wenger (1991) have expanded on the concept of apprenticeship by looking more broadly at
how learning occurs within a community of practice, or group of practitioners in a field. They use the term
"legitimate peripheral participation" to describe how a learner or "newcomer" to a community of practice
proceeds through various peripheral roles, increasing in responsibility and skill requirements, to the role of
"expert". This description of communal learning may be partly true of the dance community generally (if one
views a choreographer as the "expert"); novice choreographers often dance in other choreographers' work at the
same time they are composing their own pieces. But the sets of skills choreographers and dancers practice in
rehearsal are very different from one another, and many dancers never wish to choreograph. Furthermore, the
model of legitimate peripheral participation does not work to describe the learning that choreographer and
dancers experience in the making of a single dance. The model of learning represented by choreographer and
dancers as co-participants in a system of activity may be worth looking for in other contexts, as I will address
further on.

Learning as a Creative System
         Other researchers in addition to Lave and Wenger have tried to describe how learning takes place
among members of a community of practice or system of activity. Hutchins (1995) for example, diagrams how
an organization changes over time using the Navy ship as a case study. He demonstrates through his research
how both the individuals and the practice change through the activity of the system. He uses the system itself as
his unit of analysis, describing redundancies built into the system, how people learn various roles and move

                                                      203
through roles of increasing responsibility, how the system functions to deal with turnover in personnel, with
problems  or breakdowns,     and with innovations in practice or technology.     His  case, however,  is a highly
coordinated system; the problems it goes about solving are routine. The system he describes does not seek and
solve creative problems nor does it attempt to articulate and realize an aesthetic intention using a metaphoric
vocabulary.

        Although the system Hutchins describes is unlike the system comprised of choreographer and dancers,
his definition of learning is broadly applicable. He describes learning as "adaptive reorganization in a complex
system" (1995, p. 270)--he argues that the definition works well for learning situated in the socio-material world
and it works equally well for private discoveries made in moments of reflective thought. What is it that one
adapts to in each of these cases? In most of Hutchins' examples, Navy personnel are adapting to moment-to-
moment changes in the environment; people are shifted around and new tools are engaged as the system adapts
to problems presented by the environment itself, or by the task at hand. In reflective thought, it may be changes
in representations that individuals adapt to, brought about by mental manipulations.

        What is it that individuals or the system is adapting to in dance? The data presented here suggest that
choreographers and dancers are continually adapting to changes in the state of the dance, changes that they have
wrought themselves in an effort to realize particular goals. The setting and revision of goals central to creative
work may be thought of in itself as an adaptive reorganization in light of what the system has produced. This
may be one way to think of composing generally: the system undergoing adaptive reorganization may be a
choreographer and her dancers, or it may be a writer and his ideas on paper. In describing design activity
specifically (using as examples the design of a shawl, or of a health care system), Schon (1990) uses the word
"synthesis" to describe similar processes of formation and transformation in the work. He views design as a
conversation with materials and with other individuals; designers learn through successive trials that effectively
change the design situation with each iteration, and they learn through the process of communicating across the
different frames they may hold on a design problem. Schon does not say here whether these different frames are
a consequence of individuals' specific roles within an activity system, but this "dialogue across frames" may also
characterize the interactions between dancers and choreographers and provide another perspective on how a
system learns.

        Learning has also been conceived of as conceptual change, especially by researchers interested in
individual conceptual structures or cognitive strategies--learning has often been measured by the degree or
quality of change in one's thinking or skills. Beyond change conceived as before and after states, diSessa has
raised the question of how concepts work and develop. DiSessa and Sherin (1998) argue that the core problem of
conceptual change is "shifting the means of seeing" and that " `seeing things' in the world--gaining information
about them--is a complex cognitive accomplishment" (p. 1171). If, from situated perspectives on learning, a
concept is not a particular mental representation residing in the mind of an individual but abstractions over
people acting in settings, then conceptual change is the change in this "pattern of people, things in the world, and
neuronal activations" (diSessa & Sherin,1998, p. 1173). This may be the best way to describe how a group or
system undergoes conceptual change: a group itself may "see things in the world" and as a group, shift the means
of seeing or   coordinating  information. This shifting may be another      way to   describe Hutchins'  "adaptive
reorganization in a complex system" and the transformations that choreographer and dancers undergo over the
course of composing.

The "Design Group" Model: Implications for Education and Research
        The    relationship between choreographer  and  dancers, I have     argued,  presents a unique  model for
learning. The roles of choreographer and dancers function differently to effect changes in both the design and
evolution of a system. If the model of learning this system represents is not a didactic model, not a true
collaboration, not apprenticeship or legitimate peripheral participation, what kind of model is it? I would propose
that a choreographer and her dancers is best characterized as a design group; other contexts in which such a
relational system might be found include an architecture studio, advertising agency, or an advanced research
laboratory. Although further study is needed, it may be that similar roles and dynamics exist within these
systems, functioning to affect the design and evolution of creative work.

        Are there other places where the design group model should be found, where this model of collective
learning and creating would in fact be constructive? This model does not describe the typical classroom--such
collective learning does not often happen here, nor design, nor the fostering of individual creativity through the

                                                   204
creative work of the whole. Teachers are generally viewed as having the responsibility to impart to students
specific knowledge and skills, and students generally learn from lessons designed for them. In contrast, dancers
and choreographer join in a shared, creative enterprise; they are in something together, even if that "something"
may not be fully formulated at the start. Choreographers, on some level, trust the particular expertise of their
dancers, trust/expect that their dancers will bring new insights to the collective endeavor and that the work will
evolve in relation to what is produced. Although the system as a whole learns in this model, it is not the model of
learning most teachers are encouraged to use as the basis for their lessons.

         There   are  exceptions. The    choreographer  role   may    in fact  aptly    describe  those   teachers we   have
frequently referred to as "gifted" or "natural"--teachers such as Vivian Paley (e.g. 1981), who take notes and
carefully observe their students, using students' words and actions to design and facilitate the next educational
experience. Perhaps too often teachers don't engage their students in orienting activities, don't ask students to
generate their own material, or join them to "mess with it" and see what evolves. If teaching is both science and
art, it may be that choreography unveils the mystery of what that "art" entails.

         Little is known about how people learn through the act of composing. While a generative, iterative
process is central to composing in many art forms, we have no particular word(s) in education or cognitive
research that identifies this process as a means of learning and knowing. The sensitivity to their materials that
many artists describe may parallel in dance the intersensitivity that is fostered between choreographer and
dancers over the rehearsal process. In dance, this creative reciprocity is an essential component of composing:
choreographers    and  dancers  "develop,  strengthen,  and   nurture    their creative     individuality  via their   mutual
creativity" (Blom & Chaplin, 1982, p. 184). Further research on creative "systems" may tell us more about what
happens in this kind of exchange and how people might function constructively as co-participants in a creative
process.

References
Bereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Blom, L. A. & Chaplin, L. T. (1982). The intimate act of choreography. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Cole, M. & Engestrom, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
    cognitions: Psychological and educational implications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
diSessa, A. A. & Sherin, B. L. (1998). What changes in conceptual change? International Journal of Science Education, 20
    (10), 1155-1191.
Flower, L. & Hayes, J. R. (1994). A cognitive process theory of writing. In R. B. Ruddell, M. R. Ruddell, and H. Singer
    (Eds.) Theoretical models and processes of reading, 4th edition. Newark, Delaware: International Reading Association,
    928-950.
Goodwin,   C. (November,  1993).  The  blackness  of black:  Color categories      as situated practice. Discourse tools  and
    reasoning: Situated cognition and technologically supported environments. Lucca, Italy.
Harper, D. (1987). Working knowledge: Skill and community in a small shop. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keller, C. H. & Keller, J. D. (1996a). Cognition and tool use: The blacksmith at work. Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press.
Keller, C. H. & Keller, J. D. (1996b). Thinking and acting with iron. In S. Chaiklin and J. Lave (Eds.), Understanding
    practice: Perspectives on activity and context. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 125-143.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics, and culture in everyday life. Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press.
Paley, V. G. (1981). Wally's stories. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Salomon, G.,  Ed. (1993). Distributed cognitions: Psychological    and educational      implications.  Cambridge:  Cambridge
    University Press.
Schon, D. A. (1990). The design process. In V. A. Howard (Ed.) Varieties of thinking. New York, NY: Routledge
Scribner, S. (1997). Mind in action: A functional approach to thinking. In E. Tobach, R. J. Falmagne, M. B. Parlee, L.M.
    Martin,   & A. S. Kapelman   (Eds.), Mind and    social practice: Selected     writings of  Sylvia Scribner. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press.
Stevens, R. (1999). Disciplined perception: Comparing the development of embodied mathematical processes at work and
    school. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
Stevens, R. & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In M. Lampert & M. L.
   Blunk (Eds.), Talking mathematics in school: Studies of teaching and learning. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press, pp. 107-149.

                                                       205
