            Emerging Social Engineering in the Wireless Classroom

                                   Shelley Goldman, Roy Pea & Heidy Maldonado
                                    and the WILD Team @ Stanford University
                                      Tel: (650) 723-8422, Fax: (650) 725-7412
                  Email: sgoldman@stanford.edu, roypea@stanford.edu, heidym@cs.stanford.edu

         Abstract: Code It! fosters mathematics learning environments where pre-algebra students use
         handheld technologies to confidently and enjoyably explore and learn about functions. The
         resources we developed--server-based and handheld software and paper-based student and
         teacher texts--were packaged as a 20-session unit on code making and breaking and designed
         to boost students' understanding of mathematical functions and their facility with the multiple
         representations of tables, graphs and symbols. We field tested the wireless system with two
         teachers and 120 middle school students during a five week summer school, and conducted
         studies on the features and function of the technology as a learning and teaching resource. We
         report on project development and research, focusing on what we learned about the strengths
         and   difficulties of wireless  handheld    technology in  the mathematic   classroom,      and the
         emerging social engineering that helped students overcome the technological constraints.

1. Introduction: Addressing a Need
         Global    concern  to raise   lukewarm  achievement    results on  standardized    tests and    international
comparisons across schools, particularly within math and science realms increases the demands upon unprepared
and already overburdened teachers. The Code It! Materials ญญ technology and real world based ญญwere designed
to address   this challenge,   capitalizing on developing  technology   for stimulating   high  performance     while
providing a satisfying, successful learning experience on the topic of functions. Code It! features multiple
representations   of functions to  aid learners' development    of rigorous algebra  skills and   is inspired by  the
curriculum   unit, Codes,   Inc, developed   by  the Middle-school   Mathematics    through  Applications     Project
(MMAP), which teachers found helpful for transitioning to the use of technology and more applications-based
curriculum materials (Lichtenstein, 1998).

         Technology    should  be  providing   tools to support the  activities of mathematics    classrooms.   Data
gathering, pattern finding, spatial thinking, working and linking multiple representations, are all possible with
computers, yet many problems have accompanied classroom computer use. Even when researchers developed
compelling exemplars (Institute for Research on Learning, 1998; Roschelle, 2001), changes in organizational,
social, and  pedagogical    practices with  computers   produced   high hurdles  (Goldman,   2001;    Means,  2001).
Recently, the combination of increased access, increasing teacher knowledge, decreasing technology costs, and
new portable devices is creating a synergy for new possibilities. With a price tag lower than even the graphing
calculators math classes require, greater portability than the slimmest laptops due to their low weight and
wireless networking, and computing power comparable to a 1995 desktop or 1997 laptop(1), handhelds thrive
across school campuses, often integrated with cellular phones, and with many of the same common productivity
applications that appear on desktops. Early studies of handheld technology use are modest yet suggestive of how
they might best be applied (Soloway, 1999; Curtis, 2002; Luchini, 2002; Vahey, 2002; Roschelle, 2003; Tatar, in
press), and the handhelds' beaming ability lets users exchange information easily by direct communication
through  infrared  beaming,    and has been  used to  control audiovisual   equipment  in   the classroom,   to share
applications, text messages, audio clips, contact information, drawings, and data (Batista, 2001; Pownell and
Bailey, 2001) through a simple physical gesture, even without typing or selecting the receiver's username or
identifier.

         The combination of versatile modular hardware, integrated with many of the applications of task-
specific devices (such as graphing calculators), and full-blown computers (including participatory simulation
software,   e-mail   readers,  web  browsers,   compatible  or  reduced   versions  of  Microsoft's      productivity
applications), plus their calendar and organizational functions, make these devices particularly appealing and
many thousands of classrooms across the United States are acquiring them. Because of their cost and capabilities,

                                                      222
handhelds are perceived as holding the potential for democratizing access to the technology for all students, and
of allowing educational researchers unprecedented access to students' records and interactions: from studying
social networks at school through the students' beaming logs, to comparisons between the intended curriculum,
the taught curriculum, and the learned curriculum, and analysis of the effectiveness of "probeware" applications
(where  students  record real-world  data on their handhelds through  physical probes for    later analysis) and
participatory simulations in the classrooms. Instead of four or more students sharing a desktop machine, students
can collaborate by fluidly sharing information across devices, or even comparing results by looking at each
other's screens.

        These are promising trends, and to tap the potential in Code It! we developed representations that can be
easily manipulated in an engaging collaborative learning context for deepening understanding of algebraic
formalisms (ITEA, 2000; PCAST 1997).

2. The Setting and Approach
        Our research questions are aimed at uncovering the strategies that teachers use to orchestrate the use of
handhelds, and identifying the obstacles and affordances they interact with in using Code It! materials and
technologies. We partnered with the Stanford Teacher Education Program and the Santa Clara, CA Schools to
use Code It! with all of the district middle school students in their summer school program for our 20-session
field test with two teachers over a five-week period. Each teacher had 60 students split between two consecutive
100 minute class sessions: one teacher used handheld iPaq computers (PDAs); the other teacher used Compaq
Tablet PCs. Approximately 40% of each 110 minute class period was dedicated to encoding and decoding
activities with the Code It! materials, with the students separated into four-person groups that remained relatively
stable throughout  the intervention. The  classroom  activities and software implemented     remained  the same
throughout both hardware platforms: our present analysis concentrates on only the two PDA classrooms.

        We collected several data streams, including observational data, videotapes of teachers and the four-
member student groups used in the classrooms, problem-solving and informational interviews with student
dyads, and pre- and post-testing of mathematics knowledge. These methods, of observing and videotaping
classroom field tests of materials and feeding back results into the design, enable the development team to define
areas for revision based on the use of the materials under real classroom conditions (Brown, 1992; Cobb, 2003;
DBRC, 2003). The cycle of development and field test supports our learning about how teachers and students
appropriate these materials and how best to iteratively improve the design for achieving the intended teaching
and learning goals (and new ones that might emerge).

        The project was structured around three strands of activity: materials development, supporting the
teachers, and field test research in the classroom. As we address each strand below we emphasize the lessons
learned on how social engineering ญ a term that is often misused in both meaning and purpose by the hacker
community ญ can overcome technological constraints and lead to learning gains for students.

                                Figure 1: Student groups working on Code It!

                                                    223
Materials Development
         We created a technology-integrated 20-session curriculum unit on introduction to functions, with a code
making and breaking theme. The unit was developed to bring alive in classroom activity the functionality of the
Code It! application with pre-algebra content. The unit places algebra learning in a real-world context--making
and breaking secret codes (Singh, 2000). Students can challenge others to break their codes to determine message
content. The materials are structured so that students must examine properties of functions in general, learn to
distinguish among "families" of functions (e.g., linear vs. quadratic) as well as learn properties of each family
(such as effects of  changes  in constants to graph).    Connections  among  symbols,     tables and graphs are
emphasized in both the software and text materials.

         Exploiting the handhelds' wireless connectivity, students can create and exchange codes easily, and
records of these transactions can be captured on the server for future analysis, so that the PDA display for any
student at any particular time can be recreated. The server also acts as a repository for text and codes created by
the teacher and students, providing an easy way to share codes among groups and to distribute practice problems.
It is this promise of engaging technology that promotes increased interactions with mathematics and embedded
assessment activities that we hope to promote. Code It! software is built to exploit an in-room wireless network
allowing students to work   on codes together in    groups and  to share codes between    groups.  Each PDA   is
connected wirelessly to a teacher's workstation. The teacher's station, shown in Figure 3, runs administrative
software so that the teacher can control and monitor which students are logged into the server, assign them to
groups, create and distribute practice problems, and open an observer window to display any group's current
state. The observer window is particularly important for teachers because the small display size of the handhelds
makes it more difficult to monitor group work in the traditional "over the shoulder" manner. In addition, the
server logs each group's activity, allowing a researcher or teacher to reconstruct the precise ways in which
students were using the software and solving the math problems.

Figure 2: Three Code It! representations on a student's PDA: The expression and graphical screen view of a code
                      solution, the frequency tables' view and the function table's view.

         Each student PDA runs Code It! software for creating plaintext, for making and breaking codes, and for
uploading and downloading text and codes from the server. Code It! software is written in Java to allow for
portability across platforms and for wireless communication. When making or breaking codes, the student's
screen displays the encoding function (or current guess) and the graphs and tables that represent the function and
the coded text, as Figure 2 illustrates. These representations include the function's expression itself, a graph of
the function, a function table, and word and letter frequency tables. Students change the values of the function's
coefficient, exponent, constant, and offset by clicking with the handheld's stylus on the small arrows that appear
immediately below    (to decrease) and above  (to    increase) each of these terms on     the expression. These
representations were selected to encourage students' fluency with multiple representations of functions, a central
element of secondary math curriculum (NCTM 1989, 2000), as well as to foster collaboration within the student
groups, rather than to create an ideal coding tool. Any change made by one student immediately propagates to

                                                     224
the other students in his or her group through their server linkage, so the PDAs within a group always display the
same function and text. As we discuss in the next section, to foster communication among group members and
increase the diversity of information available to the group for the coding or decoding task, students were
encouraged through assigned group roles that rotated across days, so that all students took on all roles, to focus
on a different representation per teammate. When a group has successfully created or broken a code, they receive
a congratulatory message from the teacher's station, which also records their problem and solution with the
corresponding time-stamp.

Importance of Teaching to Code It! Success
         The teaching component turned out to be as important as the materials and software in ensuring that
students get   a well  structured, engaging and  deep  mathematical   learning      experience  through   Code    It!
Professional development included three days of training and planning with the teacher partners as well as just in
time, in-class support.  The  workshop  included an  introduction to the technology      and  software,  as well  as
discussion and revisions of the curriculum unit and activities. Just-in-time daily consultations ranged from
strategic advice on classroom management techniques, to math and technology specific problem solving while
implementing the unit, often as a result of the teachers' lack of prior experience with the devices. Teachers were
central to the   curriculum's  success in the classroom.  They   innovated by       creating  tasks, activities, and
explanations,  and  by setting into motion  social rules for encouraging  appropriate     forms   of  mathematical
discourse and technology use.

         Turning the attentions of students in the Code It! classroom to the mathematics took a great deal of
social engineering on the part of the teachers and the development team. The team had to mitigate the effects of
the widely heterogeneous groups ญ in terms of previous mathematics knowledge, English language dominion,
socio-economical levels, race, gender, and age ญ and the constraints of the technology. During the teacher
preparation workshop, we decided to introduce rotating social roles within the groups to ensure that all students
had a chance to work with each tool and representations during the problem solving process. However, once
students learned to code and decode using the PDAs, they forged ahead without clear group structures, leading to
heated discussions within the group on recording and changing privileges. We worked with the teaching staff to
design social roles that would foster group collaboration, rather than competition.

         Linking the process roles of (1) recorder, (2) presenter, (3) publisher and (4) equipment manager to the
different code representations in the software, and rotating these roles daily, had several positive effects in
addition to resolving much of the inter-group conflict. Role based pedagogy and "group-worthy" tasks have been
shown to serve as powerful supports for heterogeneous grouped students (Cohen & Lotan, 1997), and with Code
It! they contributed to increased engagement for more students in code analysis and breaking activities, provided
a vehicle for teachers to engage students in content-based conversations, and overcame some of the technological
constraints that are discussed in detail below. The student in charge of taking notes (the recorder) one day would
also be responsible for monitoring the function graph as the student publisher altered the coefficient, exponent
and constant of the function, while the equipment manager and presenter monitored the frequency and function
tables, respectively. The next day, roles would rotate so that all students gained experience at interpreting and
communicating key indicators for each representation that signaled a closer match between the encoding and
decoding functions.

         In addition to group roles, another rule was introduced stating that: "all students in a group must be able
to explain the strategies and routes to solutions in order to receive credit," which lead to increased team
cooperation in heterogeneous groups. Enforcement of these rules, both during in-class presentations and during
mathematical activities, often involved the teacher and student teacher querying any student from the group
about their strategy and solution, and was facilitated by wall posters reminding students of the rules and rotating
assignments. After instituting these social rules new patterns emerged, and we observed multiple instances of the
students who took problem-solving approaches talking with those who usually guessed or seemed uninvolved. In
addition to this knowledge sharing we recorded an increase in consistency of students' performance over time.
This  teacher-led social engineering   improved group  relations and engaged        students more deeply  with    the
software and the mathematics under study.

         Teachers appropriated the technology into their teaching practices increasingly throughout the summer,
as their familiarity and confidence with the tools increased. They assessed students' work and needs, developed
activities and code breaking problems to scaffold students' understanding, bridging the gap between simple and

                                                   225
complex code breaking problems in the curriculum. Teachers relied on the server screen to keep track at a
distance of which students were on-line and which groups were most active. As Figure 3 illustrates, a circle
represented each student in a group, and its color changed when the student connected to the server. Teachers
monitored group activity through the observer windows, which presented information in exactly the same way
group members viewed it, as if the teacher was another teammate, albeit virtual. These multiple views into the
groups' activities enabled the teacher to troubleshoot for students who were having log-on issues, as well as to
visit groups that were lagging behind in the decoding problems. Furthermore, both teachers used projection
equipment with their PDAs, so that they and their students could discuss with visual aids the various strategies
for code breaking, as well as demonstrate how the different Code It! tools could be used. These activities
illustrate the robustness of the software package, and how teachers made it compatible with their teaching
practices.

Technology Design and Performance
          Constraints imposed by the technology in everyday teaching practice were many and ranged from
overload delays during whole class log-on, to the lengthy scrolling screen with multiple representations of data,
to the fact that the system could log only group work. Specifically, three features of Code It! were shown to need
reworking during the classroom test: (1) how mathematical representations and tools are organized; (2) the
choice to base the system on group activities and interaction over individual acts; and, (3) the design and
usability  of record keeping functions--potentially    so promising with wireless technology.       Given that our
developing time for this first version was only twelve weeks, we are looking forward to correcting these three
shortcoming in the next software release, but until then let us consider each of these three issues in greater depth:

          The Code It! student PDA screen features a vertically lengthy set of representations for the function
under consideration, which students scrolled through to focus on their assigned view, as Figure 2 illustrates.
These representations are: the encoded and decoded text, the manipulable mathematical function expression, a
graph of the function, a function table, and word and letter frequency tables. The word frequency analysis data
representation suffered from the system's delay when handling longer codes than three or four sentences, and
until student roles were established, the vertical scrolling layout preferenced the graphical representation over
others, since it was directly below the manipulable function. The group process and daily rotation of assigned
roles for students, attaching each teammate to one of the representations per day, was a compromise between the
constraints of the system and the ways students could best benefit from the representations available. Yet
although all students gained experience with each representation and the stylus wars for control of the encoding
process were resolved in favor of strict, daily roles, some students became alienated, discouraged, and in some
instances bored, particularly if they had a less-than-critical role for the day. Through this field test, we were able
to deduce that the multiple representation capabilities of the software are a strength and real resource for
mathematical work and learning. A question that now remains for investigation is how structured or unstructured
students' access to those representations should be.

          As we consider the redesign of the system, not only will interface and display constraints ญ such as
button-linked screens instead of a longer scrolling window ญ have to be addressed, but also the underlying
system architecture. Although having a portion of the data displayed for interpretation on each student's PDA
made for within group collaborative learning, it meant that on any day a student had the opportunity to relate to
only one view of the data, and that Code It! activities outside the group were not enabled. That is, students could
not practice encoding and code breaking on their own, nor could they draw parallels between representations by
comparing them side-by-side. Excitement for exploration of the software turned to frustration ญ particularly in
the first sessions with Code It! ญ until all teammates had experienced the different roles and representations.
Schools also rely on individual accountability, and the Code It! system was unable to account for individual
problem solving activity. This field test has proven that we must also support individual activities within Code
It!, and we are exploring potential avenues that would maintain support for collaborative learning.

          Our design decision was to bias the function of the system to support groups over individual students,
and the architecture of the system made the server act as a gatekeeper, transmitting changes from one PDA to all
the others within a team, and recording them for later retracing of strategies. However, after this field test we
believe that the server can do much more with this information without waiting until class is over. We observed
that student groups quickly developed strategies to break codes, which were shared approximately once a week
with the whole classroom. Some of these strategies depended excessively on a simplistic approaches, such as

                                                      226
curve-fitting functions through the graph that usually got the students within range of a correct code. Many of the
students determined the exponent graphically, and often the lead coefficient as well by adjusting the graph.
Others consistently sought out single, two, and three- letter words, as well as mappings for the most common
letter in the English language ("e") as a path for breaking codes. We are discussing incorporating a prediction
capability to the software, which could alert the teacher or team itself when a group is in danger of depending
solely on a particular pattern of code breaking. Moreover, as the students presentations of  decoding attempts
showed, when faced with reconstructing all steps, students needed access to records of their transactions and
solutions shortly, before the end of class.

            Figure 3: Teacher's view on the server, with observing windows for every group in the classroom

3. Findings to Date
       Preliminary findings include analysis of pre- and post-tests, and analysis of observations, videotapes,
and interviews. We report on progress on math test items, and video analysis that indicates increased sharing of
mathematics and use of software representations in the groups. Results of the pre- and post-tests in the PDA class
(N=45) with our targeted student groups are very promising. The mean increase from pre- to post tests was eight
percentage points, with great variability in whether groups functioned well (a fertile area for subsequent studies,
as in Barron, 2003). In four of six focus groups students made significant gains, in some cases raising their
scores by 15-30%. The PDA students showed significant gains on test items relating to evaluating exponents and
the graphs of functions. On one graphical item, 44% of students answered correctly on the post-test, as compared
to only 13% on the pre-test.

       These trends are particularly exciting because these results were for students in grades 6 through 8 who
were placed in heterogeneous    groups      regardless of their previous school math course achievement. Many

                                                       227
students in the class had done poorly in sixth or seventh grade math, and were required to attend the summer
academy to advance to the next grade, while some students had completed the first year of algebra. The teacher's
recommendation and innovative social structures encouraged the more skilled algebra students to help others,
and the pre- and post-test results showed that these interactions may have had an impact on achievement.
Currently, we   are analyzing     the activities  and  progress   of four  groups of students   in the two  handheld
classrooms, which we captured through 120 hours of classroom interaction video, the server's records, and code-
breaking strategy interviews with twelve pairs (N=24) of students in these chosen groups at the conclusion of the
program.

          Future plans for the project include a significant redesign of the software for version 2, such that no
representation is privileged over others, as the graph view was preferred in this version over the function table,
letter frequency and word frequency table representation. Depending on the more familiar graph led some
observed groups to follow simplistic decoding strategies that comparatively did not improve their dominion of
functions  as  much    as  their peers', such  as predicting the   range   and  domain of the encoding    function by
methodically changing values in the function until the axis labels came within the range of the traditional
alphabet.

          We seek to address the ideal balance between scaffolding for collaboration and individual exploration of
the encoded functions, within the Code It! software environment, so as to lessen opportunities for disruptive
stylus-wars. Our upcoming iteration will incorporate a flexible grouping mechanism, while maintaining both the
appeal of collaboration and software robustness that made this first experience with Code It! successful. We are
also considering ways to decouple the individual PDAs from the system. This would allow for students to
explore and problem-solve individually as well as in groups, and as well as provide opportunities for "anytime,
anywhere computing", home and family connections.

Endnote
(1) The comparison is based on the reported clock speeds of the Toshiba Libretto (70CT : Pentium MMX 120 MHz), a PC
    laptop introduced in 1997; the Apple Macintosh 7200, a desktop computer introduced in 1995, which could go 120
    MHz,   and the latest  Palm  Tungsten T handheld   introduced in 2003, which on average can reach 120Mhz  as well.
    Information    for this   comparison   was   obtained  from: http://www.priceminister.com/offer/buy/1192850/PR030,
    http://www.apple-history.com/7200.html, http://www.palm.com/products/handhelds/tungsten-t/specs.html, March 2003.

References
Batista, E. "Debating the merits of palms in class." Wired News, Available online:
          <http://www.wired.com/news/school/0,1383,45863,00.html> August 23, 2001
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 307-359.
Brown,  A.  (1992).    Design    Experiments:  Theoretical  and   Methodological   Challenges   in Creating Complex
          Interventions in Classroom Settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2). 141-178.
Cobb, P.,  Confrey,    J., diSessa, A.,  Lehrer,  R., & Schauble,    L. (2003).  Design Experiments in Educational
          Research. Educational Researcher, 32 (1), 9-13.
Cohen, E. G., & Lotan, R. A. (1997). Working for equality in heterogeneous classrooms: Sociological theory in
          practice. New York: Teachers College Press.
"Consolidated High School District 230: Schools of Thought" < http://www.d230.org/Handheld/> June 2001.
Curtis, M., Luchini, K., Bobrowsky, W., Quintana, C., & Soloway, E. (2002). Handheld Use in K-12:                     A
          Descriptive Account. Proceedings of The First IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile
          Technologies in Education (WMTE'02, pp. 22-30). New York: IEEE Press. .
Design-Based   Research     Collective.  (2003).  Design-based    research:  An  emerging   paradigm  for educational
          inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32 (1), 5-8.
Goldman, S. (2001). Technology in the Mathematics Classroom: Guidelines from the Field. ERIC Update. ERIC
          Clearinghouse     on   Information  and  Technology,     22   (2). <http://ericit.org/newsletter/Volume22-
          2/goldman.shtml>
International Technology Education Association (2000). Standards for Technological Literacy: Content for the
          Study of Technology. Reston, VA: ITEA.
Lichtenstein, G. Weisglass, J., & Erickan-Alper, K. (1998). Final Evaluation Report: Middle-school Mathematics
          through Applications Project. Denver, CO: Quality Evaluation Design.

                                                        228
Luchini, K., Bobrowsky, W., Curtis, M., Quintana, C., & Soloway, E. (2002). Supporting learning in context:
         Extending learner-centered design to the development of handheld educational software. In Proceedings
         of The   First IEEE  International  Workshop    on  Wireless and  Mobile  Technologies    in   Education
         (WMTE'02, pp. 107-111). New York: IEEE Press.
Means, B., Penuel, W. R., & Padilla, C. (2001). The Connected School: Technology and Learning in High
         School. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass.
Middle-school Mathematics through Application Project Final Report to the NSF (1998). Menlo Park, CA:
         Institute for Research on Learning.
National Council   of   Teachers of Mathematics.     (1989). Curriculum   and evaluation standards    for school
         mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics: (2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics. Reston,
         VA
Pownell, D., Bailey, G. "Getting a handle on handhelds." Electronic School. Available online:
         <http://www.electronic-school.com>. June 2001
President's Committee of Advisors on Science and Technology and Panel on Educational Technology (1997,
         March). Report to the President on the Use of Technology to Strengthen K-12 Education in the United
         States.
Roschelle, J., Pea, R., Hoadley, C., Gordin, D., & Means, B. (2001). Changing how and what children learn in
         school with collaborative cognitive technologies. In M. Shields (Ed.), The Future of Children (Special
         issue on Children and Computer Technology, published by the David and Lucille Packard Foundation,
         Los Altos, CA), Volume 10, Issue 2, pp. 76-101.
Roschelle, J., Patton, C., & Pea, R. (2003). To unlock the learning value of wireless mobile devices, understand
         coupling.  In  Proceedings  of The    First IEEE   International Workshop   on  Wireless   and   Mobile
         Technologies in Education (WMTE'02, pp. 2-7). New York: IEEE Press.
Singh, S. (2000). The Code Book: The Science of Secrecy from Ancient Egypt to Quantum Cryptography. New
         York: Anchor Books.
Soloway, E., Grant, W., Tinker, R., Roschelle, J., Mills, M., Resnick, M., Berg, R., & Eisenberg, M. (1999).
         Science in the palm of their hands. Communications of the ACM, 42(8), 21-26.
Tatar, D., Roschelle, J., Vahey, P., & Penuel, W. R. (in press). Handhelds go to school. IEEE Computer.
Vahey, P., & Crawford, V. (2002, September). Palm Education Pioneers Program: Final Evaluation Report.
         Menlo Park, CA: SRI International. (http://www.palmgrants.sri.com).

Acknowledgments
The WILD Team @ Stanford members contributed to the Code It! work reported herein. Thanks to Toby White,
Lee Martin, Sarah Walter, Gloria Miller, Mike Mills, John Murray, from Stanford University, and to Nicolai
Scheele and Wolfgang Effelsberg, from University of Mannheim (Germany). Special thanks to our partnering
teachers and their students, the Stanford Teacher Education Program and the Stanford student teachers, and the
Santa Clara School District. This project was supported by Stanford Center for Innovation in Learning (SCIL)
and the Wallenberg Global Learning Network. We hankfully acknowledge an HP mobile wireless computing
equipment grant to SCIL.

                                                     229
