                  Understanding Collaborative Activity Systems:
       The Relation of Tools and Discourse in Mediating Learning

                                  Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver & Ellina Chernobilsky
                     Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick NJ 08901-1183
                                    Tel: 732-932-7496, Fax: 732-932-6829
                            Email: chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu, ellinac@eden.rutgers.edu

        Abstract: The goal of the current research was to establish a methodology for examining
        students' learning processes in online collaborative environments. In particular, we examine
        the relation between tools, discourse, and learning from the perspective of activity theory. We
        apply this methodology to examine the interaction and tool use of two groups of pre-service
        teachers who participated in an online video case analysis activity using STEP system ­ a
        collaborative environment designed to guide students through online problem-based learning
        tasks. The goal of the activity for both groups was to collaboratively analyze the video case
        and then individually apply learning sciences concepts to a lesson design. To examine how
        tools shape the activity, while the activity shapes collaboration and discourse during the task,
        we employed chronological representations of discourse and tool-related activity (CORDTRA)
        to compare learning processes in two groups.

Introduction
        A sociocultural view of learning proposes that interaction among learners, teachers, and mediating tools
supports active thinking and promotes knowledge construction (Engeström, 1999; Kozulin, 1998; Vygotsky,
1978). This is particularly crucial in studying technology-mediated learning, which often involves the design and
analysis of activity systems to promote knowledge construction.   Activity systems have often been studied using
ethnographic case studies (e.g., Cole & Engeström, 1993).   Another approach to studying activity systems can be
accomplished with mixed methods that permit fine-grained analyses of learning discourse and its relation to tool
use.  In this paper, we briefly summarize activity theory and articulate a methodology, adapted from Luckin
(2003) that can be used to examine how collaborative discourse and tools mediate knowledge construction in an
online problem-based learning activity.

Activity Theory
        Activity theory provides a framework for understanding learning activity as it tries to explain the
changes in human practices over time.    This is consistent with an increasing realization that learning does not
happen in isolation but is embedded in activity systems and their sociocultural context (Engeström, 1999).
Learning environments     are complex   activity systems that  involve multiple agents,  physical    artifacts, and
psychological tools  that mediate learning.  According   to this theory, each activity system is composed       of a
subject (a person or persons directly involved in activity), an object (the goal of an activity), mediating artifacts
(including material and psychological tools that aid in the achievement of the goal), community (people who are
involved indirectly), division of labor, and rules (the socially established regulations that drive the activity). The
notion of tool use and mediation is a cornerstone of activity theory. Tools shape the subject's interaction with
reality and also reflect prior experiences of others. Tools are used and transformed during the activity itself.
Therefore, they serve as a means of enculturation and transmission of social knowledge. One such tool that
groups use in problem solving is discourse. Discourse is important for internalization and externalization, two
basic processes that can be found in every activity. Internalization is a process of transferring material from
social to personal domains, while externalization is the process where the material is introduced back to the
social environment   (Valsiner,   1997;   Engeström,  1999).   These   intertwined processes   provide   for    the
transformation of knowledge from social to individual and back. Developing analytic tools is a challenge for
understanding how knowledge transformations are mediated.

Chronologically-ordered Representations of Discourse and Tool-related Activity
        Understanding multifaceted activity systems is complex because it is difficult to capture the chronology
and  simultaneity of events.   One way   to accomplish   this is to construct parallel timelines that  permit   the

                                                    254
researcher to look at the relationship between collaborative activity of interest, such as discourse and patterns of
tool use. Luckin (2003) developed the CORDFU methodology to document the relation between dialogue and
features used in a hypermedia system, and has since extended it to look at collaborative technology-mediated
activity. Hmelo-Silver (2003a) generalized this tool to construct chronologically-ordered representations of
discourse  and  tool-related activity (CORDTRA)     to examine    the dialectical relationship   between     students'
drawing activity and their collaborative discourse in a problem-based learning session. The CORDTRA diagram
helped uncover important relationships between drawing activity and causal discourse.     In this paper we apply
the CORDTRA methodology to examine mediated learning using the STEP system. The STEP system provides
a suite of tools and an activity structure for computer-supported collaborative learning (Derry, in press).

The STEP System and Activity Structure
          The STEP system is an online learning environment, designed to support students as they engage in
problem-based learning (Derry, in press). The goal of the system is to provide pre-service teachers with an
opportunity to study the learning sciences using videocases as contexts to engage in collaborative lesson design.
The system contains three parts: an online problem-based learning environment (tools that scaffold students'
online individual and group work), an online library of video cases and a hypermedia textbook, the Knowledge
Web (KW).     The KW is a cognitive flexibility hypertext (Spiro et al., 1992), which provides information about
learning sciences theories and concepts. The videocases consist of minicases that are indexed to appropriate
concepts in the KW. This site has twelve steps that guide students through the activity. Some steps are designed
for individual work (e.g. phases 1 and 3), others are designed for group work (e.g., phase 2).   Figure 1 shows an
example of the road map screen of this twelve-step system.

                                             Figure 1. STEP road map
Representing a Complex Activity System in Use
          The CORDTRA     methodology     is well suited    to analyzing collaborative  activity in a    technology-
mediated activity system such as STEP.    The setting for this research was a preservice teacher education course
in the learning sciences at  a large  Midwestern  university.    The participants were  two groups   of     preservice
teachers who engaged in an online video case analysis activity that lasted seven weeks. One group had five
members and the other had six members. The videocase that both groups analyzed showed a student teacher in a
social studies classroom using problem-based learning (Hmelo-Silver, 2003b). Both groups had the same tutor to
facilitate the learning. The role of the tutor was twofold.  First, the tutor's role was to assist the students with the
learning process by guiding them through the steps of the activity, asking the questions that encouraged them to
think deeply, and monitoring their progress and schedule. Second, the tutor helped guide the students in using the
STEP tools.

          The goal or object of the activity was to apply learning science concepts to the analysis of a videocase,
and later, to individually apply those concepts to design their own instruction. The activity system is represented
in Figure 2.  The patterns of interactions, tools, and learning were quite different for the two groups.    We use the
CORDTRA diagrams in conjunction with examples of discourse to examine the relationship between the activity
structure that was actually enacted, the STEP tools, and the discourse. The two major sources of data of primary
interest to this research were computer generated log files and online student/tutor discourse. The hypothesis that
drove the research was that tools shape the activity, while activity in turn shapes collaboration and discourse.
Thus, our goals for this research were to develop and adapt analytic tools that would allow us to examine (1) the
interaction among the group members and the tutor, (2) the use of technology as a mediating tool in the activity,
and (3) how the use of technology affects the division of labor in the activity. We have reported on goals one and
three elsewhere (Chernobilsky, Hmelo-Silver, & DelMarcelle, 2003).     In this paper, we focus on the second goal
as we examine how the CORDTRA technique allows us to examine the relation between discourse, tool use, and
the  object     of  the  group    phase      of  the   activity    (constructing    a   conceptual          analysis).

                                                     255
                                         Figure 2. STEP activity system

Constructing CORDTRA
        Since  the data that we  collected   were  scattered in  different databases (e.g. log   files,  threaded
discussion), the first important issue that we faced was to gather and organize the data from these various sources
into a manageable and user-friendly structure that would facilitate data analysis. We created a data file for each
group. Each file contains three parts. Part one logs the date and time for each hit on the STEP system, the student
id and user name, group number, sites attended during each log-in, students' online discourse and the personal
journals that students kept while working on the problem. All these data were compiled in chronological order.
Part two contains the group work that the students produced as a result of their research and discussions. Group
white boards are placed in this section of the data file. Part three of each file contains analytic coding for each
entry in parts one and two. Since many of the entries were more than one sentence long, it was possible for more
than one idea to be discussed in a single entry. If an entry contained multiple ideas, these were parsed when the
topic changed.

Coding the Discourse
        The discourse of each group was coded for student collaboration, questioning, monitoring and statement
complexity. These categories are indicative of different aspects of cognitive engagement (Hmelo-Silver, 2003a).
Each of these categories was broken into further, more detailed subcategories. Examples of each category are
shown in Table 1. Student collaboration included introduction of new ideas, modification of previously stated
ideas, agreement   or disagreement with other group members, acknowledgement of other group members, and
summarizing ideas. Summarizing ideas serves an important purpose in this setting as it helps the group establish
common ground. In addition the content of the talk was coded into task, tool, and personal talk. The complexity
of an idea was coded as either a simple assertion or a more complex explanation.     Statements were coded as
monitoring if they involved group or individual monitoring, planning, and self-directed learning.  In addition to
coding statements, we were   interested  in the questions that the  students and tutor asked.    We    coded two
categories of questions: meta-questions/ prompts and informational questions.     The first type of question is
important because it suggests that the students were engaged in high-level thinking about their task and the
second type suggests  that they are engaging    with each other  as sources  of information.     The information
questions include both low-level factual requests and higher-level questions that make connections between
concepts and between concepts and cases. An example of the latter type of question is show in Table 1.
        Students used several online tools during the activity: the twelve-step online learning environment, the
video library with the case to be analyzed, the hypermedia textbook--the KW, discussion board, research library,
group report tool, lesson plans, notes and help tools. The group report tool served as a shared space for students
to post and edit their mini-case analyses. For ease of analysis, only tools that were frequently used are included
in the CORDTRA      diagrams. One   issue   in constructing  the CORDTRA      diagrams  is to    include enough

                                                   256
information so that they are useful but not so much information that the analyst is overloaded.               In our initial
attempt at this analysis, we included additional types of coding, the individual student and tutor contributions,
and finely coded analysis of conceptual discourse and specific concepts browsed on the KW (Chernobilsky et al.,
2003).   What we learned from that is that less can be more.      Although this initial analysis allowed us to see some
gross patterns in the interaction, we needed to zoom in to better understand the relation between the tools and the
learning activity reflected in the discourse.
Interpreting CORDTRA Diagrams
         Our analysis here focuses on two groups of preservice teachers in their final year of a teacher education
program as they constructed video case analyses as a group followed by individual lesson plans.               These groups
demonstrated different patterns of interactions, tool use, and group products. The CORDTRA diagrams are
shown in Figures 3 and 4 and reflect the seven weeks that the students were working on the system.

Table 2. Examples of coding categories

                 Category                   Example
Collaboration    New Ideas                  I   think that  another  concept  in this     case   is teacher-centered
                                            learning/instruction.
                 Modification                 But, maybe instead of doing so many worksheets every day, you could
                                            incorporate some games or something for learning the vocabulary.
                 Agreement                  I agree with Max in the fact that we need to learn how to professionally
                                            critique a colleague.
                 Disagreement                 I am still going to have to say 3 & 6. I know a lot of people want 2, but
                                            I haven't been convinced that it is the best case to take more indepth
                                            look at. (referring to which minicase # to select for further analysis)
                 Acknowledgement              I have  been  following this discussion    and I   think Jack makes     an
                                            excellent point about argumentation needing a goal but not take it to a
                                            personal level.
                 Summaries                    What we have so far: Jack ­ teacher beliefs, Beth ­ hands on learning,
                                            Ellen-  prior knowledge use Carol ­ cognitive flexibility theory Sylvia
                                            ­ collaborative learning
Content          Task-related               I don't know if I really understand what we are researching for exactly.
                                            A little clarification on this would be appreciated
                 Tool-related                 I know the other day I went back to refer to something in a previous
                                            posting only to lose what I was currently writing, so I hesitate to look it
                                            up now.
                 Personal                   I am at home this weekend and busy with family type stuff and sick
                                            relatives...
Complexity       Simple                     In case 8 I like the concept of questioning.

                 Explanation                I feel like the discomfort we seem to have had with the line of
                                            questioning in this minicase may stem from having a goal that was very
                                            personal to Kyle. This line of questioning my have taken on a trumped
                                            up sense because of Kyles intentions and likely his inexperience as a
                                            teacher.
Monitoring       Monitoring        and      I still want to research prior knowledge with mc#2 but I see that Sam
                 planning                   and Dina want to do classroom management, so I think I may research
                                            transfer?
Question         Meta and prompts           Does that seem   right to you? What other concepts should we consider
                                            for this case?
                 Informational              Does teaching argumentation facilitate critical thinking?

Group 1 began with some initial discussion that was divided between personal, task, and tool talk.          They spent
time exploring the KW, video, and PBL-online. The group continued to engage in discussion as they explored
the affordances of the system. Many new ideas were thrown out to the group at this time and the group moved
through cycles of simple statements and explanations as they were figuring out their task and trying to make a
decision about which minicase to choose for further analysis. For example, one student wrote during this phase
of discussion:

                                                         257
                                                                                                                                LESSON PLANS
                                                                                                                                DISCUSSION     BOARD

                                                                                                                                GROUP REPORT

                                                                                                                                KW
                                                                                                                                VIDEO

                                                                                                                                PBL ONLINE
                                                                                                                                Monitoring   and Planning

                                                                                                                                Explanation

                                                                                                                                Simple  Assertion

                                                                                                                                Collaboration:   Summaries
                                                                                                                                Collaboration:   Disagreements

                                                                                                                               Collaboration:   Acknowledgements

                                                                                                                               Collaboration:    Modifications

                                                                                                                                Collaboration:  New   Ideas

                                                                                                                                Meta   Questions  &  Prompts

                                                                                                                               Information Questions
                                                                                                                                Personal

                                                                                                                                Tool

                                                                                                                                Task
0      250        500        750     1000       1250      1500       1750       2000       2250       2500     2750       3000
                                                          Lines

                                                       Figure 3.     Group 1 CORDTRA

                                                                                                                             LESSON PLANS

                                                                                                                             DISCUSSION BOARD

                                                                                                                             GROUP REPORT

                                                                                                                              KW

                                                                                                                              VIDEO

                                                                                                                              PBL ONLINE

                                                                                                                              Monitoring & Planning

                                                                                                                              Explanation

                                                                                                                              Simple Assertion

                                                                                                                              Collaboration: Summaries

                                                                                                                              Collaboration: Disagreements

                                                                                                                              Collaboration: Acknowledgements

                                                                                                                              Collaboration:  Modifications

                                                                                                                              Collaboration: New Ideas
                                                                                                                              Meta Questions & Prompts

                                                                                                                              Information  Questions

                                                                                                                              Personal

                                                                                                                              Tool

                                                                                                                              Task
  0          250         500         750        1000        1250        1500         1750        2000        2250        2500
                                                            Lines

                                                       Figure 4. Group 2 CORDTRA

                                                                      258
         I think Jack is right about minicase eight because seeing what the students learned about whatever topic
         is rather the whole point of teaching something. At least in language acquisition, the steps are reception
         (hearing ((easiest? skill to acquire)) and reading) and production (speaking and writing ((hardest))) so
         even though we don't have written results in case eight we do have students verbally elaborating on their
         understandings.

After their initial exploration of the Knowledge Web, they moved their focus to the video cases and the PBL-
online activity environment. Thus, the CORDTRA diagram suggests that there was an initial exploration and
proposal of ideas to the group. This group was respectful to each other throughout the activity--there were no
disagreements and they regularly acknowledged each other's ideas.   During this phase of work (approximately
lines 250-1100) there were many questions being asked, both to obtain information from each other and to
monitor their activity as another student noted:

         I would agree with Jack in that I think 2 of the most important concepts in 8 are questioning and
         modeling. I also think that the concept of discourse is important. I guess I would like a better definition
         of the word though- all the glossary said is something about verbal communication, but I think there are
         other ways of looking at it For instance, is the discourse just teacher questions, student answers? Or
         should the teacher try to get the kids to build on one another's ideas and responding to one another's
         comments rather than just answering the teachers questions? i guess that whole idea could go under
         questioning though

         There was a break in the discussion activity once the students identified the concepts they were going to
individually explore.  At this point they went to the KW to research their concepts. The scribe was entering
information into the group report, as the information was being reported and agreed upon by the group. They
made extensive use of the KW and continued to examine the video, which suggests that they were trying to
connect the learning sciences concepts they were researching to the case. The next phase of the activity began as
the group needed to finalize their case analysis.   Several new ideas were introduced and refined. The students
slowed their use of the video first, and then reduced their use of the KW as they refined their group report and
finished the group phase of the activity.   At around this time, discussion of the tools ceased, perhaps as students
were both comfortable with them and their use became a norm that no longer needed to be discussed.    At around
line 2100, the students moved to the individual phase of the activity and constructed individual lesson plans. The
students focused on the KW and left the PBL online until they posted their lesson plans so other members of the
group could comment on them.      Group 1 had fairly delineated phases of activity. Even when the discussion
ended, group members went back to the discussion board and used the PBL online scaffolding for the activity
structure. A great deal of deliberation went on in the group before they began developing the group report. The
final phase of the activity was the phase where students refined their knowledge, prepared their individual
solutions, and provided the learning sciences evidence that their solutions were sound. Virtually no conversation
took place (at the very end of this phase a student posted some comments, but no reply was given to her).
Instead, students were busy learning from the KW.

         The other group was less effective both in their communication and in their writing of the final group
product.   The CORDTRA diagram for group 2 is shown in Figure 4. It shows that only three phases of the
activity are clearly identifiable. These students blended the introductory phase with their discussion phase as this
next example demonstrates:

           Well, I may be the last one to introduce myself, so I am sorry if you have all been waiting for me.
         Anyways, I am Sam Eringburg. Like Dina, I am in the field of Mathematics. Let me start out by telling
         you how I decided on teaching and mathematics... ... OK now to the moment you have all been waiting
         for, the minicases I chose were 2 and 8. But to be honest with you, there were a couple of others I could
         have chosen too. I would just like to choose one with some classroom discussion in it. I think that is the
         most interesting thing to look at.

         There was minimal use of the KW until late in their activity, The only tools that students in group 2
used during this phase were the PBL online environment, discussion board, and video presented for analysis. No
exploration of other tools or the general affordances of the system took place during this phase. Instead, the
students were focused on discussing various concepts. All students, as well as the tutor, were active in the

                                                     259
discussion during this phase. As in Group 1, these students brought in a lot of personal talk. At the same time,
they remained focused on the discussion of the task and the concepts presented in the video. Most of the
questions that students raised were information-seeking questions. During this phase, students brought in a lot of
new ideas (with some modifications). They frequently acknowledged each other and agreed with other group
member's ideas. Unlike Group 1, during this phase, students expressed some disagreements mostly about the
minicases they wanted to analyze and what concepts were important to research in those minicases. It is notable
that this group continued to engage in tool-related talk but shut down the task-related talk.      They were not
questioning the tool use, instead were referring to tools they could use: "If you go to the Prior Knowledge Use
page in the kweb there is a short but good explanation of why it's important for teachers to do KWL activities."

         The "research   and share phase"    began     at about line 1400. During this phase, students   researched
concepts, and reported on the results of their research. During their discussion, they continued their research on
the KW and also began working on their final individual lesson plans. They looked at each other's individual
work and commented on it. At the same time, the frequency of KW use was low; students looked at just a few
concepts, mostly once or twice per concept.   There was a break in the discourse as the students did their research
and began the group report. They monitored their progress in the task as they shared their information with
simple assertions as well as more complex explanations. Again, most of the questions were information-seeking
questions that students asked when they reviewed each other's lessons.      The students acknowledged each other
extensively, but brought in very few new ideas and modifications. The last phase of Group 2's activity was
similar to the last phase of Group 1's activity. There was no discussion taking place.    The students were busy
searching the KW for the concepts they were using in their final lesson plan.

         The final products were different for the two groups.     Group 1 stayed closer to the task of providing a
conceptual analysis. They used each minicase to illustrate different concepts that they discussed.  In the example
shown below, the students connect their conceptual learning to the case as they give examples of how the teacher
in the video, Kyle, modeled metacognition for the students.

         Closely related to metacognition is modeling. There are several times when Kyle tries to demonstrate
metacognition through the modeling process. Kyle overtly models target cognitive behavior asking: What do we
know? What do we need to know?" to allow the students who are new to the self monitoring process to see what
thinking processes   are involved. The     internalization  of  higher ­order thought  processes such   as analysis,
evaluation of arguments, perception, awareness and problem solving provides stronger critical thinking, better
performance in specific domain, and greater possibilities of transfer.

Group 2 was more critical of the teacher and less analytical.      They used the same concepts for both minicases.
The following examples are from their analyses for minicases two and six. There was little elaboration of
conceptual information and more suggestions for the teacher to do things differently.     There is a great deal of
overlap in their analyses for the different minicases.

         In order to facilitate good argumentation in his class Kyle could have set up norms for class discussions
         and teach students how to successfully argue in an academic situation. At the beginning of the
         year/semester, Kyle could have worked with the students to develop a set of classroom norms....One
         idea is to develop a "classroom constitution" and then have the students and teacher sign it.

         It is suggested that Kyle may have prevented this had he set classroom norms right from the start of his
         student teaching experience. These norms would have power and respet [sic] from students if they
         helped create them by means of classroom constitution. In order to facilitate good argumentation in his
         class Kyle could have set up norms for class discussions and teach students how to successfully argue in
         an academic situation. At the beginning of the year/semester, Kyle could have worked with the students
         to develop a set of classroom norms....One idea is to develop a "classroom constitution" and then have
         the students and teacher sign it.

Discussion
         Overall, Group 1 was more effective than Group 2.        Although they ostensibly had the same object of
their activity, a conceptual analysis of the case, the groups used the tools in different ways.   The CORDTRA

                                                       260
diagrams make salient how the different groups demonstrated different patterns of tool use, and while we are
careful to note that no causal claims can be made, the different patterns of tool use suggest hypotheses that might
be explored in further research.    Group 1 stayed close to the video and the KW throughout much of the activity.
There appear to be cycles of watching the video and conducting research in the KW. They summarized their
thinking frequently in the beginning of the activity as they established common understanding of the task.
Alternatively, Group 2 used these tools more sequentially.       They spent time initially watching the video and then
they went to the KW.     They continued summarizing until fairly late in their discussion, and much of this was the
tutor helping to be sure that the group had a joint understanding.   They did not begin working in the group report
until fairly late in the activity and did not appear to spend much time there.    This is in contrast to Group 1, which
went to the group report at the same time they started their independent research.

          This representation raises issues that can be addressed in other analyses.        For example, the contrast in
the tool use and coded discourse between Groups 1 and 2 suggested a need to zoom in on particular segments of
talk and activity to better understand the pattern that is observed on a gross scale (e.g., Chernobilsky et al., 2003).
In addition, these observations in the CORDTRA diagram allow us to form hypotheses that might be tested in
different approaches to facilitation and in how students are oriented to the tools. In addition, we have since taught
the course with different variations on the activity structure and can examine the relationship between these
patterns of tool use and effective learning processes.    The differences in these patterns provide suggestions for
helping students use the tools effectively --which should in turn help learners see how concepts and cases can
inform understanding of each other. For example, Group 1 was more likely to research their concepts in the
context of the KW so that may account for the more coherent final product they generated.

          Activity theory provides a conceptual tool for thinking about learning environments.            Research tools,
such as CORDTRA, provide a practical mechanism for looking at activity systems in general, and patterns of
mediation in particular.   Most importantly, they can help researchers see order in the midst of the complexity of
learning.

References
Chernobilsky, E., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & DelMarcelle, M. (2003, April). Collaborative Discourse, Tools, and Activity in
          Online Problem-Based Learning. Paper presented at the Annual meeting of the American Educational Research
          Association, Chicago IL.
Cole, M. & Engeström, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
          Cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 1 ­ 46). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Derry, S. (in press). ESTEP as a case of theory-based web course design. In A. M. O'Donnell, C. E. Hmelo-Silver & G.
          Erkens (Eds.), Collaborative reasoning, learning and technology. Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y. Engström, R. Miettinen & R. Punamaki
          (Eds.), Perspectives on activity theory (pp. 19-38). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hmelo-Silver,  C.  E. (2003a).  Analyzing   collaborative knowledge    construction:  Multiple       methods  for integrated
          understanding. Computers and Education, (41), 397-420.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2003b). Problem-based learning. In J. W. Guthrie (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Education (Second ed., Vol. 4,
          pp. 1173-1175). New York: MacMillan Reference.
Kozulin, A. (1998). Psychological tools. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Luckin, R. (2003). Between the lines: Documenting the multiple dimensions of computer-supported collaborations.
          Computers & Education, 41, 379-396.
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, P. J., Jacobson, M. J., & Coulson, R. L. (1992). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism, and hypertext:
          Random access instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains. In T. M. Duffy & D. H.
          Jonassen (Eds.), Constructivism and the technology   of instruction: A conversation.  (pp.  57-75). Hillsdale,  NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Valsiner, J. (1997). Magical phrases, human development and psychological ontology. In Cox B. D., Lightfoot, C. (Eds.),
          Sociogenetic perspectives on internalization. (pp. 237-256). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by NSF ROLE Grant #      0107032. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF. We are extremely grateful
for our collaboration with Sharon Derry and Matt DelMarcelle.

                                                      261
