     Socially Relevant Representations in Interfaces for Learning

                                     Christopher M. Hoadley & Joshua A. Kirby
                  314 Keller Building, Pennsylvania State University, University Park PA 16802
                                    Tel: +1 814/863-0415, Fax: +1 814/865-0218
                              Email: icls04@tophe.net, icls04@zealousagenda.com

         Abstract: In this paper we describe a way of looking at how people learn from computer
         interfaces. In particular, we describe the concept of a socially relevant representation,    or a
         representation of social context information (as opposed to domain knowledge information).
         We   describe  known   or   hypothesized mechanisms   by  which   such  representations    might
         facilitate learning, and discuss implications for the design of knowledge media.

Introduction: Context as a Clue to Understanding
         This paper explores the role that representations of social context information can play in learning.
Consider the following experience. Hoadley was a graduate student in an interdisciplinary doctoral program in
science education.   The first year students came from many different backgrounds in the sciences, and were
preparing for an exam to cover readings from a first-year seminar in cognition and education. For many, the
papers read were fairly easy to understand--their methods and findings were clear. Still, they were challenged in
trying to make a coherent whole of the papers they had read to prepare for this exam. To the students, every
paper seemed to have its own goals, emphases, vocabulary, methods, and so on.     There was no sense of whether
similar terms were distinct in meaning or whether they were synonyms for the same idea. The students lacked a
framework with which to integrate the ideas put forth in the papers, and important precondition for deeper
understanding (National Research Council Committee on Learning Research and Educational Practice, 1999).

         They eventually stumbled on a technique that helped them get a sense of their new field.    They grouped
the papers, first historically, and then into "camps" of researchers. Questions like "Would this person have
known about this person?" "What discipline was this person coming from?" or "Would this person have agreed
with this person?"   helped  to sort out the  multiple themes  and traditions and understand    how   they related.
Although none of the students had been told this history, they were able to piece it together by looking at dates,
citations, and institutional affiliations. Although this took place before the Web existed, it is easy to imagine
today that the students might have searched online for each author's career history and CV as well.

                           The Problem                                A Solution?

                            Figure 1. Making sense of a domain via social information.

         The point of this story is that even though reconstructing historical information about these papers made
extra work for the students, it was this extra information that helped to make sense of the research in the papers.
In this paper, we make a case for why social context information deserves a place in interfaces for learning.  We
describe  the concept   of s ocially relevant representations (SRRs) for  interfaces   and  other artifacts. These
representations may have important effects on learning. We present a rationale for why SRRs deserve a place in
educational interface design and explore from a cognitive perspective some ways SRRs may facilitate learning
(see Figure 1).

                                                    262
Representations in Educational Media
         How do we design representations to foster better learning? Obviously, current educational theory
emphasizes a wide variety of learning processes, from apprenticeship and social appropriation to constructivist-
linked discovery learning. Media and information design are an important part of many of these approaches.
While   it is most   closely identified  with     an instructionist  point of view    (Bruner, 1968),  information
representations can be viewed as an important part of the learning environment regardless of the educational
philosophy used.

         A pure instructionist viewpoint might stop at identifying media or representations that accurately and
effectively describe the domain that is being taught (with a relatively uncomplicated view of what "accurately
and effectively" means).  A large body of literature exists that helps define what features effective instructionist
representations must have, ranging from properties of information design, textual chunking, or age-appropriate
language, to the types of media that might best convey certain messages. A textbook would be the classic
example of an educational representation designed for learning in the instructionist approach.

         A cognitive constructivist approach to the use of representations to support learning might be concerned
with additional questions. What are the decoding processes and memory storage processes that allow the learner
to construct an understanding of the representations? How much assimilation vs. accommodation is required to
respond to the representations, and will the representations support or hinder conceptual change processes? For
instance,  a  computer  program   that exposes    students  of physics  to a microworld   where    physical laws are
represented both as images of moving bodies and as graphical force, velocity, and acceleration vectors (perhaps
also as mathematical symbols) (White, 1993) might have been designed to foster a particular type of cognition or
constructivist activity on the learners' part.

         Likewise, representations play an important role in sociocultural models of learning. The acquisition of
literacy, for instance, is often studied as a sociocultural phenomenon, as are learners' practices surrounding
textual representations  as  they learn  to    read  (Ravid &   Tolchinsky,  2002).  This view  of  representational
appropriation extends to other types of representations and learners as well, for instance, representational fluency
forms an important part of the practices of chemistry (Kozma & Russell, 1997) or mathematics (Kaput, 2001;
Kaput, Noss, & Hoyles, 2001) and learners appropriate the use of these specialized representations as part of
their entry   into more expert  practices.     Talmudic-style  textual deconstruction   activities (Klamma,   Jarke,
Hollender,   & Boerner-Klein,    2002)  or     performances  of literacy might    be examples  of  how  educational
representations can be designed to foster learning from the sociocultural perspective.

         Thus, representations do a lot of work in the learning context, regardless of the particular educational
strategy or philosophy. Seeing the representations that form part of the educational environment and trying to
optimize those representations is an important part of the design of instruction. In particular, computers give us
unprecedented ability to create, manipulate, and share representations of a wide variety of types. Understanding
how they do their work, and how we may design them, is vital.

Sensemaking and Representations
         One metaphor for understanding the role these representations play in learning is to think about how
learners come to do sensemaking with educationally motivated representations. A variety of levels of analysis are
possible, from a semiotic symbol-systems level analysis to a media and communications theory analysis to an
instructional design analysis. Here, we choose to examine it from a cognitive perspective.

         Cognitive scientists, especially those concerned with learning, have examined the role representations
can play in learning activities (e.g. diSessa, 1991; Kozma & Russell, 1997; Kozma, Russell, Jones, Marx, &
Davis, 1993; Sandoval et al., 2000). While they share with instructionists and usability engineers the goal of
allowing a learner to apperceive and decode or comprehend representations of information, they also concern
themselves    with how  learners  can  generate     representations and  interact with  them in ways   that  support
conceptual development. To illustrate with a few examples from how representations can help students learn
Newton's laws, diSessa examined how physics students could use the generation of representations about motion
to help them make explicit, refine, and share their underlying conceptualization (diSessa, 1991). White and
Fredericksen (White, 1993; White & Frederiksen, 1998) have examined the ways students can interact with

                                                       263
simulations   that represent  aspects of    physical  motion   to   question their  own  assumptions    and refine  their
understanding. And others have examined how multiple, linked representations can be used to scaffold learners
to reduce cognitive load and aid in creating links between different conceptualizations of the same scientific
phenomena (Kaput, 2001; Kaput et al., 2001; Kozma, Russell, Jones, Marx, & Davis, 1996).

          The  cognitive  perspective    on representations    can  sometimes   collide    with the information   design
perspective and the instructional design perspective. With information design, the goal is often to allow the
greatest  information   density  (Tufte, 1990;   Tufte,   2001),  while  many  in   instructional  design use  a  goal of
supporting  the    greatest  information  comprehension       (Bloom,   1956).  From    this cognitive  perspective    on
sensemaking, however, the focus may be on engaging the learner with less information (to reduce cognitive load
or direct attention) or on providing confusing information (to help spark the beginnings of conceptual change
processes, e.g. Wiser & Carey, 1983). Piaget's model of assimilation and accommodation (Piaget, 1970) helps
explain why this is so; he links the development of new conceptual structures to either assimilation (whereby
new experiences    are   assimilated into   the existing  conceptual    structures  with   minimal  change,   as with  an
instructionist  learning    environment,    such   as  reading    a textbook   which    is readily  understood)    or  to
accommodation (whereby new experiences force reorganization of the underlying conceptual structures, as with
for example discovery learning in a microworld). Whether an accommodation or assimilation mechanism is
sought, the representations to be used by the learners must have the appropriate affordances to allow them to be
used in cognitively appropriate ways. In the case of technology, we have much greater freedom to change
features of representations and to use multiple media and interactivity than ever before (say, with paper-based
representations) which makes it even more important that we have models of how to design our representations
to enhance sensemaking. In the next section, we discuss another way representations may be designed to enhance
learning.

Social Cues as a Scaffold for Sensemaking
          Above,   we   have explored  some     of the ways    that external  representations   can cognitively   support
sensemaking activities in learning a particular domain. Up to this point, we have considered representations that
directly address the content of that domain. For instance, in the case of physics textbooks, we mentioned the
ways these books discuss physics concepts. Here, we identify an important additional way to consider what
information should be represented in a learning environment. While the representations of domain concepts
(such as the physics described in the physics textbook or the models represented in a microworld) has been well
studied    as   an    avenue     for  learning,       the  ways      representations       help   convey    contextual
information--metaknowledge, if you will--has been less well studied. In particular, we advocate attending to
socially relevant representations (Hoadley, 1999; Hoadley, Hsi, & Berman, 1995), or representations that convey
social context  information   that is not   directly   related to   the domain. Below,     we   define socially  relevant
representations and give an example of how they might facilitate learning. Then, we identify examples of SRRs
from prior work on social representations in interfaces and their impact. Finally, we discuss (from a cognitive
perspective) evidence that these representations can facilitate learning and discuss possible mechanisms.

Defining Socially Relevant Representations
          We define socially relevant representations as any representation (presumably in software, but also in
other media) which contributes information that is not part of the traditional domain area content, but rather is
used for (or derived from) social interaction. For instance, the equation for Newton's third law of mechanics
would not be an SRR because it is considered part of the domain of physics. However, the story of how Newton
came up with the third law (perhaps even calling it "Newton's third law") is socially relevant information.
Socially-relevant is not a sharply distinct category; representations carry information which may be considered
"social" to varying degrees, indeed many argue that all representations are interpreted via an inferred social
context,  and  all representations   carry  both   designated  and   connotated    meanings   (where   social context  is
connoted,  e.g. Langer,   1942).  However,    certain  types   of   representations are  prototypically social,   such as
representations    that identify individual  people,    their  personalities, their  goals,  their  interactions, etc. A
representation may simultaneously convey domain content and social context, such as a videotape of Stephen
Hawking lecturing on the history of the universe; the representation conveys content in the domain of physics but
also carries social context information by providing a representation of Hawking himself (an important figure in
the domain), his personality, communication style, the handicaps he faces, and so on.

                                                        264
       Socially relevant representations are powerfully congruent with ordinary people's conceptions. A body
of work by Nass and others (e.g. Nass, Steuer, & Tauber, 1994) has detailed many ways in which people cue off
of social information present in interfaces and respond in ways they use with real social agents. A person might
respond politely to a computer that asks the user to evaluate its performance, while giving a more candid
response to the same computer when the evaluation software uses a different synthesized voice to speak, as if it
were a different "person". This research was used to conclude that computers should therefore be social agents,
interacting with the user in much the way that another person would. Microsoft's BOB interface was the product;
in the interface, the computer had a guide character that interacted with the user. The user could even configure
the personality of the computer, picking a character that was more or less assertive and more or less assistive.
However this software met with many poor reviews, largely because it could not live up to the high expectations
users had for a sociable interface (Manes, 1995).

       Of course, socially relevant representations are subject to the same foibles as other representations.
They may be misinterpreted like any other representation, and enough congruence with user conceptions must be
maintained. (For instance, a socially relevant representation in physics like a narrative history of the Copernican
revolution might not make sense to someone who knew little European history.) Another problem is that social
representations themselves will be interpreted differently depending on the social context in which they are
embedded. Nonetheless, we believe that socially relevant representations may be generally useful in interfaces
for learning, even when the user is not actually interacting with other individuals.

Examples of Socially Relevant Representations for Learning
       Below  we  identify    some  examples      from  the literature of how    what   we  term socially relevant
representations might help learning, including voice and authorship, emotional context, and discursive structure.

Voice and authorship
       Paxton (Paxton, 1999, 2002), has conducted several reviews of K-12 history textbooks that have
focused on personal agency and author visibility. One study (Paxton, 2002) compared students' written and think
aloud responses to historical texts that were either written with a visible or anonymous author. An anonymous
author would write a text without reference to or indication of her own opinions, interpretations, or other forms
of personal agency. A visible author, on the other hand, features a strong narrative voice in the text that clues the
reader into what the author is writing as fact, observation, or opinion. One result of Paxton's study was that
students who received a visible author text showed a higher degree of personal involvement in the essays they
wrote while responding to written and oral comprehension questions in a reading-to-write scenario. Paxton wrote
about one finding that:

       The participants' think-aloud statements, in aggregate, make clear that those in the visible-
       author group were more likely to establish conscious relationships with text authors, hold
       mental conversations with and about those authors, and give more thought to the primary
       historical information embedded in those texts. Not all of these effects reached a level of
       statistical significance, but they are nonetheless suggestive (p. 235).

       Another observation from the study was that students who read the visible author text, the text that
contained references to the author's self, used phrases that indicated personal judgment more often--such as "I
think", "in my opinion", "I believe", and so on.

Emotional context
       Tu and McIsaac       (Tu &  McIsaac,      2002) studied online  learning  environments    and explored the
relationship between social presence and interaction. They found that three emergent dimensions of social
presence--social context, online communication, and interactivity--are important elements of establishing a
sense of community among online learners. Their study reviewed, qualitatively and quantitatively, student
perspectives of communication experienced as a part of a course delivered through an online course management
system (CMS). One observation from their study included CMC users' constant search for methods of self-
expression (i.e., creating SRRs) in spite of the (limited) affordances of the medium. Tu and McIsaac found that,
"Students used emoticons and paralanguage to compensate for the lack of social context cues in the online
communication environment" (p. 143). Interestingly, this compensation was fueled by the participants' drive to
communicate more effectively and efficiently. Interviews further revealed that perceived social presence is

                                                       265
influenced by the social relationships that the students are able to construct throughout the course of their
involvement in the online study.

Discursive structure
        Hoadley (1999) studied learning in an online discussion tool and explored the relationship between
conceptual change in science and social context representations. One study examined the role of discursive
structure (threading) in a discussion activity about design choices embedded in a larger design project. In the
discursive condition,  students  contributed to a  threaded discussion    with  comments      labeled with  headers
indicating their discursive relationship to prior comments ("and," "or," "but," "?" and so on); in the control
condition a topical structure was used instead, with topical subject headers, approximately the same number of
levels of hierarchy and an otherwise identical interface. The learners in both conditions participated equivalently
with no significant differences in number of contributions made, quality of comments, etc. However, students in
the discursive condition were significantly more likely to change their scientific interpretations of the problem on
a posttest, and more likely to change their own designs in the larger course project than those in the topically
structured condition.

Social agents
        The research of Moreno, Mayer, and colleagues has pointed towards the value of social agency in
computer-based  teaching   environments.  One    set of  studies     (Moreno,  Mayer, Spires,      &  Lester, 2001)
demonstrated that both college and junior high school-level students who interacted with animated pedagogical
agents were better able to transfer their knowledge for use in novel situations, and the students were more
interested in the material and more eager to interact with the instructional program again. Furthermore, the
students who used the animated pedagogical agent produced significantly more correct solutions on difficult
transfer problems than those who received the instructional content from text.

        These examples may not be a comprehensive catalog of types of socially relevant representations, but
they show some of the promise of SRRs. From the examples we can see socially relevant representations of
various sorts that are distinct from the domain content have been demonstrated to enhance learning. This
suggests that we should investigate the mechanisms by which such representations facilitate learning to better
understand how we may design learning interfaces with them.

Theories on Mechanisms for Socially Relevant Representations
        The most obvious mechanism for socially relevant representations to aid in learning is if these cues aid
in collaboration activities, which then facilitate learning. However, there are several possible mechanisms by
which they may directly facilitate learning. These mechanisms may also be part of the causal pathway by which
collaborative learning activities serve to support individual learning. Here, we condense the eight mechanisms
hypothesized by Hoadley (1999) and link them to one related mechanism hypothesized by Mayer and Moreno.
The shortened list is summarized in Table 1 below.

        The first two mechanisms proposed by Hoadley are related to increased motivation. One possibility is
that the use of social representations increases intrinsic motivation by making the learning context more similar
to (presumably intrinsically motivated)  social interactions. The     second   possibility is that socially relevant
representations increase motivation by increasing the learner's sense of social presence (International Society for
Presence Research, 2003a, 2003b) and perceived audience, thereby "raising the stakes" for students to contribute
reasonable effort to avoid embarrassment or increase social stature.

        One additional model of how socially relevant representations may facilitate learning relates to the
misapplication of social schemas to inanimate objects (Nass & Moon, 2000; Nass et al., 1994). Social agency
theory (Mayer, Sobko, & Mautone, 2003) contends that the activation of social conversation schema in learners
can be activated by social cues embedded into the instructional media (consistent with Nass), and that the
activation of such schema elicits increased motivation. Mayer et al. propose that "once learners interpret their
interaction with a computer as social, the rules of human-to-human communication come into play, so they try
harder to make sense of what the computer is saying by engaging in deep cognitive processing" (p.419). While
this is not identical to the means proposed by Hoadley, all three share a causal pathway through motivation and
engagement. We summarize these three as SRR as motivator.

                                                    266
         Another mechanism by which SRRs may aid in learning is by serving as an index or mnemonic to ideas
in the content domain. Just as the ancient Greek rhetoricians used the method of loci (memorizing a speech by
associating points with geographic locations along a familiar walk), connecting ideas to social background
information   may  provide additional associations   to    help learners    remember ideas.    We   term  this SRR  as
mnemonic.

         A  third general mechanism   is the use of  SRRs      to aid  in   interpretation and coherence     judgments.
Connecting    and linking ideas is an important  part     of conceptual   change  (diSessa,   1988;    Linn, 1995) and
development of a sense of which ideas cohere with each other is an important part of both evaluating and
understanding ideas (Ranney & Thagard, 1988; Thagard, 1992). Since individuals try to present themselves as
coherent in social situations, social cues may help learners judge which ideas cohere; for instance, one would
expect ideas from the same person or people trained similarly to be more coherent than those that come from
other "camps." This is a specialized version of the more general problem of communicative interpretation and
other manifestations are also possible. For instance, social cues might serve as aids to directing attention as
people make sense of various representations. As McLuhan said, "the medium is the message," and contextual
cues are an   important part of how   people learn to     interpret  ideas. We  term this   SRRs  for    contextualized
interpretation.

         A final possible mechanism is that social cues can be used to aid learners in constructing runable mental
models of other people as a means to understanding a domain. Development psychology identifies perspective
taking as an important and sophisticated reasoning ability that may be related to the ability to maintain mental
models of others' reasoning (Flavell, 1985). This perspective-taking ability has been linked to conceptual change
in science as mediated by scientific reasoning and the development of scientific epistemology (Dunbar, Klahr, &
Fay, 1989; Fay, Klahr, & Dunbar, 1990; Kuhn, Amsel, & O'Loughlin, 1988). Development of perspectives and
mental models of others presumably requires contextual information about the other person and SRRs may
provide  this context information.  Once  a  learner has     enough   information to construct    a mental    model of
another's' viewpoint, this could conceivably be used not only to help make coherence judgments for linking and
distinguishing ideas (Linn & Songer, 1993) but could also be used to help bracket entire belief systems in order
to support conceptual reorganization in conceptual change (Carey, 1991; Kuhn, 1989). We term this SRRs for
prediction.

Table 2: Sample hypothesized benefits of social representations for learning.

            SRR as motivator
            Social representations may generally motivate students to participate, either by making
            participation more fun or by raising the stakes for student participation through perceived
            social consequences in the learning activity.

            SRR as mnemonic
            SRRs may serve as a mnemonic to ideas that students encounter.     Learners may be able to
            better coordinate multiple clusters of ideas (such as complex interpretive frameworks like
            scientific theories) when these ideas are tied to individuals or fit within a social schema.

            SRR for contextualized interpretation
            Learners may be accustomed to assembling coherent, competing views from observing
            social acts. For instance, a student may try to interpret an online discussion in terms of
            which "sides" people are on, helping form a coherent picture of each competing viewpoint.
            Or SRRs may provide cues to which ideas are consistent, in the form of which are jointly
            held by an individual person and which conflict.

            SRR for prediction
            If a learner can develop a mental model of another social agent and their goals and beliefs,
            the learner may be able to predict other beliefs or goals held by that agent. "What if"
            scenarios may help learners explore the implications of ideas or theories without overt
            social interaction, by playing out scenes in their mind.

                                                     267
         It is important to note that these proposed mechanisms are in addition to other second order benefits that
might derive from how representations support group processes that then might aid learning. So, for instance,
while social representations might directly increase motivation, they might also facilitate task coordination in a
collaborative setting, and that more efficacious task coordination might itself be motivating.

Conclusions
         Thus, socially relevant representations can help scaffold learners by providing social context cues in
learning media. Concern for the learners' perception of the social relevance of educational representations should
be the responsibility of the learning technology designer. Contemporary learners of all ages are wading through a
morass of irrelevance in the education they receive, rather than participate in. We believe this is partly due to a
lack of social information that would offer learners a greater opportunity to hang their content knowledge upon
mental structures related to social context. The theory of socially relevant representations suggests multiple
mechanisms for enhancing the meaningfulness of educational media. We believe it is a context-driven yet
domain general theory for design, applicable to learners of all ages, cultures, and backgrounds. Further work is
needed to help explore the mechanisms by which socially relevant representations facilitate learning, to explore
individual differences in the use of SRRs, and to develop design guidelines that spell out when SRRs may help
vs. hinder learning.

References
Bloom, B.  S. (Ed.).   (1956). Taxonomy   of  Educational Objectives:  The  Classification  of    Educational Goals (Book  1:
         Cognitive Domain). New York: Longmans, Green, and Co.
Bruner, J. S. (1968). Toward a theory of instruction. New York: W. W. Norton and Co., Inc.
Carey, S. (1991). Knowledge acquisition: Enrichment or conceptual change? Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
diSessa, A. A. (1991). Transforming intelligence with computers. In H. Rowe (Ed.), Intelligence: Reconceptualization and
         Measurement. Hillsdale, NJ.
diSessa, A. A. (1991). Local sciences: Viewing the design of human computer systems as cognitive science.
diSessa, A. A. (1988). Knowledge in pieces. In G. Forman & P. B. Pufall (Eds.), Constructivism in the computer age--The
         Jean Piaget symposium series (pp. 49-70). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dunbar, K., Klahr, D., & Fay, A. (1989). Developmental differences in scientific reasoning processes.
Fay, A., Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1990). Are there developmental milestones in scientific reasoning? Paper presented at the
         Twelfth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Cambridge MA.
Flavell, J. (1985). Cognitive Development. Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall.
Hoadley, C.  (1999). Scaffolding  scientific discussion using socially relevant  representations    in networked  multimedia.
         Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, CA.
Hoadley, C.,  Hsi, S., & Berman,   B.  P. (1995). The   Multimedia   Forum  Kiosk  and   SpeakEasy.    In P.  Zellweger (Ed.),
         Proceedings of the third ACM international conference on multimedia (pp. 363-364). San Francisco, CA: ACM
         Press.
International   Society   for   Presence     Research.  (2003a).  How    do     we     measure     presence?,   2003,   from
         http://www.temple.edu/ispr/measure.htm
International Society for Presence Research. (2003b, April 29, 2000). What is presence? Retrieved 23 October, 2003, from
         http://www.temple.edu/ispr/explicat.htm
Kaput, J. (2001). Understanding deep changes in representational infrastructures: Breaking institutional and mind-forged
         manacles. Retrieved 13 November, 2003, from http://www.simcalc.umassd.edu/downloads/PKAL.pdf
Kaput, J., Noss, R., & Hoyles, C. (2001). Developing new notations for a learnable mathematics in the computational area. In
         L. D. English (Ed.), The handbook of international research in mathematics. London: Kluwer.
Klamma,  R., Jarke, M., Hollender, E., &  Boerner-Klein,  D.  (2002, August    17-19). Enabling   communities  by constructed
         media: The case of a web-based study environment for a Talmudic tractate. Paper presented at the Advances in
         Web-based Learning, Proceedings of the First International Conference, ICWL 2002, Hong Kong.
Kozma, R. B., & Russell, J. (1997). Multimedia and understanding: Expert and novice responses to different representations
         of chemical phenomena. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 34(9), 949-968.
Kozma, R. B., Russell, J., Jones, T., Marx, N., & Davis, J. (1993). The Use of Multiple, Linked Representations to Facilitate
         Science Understanding. Paper presented at the EARLI Conference, Aix-en-Provence, France.
Kozma, R. B., Russell, J., Jones, T., Marx, N., & Davis, J. (1996). The use of multiple, linked representations to facilitate
         science understanding. In S. Vosniadou, E. De Corte, R. Glaser & H. Mandl (Eds.), International perspectives on
         the design of technology-supported learning environments (pp. 41-60). Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
         Associates.
Kuhn, D. (1989). Children and adults and intuitive scientists. Psych. Review, 96(4), pp. 674-689.
Kuhn, D., Amsel, E., & O'Loughlin, M. (1988). The development of scientific reasoning skills. Orlando, CA: Academic Press.

                                                         268
Langer, S. K. (1942). Philosophy in a new key: a study in the symbolism of reason, rite, and art. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University Press.
Linn, M. C.   (1995). Designing  computer  learning  environments  for engineering      and  computer  science:  The  scaffolded
         knowledge integration framework. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 4(2), 103-126.
Linn, M. C., & Songer, N. B. (1993). How do students make sense of science? Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 39(1), 47-73.
Manes, S. (1995, Tuesday, Jan 17, 1995). Bob: a new best friend has personality quirks (Microsoft's user-friendly integrated
         software). New York Times, pp. B10, C18.
Mayer, R. E., Sobko, K., & Mautone, P. D. (2003). Social cues in multimedia learning: Role of speaker's voice. Journal of
         Educational Psychology, 95(2), 419-425.
Moreno, R., Mayer, R. E., Spires, H. A., & Lester, J. C. (2001). The case for social agency in computer-based teaching: Do
         students learn more deeply when they interact with animated pedagogical agents? Cognition and Instruction, 19(2),
         177-213.
Nass, C., & Moon, Y. (2000). Machines and mindlessness: Social responses to computers. Journal of Social Issues, 56(1), 81-
         103.
Nass, C., Steuer, J., & Tauber, E. R. (1994). Computers are Social Actors. Paper presented at the ACM CHI'94 Conference
         on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Boston, Massachusetts.
National Research Council Committee on Learning Research and Educational Practice, Bransford, J., Pellegrino, J. W., &
         Donovan,  S.   (Eds.). (1999). How   people learn:  bridging  research        and practice. Washington   DC:  National
         Academy Press.
Paxton, R. J. (1999).  A deafening  silence: History textbooks and   the students      who  read them.  Review   of Educational
         Research, 69(3), 315-229.
Paxton, R. J. (2002). The influence of author visibility on high school students solving a historical problem. Cognition and
         Instruction, 20(2), 197-248.
Piaget, J. (1970). Piaget's Theory (G. L. Gellerier, J., Trans.). In P. Mussen (Ed.), Carmichael's Manual of Child Psychology
         (Third ed., Vol. Vol. 1, pp. pp. 703-732). New York: Wiley.
Ranney, M., & Thagard, P. (1988). Explanatory Coherence and Belief Revision in Naive Physics. Paper presented at the
         Tenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Ravid, D., & Tolchinsky, L. (2002). Developing linguistic literacy: a comprehensive model. Journal of Child Language,
         29(2), 417-447.
Sandoval, W. A., Bell, P. L., Coleman, E., Schank, P. K., Enyedy, N., Suthers, D. D., et al. (2000, April 26). Designing
         Knowledge Representations and Epistemic Practices for Science Learning. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting
         of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans.
Thagard, P. (1992). Explanatory Coherence. In Conceptual Revolutions (pp. pp. 62-102). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
         Press.
Tu, C.-H., & McIsaac, M. (2002). The relationship of social presence and interaction in online classes. The American Journal
         of Distance Education, 16(3), 131-150.
Tufte, E. R. (1990). Enivsioning information. Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press.
Tufte, E. R. (2001). The visual display of quantitative information (2nd ed.). Cheshire, Conn.: Graphics Press.
White, B. Y. (1993). ThinkerTools: Causal models, conceptual change, and science education. Cognition and Instruction,
         10(1), 1-100.
White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible to all students.
         Cognition and Instruction, 16(1), 3-118.
Wiser, M., & Carey, S. (1983). When heat and temperature were one. In D. Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.), Mental Models (pp.
         p. 267-297). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully  acknowledge   the  support of the  National Science   Foundation for      work  leading  to this paper. Opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the funders or others.

                                                       269
