          Tensions Between "Transmission" and "Discovery" in
                                 2 K-1 Science Classrooms

                                       A. Susan Jurow & Laura Creighton
                 University of Colorado at Boulder, Campus Box 249, Boulder, CO 80309-0249
                                      Tel: 303.492.6557, Fax: 303.492.7090
                       Email: susan.jurow@colorado.edu, laura.creighton@colorado.edu

       Abstract: At a time when inquiry is recommended as the best way to teach science, many
       researchers and practitioners describe science instruction using this term. As we discuss in this
       article, what is taking place in inquiry-based science classrooms may be more complicated than
       this category suggests. We propose a useful way of thinking about and describing science
       instruction is in terms of tensions between teaching as "transmission" and "discovery". The
       tension   represents  an ideological dilemma (Billig,  Condor,  Edwards,   Gane, Middleton,       &
       Radley, 1988) in education. In our focus on the dilemmatic nature of teaching and learning,
       this paper illustrates how teachers improvise a balance between organizing K-1 students'
       science learning through transmission and discovery through their use of discourse strategies
       and instructional approaches.

Introduction
       The idea for this paper emerged out of the challenge we faced in describing the kind of teaching that
took place in two kindergarten-first grade science classrooms. In these classrooms, students were working on
long-term science projects, doing hands-on activities, asking questions, and wondering about science; their
teachers were designing activities meant to spark students' interests, listening to students' questions and ideas,
and learning alongside their students about how to connect children's experiences with science content and
processes. The students and teachers were engaged in good, some might even call it exemplary, elementary
science instruction. However, when it came to describing what was actually happening in these conversations
and activities, we found it difficult to categorize because when we looked closely, we found it involved a
combination of different approaches. It was neither pure child-centered science instruction, with an emphasis on
children discovering concepts and processes, nor was it traditional science instruction, with a focus on the
transmission  of information.  The teachers  did what   they thought  was  appropriate for the students     at any
particular moment and while this is good educational practice, we found it difficult to describe theoretically
because as educational researchers, we tend to dichotomize.

       At a    time when inquiry   is recommended   as  the  best way to teach science, many   researchers     and
practitioners describe science  instruction using  this term.  According   to the National  Science      Education
Standards, inquiry involves,

       "making observations; posing questions; examining books and other sources of information to
       see what is already known; planning investigations; reviewing what is already known in light
       of experimental evidence; using tools to gather, analyze, and interpret data; proposing answers,
       explanations, and predictions; and communicating the results. Inquiry requires identification of
       assumptions, use of critical and logical thinking, and consideration of alternative explanations"
       (National Research Council, 1995, p. 23).

       In some ways, the teaching in the classrooms described in this article resembles scientific inquiry. But
what does this label actually tell us about the instruction in the classrooms? We propose a useful way of thinking
about and describing inquiry-based science instruction is in terms of tensions between teaching as transmission
and discovery.

       Brown     &  Campione    (1994)   described the   middle   ground   between  "didactic  instruction     and
untrammeled discovery" somewhat paradoxically as "guided discovery". As they emphasized, the role of the

                                                   270
teacher in this type of instruction is not clear. The teacher needs to make moment-to-moment decisions about
how to teach and what to say to students; she needs to be sensitive to students' developmental levels and
recognize the potential in what they say and do. These general suggestions for how teachers should teach belie
the depth of knowledge teachers need to draw upon when working with students.

         A goal of this paper is to contribute to discussions of inquiry-based science teaching by describing how
teachers guide students' science learning. We aim to do so by presenting two illustrative scenes from K-1
classrooms in which students are engaged in a version of inquiry-based science. This analysis is not meant to be
representative of how these teachers teach or suggestive of how teachers should teach. Rather it is meant to begin
developing the notion of a tension between transmission and discovery as a generative way of describing more
completely what teachers in inquiry-based science classrooms are doing when they teach.

Conceptual Framework
         Our thinking about the tensions between transmission and discovery approaches to teaching/learning is
informed by social psychological analyses of ideological dilemmas (Billig, Condor, Edwards, Gane, Middleton,
& Radley, 1998).

         Billig et al. (1998) introduced the notion of ideological dilemmas to describe tensions rooted in ideology
that permeate Western culture. Such dilemmas include those between freedom and control, competition and
cooperation,  and  excellence    and equity.  The   ideological dilemma    between       teaching/learning through
transmission and discovery has played a major role in shaping educational practice and discourse over the past
century. John Dewey    (1938)    described  this dilemma in  contrasting   traditional   (transmission-based)   and
progressive (discovery-based) approaches to teaching respectively:

         "To imposition from above is opposed expression and cultivation of individuality; to external
         principle is opposed free activity; to learning from texts and teachers, learning through
         experience..." (p. 19)

         For the purposes of this paper, the use of the terms "telling" and "didactic instruction" refer to the
transmission of scientific information. In transmission models, teaching involves the delivery of sets of facts by
an expert. Using this conception of science, the teacher assumes the responsibility for telling students scientific
facts and information. In  radical   discovery   approaches to  science  teaching, students    construct   scientific
knowledge for themselves.

         Research on effective teaching and learning shows that complete reliance on telling students science
content does not lead to understanding (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999). However, not stepping in to guide
a student at a critical learning moment may lead to confusion or frustration on the part of the learner. As
Loughran (2002) writes, there exists a dilemma with "when to tell or not tell" (p. 197).

Analytic Perspective
         Taking a situated approach to understanding teaching and learning, our analysis considers how the
teachers designed classroom activities and attempted to engage students in science conversations and activities
(Lave & Wenger, 1991). To document how teachers and students participated in the scenes, we examined how
they used talk, materials, and gestures to position (Goffman, 1981) themselves and others to participate in
classroom  science activities.  All  speech positions speakers  and  hearers to take     on particular  roles in an
interaction, for example as a principal actor in a story, an over-hearer, or as part of an audience. The emergent
participation framework or set of participant positions that open up when an utterance is spoken shapes how one
is able to engage with the topic being discussed or the ongoing activity (Goodwin, 1990).

         Furthermore, as suggested by Billig et al. (1998), the strategic use of talk, gesture, and pauses are
important communicative resources used by teachers to "ensure that (children) `discover' what they are meant
to" in classroom interaction (Billig et al. 1988, p. 54). For this reason, the scenes were transcribed to document
classroom participants' uses of talk and interaction. Our analysis differs from Billig et al. (1988) in that it focuses
on the actions of the teachers and students in order to examine how students contributed to the management of
the tension between transmission and discovery in classroom interaction.

                                                    271
Tensions between Transmission and Discovery: Two Classroom Scenes
Background
       The scenes presented in this paper are from a larger corpus of videotaped classroom data collected as
part of an ethnographic study of teaching in long-term science projects. In that study, science instructional
activities were videotaped over the course of one school year.

       Our purpose is not to provide an exhaustive description of the science instruction that took place in
these classrooms. Rather, it is to illustrate a tension we noted between supporting students' discovery learning
versus the transmission of science content, and to discuss the usefulness of this idea for understanding inquiry-
based science teaching and learning. As we discuss in our presentation of the scenes, the teachers appear to
manage moments that we, as researchers, view as involving a tension between teaching through transmission and
discovery as a routine part of their classroom practice. Their decisions about what and how to teach were made
on the spot, but were also informed by their ideas about good pedagogical and scientific practice. The focus of
our discussion is on describing what they did in these moments to guide students' science learning.

       The scenes used to illustrate this tension come from two kindergarten-first grade classrooms in a
laboratory school at a large university in California. As a laboratory school, the school has a long and rich legacy
of progressive education. One of the early principals of the school studied with John Dewey and progressive
educational values are still evident in official descriptions of the school's pedagogical philosophy. On their
website, the school's learning environment is described as "rich in real-world experiences and thought-provoking
activities to help children develop the ability to think creatively and use and question a variety of sources of
information."

       Forty-four students from the two kindergarten-first grade classrooms combined classes for science
instruction. Ms. Gold (1) taught students in a monolingual English classroom and Ms. Mendéz taught students in
a bilingual Spanish-English classroom. Ms. Gold and Ms. Mendéz had worked together as a team for five years
at the time of the study; a third member of the team assisted with instruction in both of the classrooms. As a
team, the teachers planned science activities together and organized science projects over the course of the year.
The classes would meet together at least one day a week for science instruction. Teachers organized instruction
so that students would work at different activity centers, work in small groups with or without a teacher, and
participate in whole-class discussions.

       The    two   scenes are from     the students' early study of physical      science. Specifically, classroom
instruction focused on investigating the characteristics of three states of matter: solids, liquids, and gases.

Scene 1: Learning Science through Experimenting
       The focus of this scene is on the tension between transmission and discovery when helping young
students learn science through experimentation. This scene takes place at the end of September and students have
been investigating the characteristics of solids since the beginning of the month.

       At the start of the activity, Ms. Mendéz refers to the students as "really awesome scientists" positioning
them as scientists who are engaging in the premier scientific activity (i.e., experimenting). As "scientists", the
teacher suggests that the children have a different relation to the activity than they ordinarily would assume as
"students". Scientists actively seek out knowledge and engage in experimenting in order to discover and test
ideas. An experiment is defined as "an operation carried out under controlled conditions in order to discover an
unknown effect or law, to test or establish a hypothesis, or to illustrate a known law" (Merriam-Webster's
Collegiate Dictionary, 1993). By framing the activity in terms of students as "scientists" who are going to do an
"experiment", it is clear the teacher did not intend the activity to be about the transmission of information to
passive recipients.

       Ms. Mendéz is seated on the rug with ten students who are tightly gathered around a jar filled with
water. The teacher prepares to pour sand from another jar into the water jar. She has asked one student to keep
his finger on the water jar to mark the current level of its contents so they can monitor what happens as they add
the sand. Before she begins pouring, Ms. Mendéz asks Sylvia for her "prediction" (2):

                                                      272
1     Ms. Mendéz:     Can you see? Leon has his finger (on the jar). What's your prediction?
2     Sylvia:         Um, the water's gonna with the other rocks at the bottom it's gonna turn a little higher.

         The teacher then pours the sand (and a few rocks) into the water jar. As the solution settles, Ms. Mendéz
directs the students to look at Leon's finger and number of students note the solution is "rising":

35    Ms. Mendéz:    Why is it rising?
36    Bradley:       The rock and the sand are pushing it up.
37    Ms. Mendéz:    (slowly) The sand and the rocks-
38    Clara:         I KNOW WHY because the stuff is on the bottom and the water is getting higher and
                     higher.

         In response to Ms. Mendéz's question about "why" the solution is rising, Bradley suggests the rock and
sand are "pushing" the water and making it rise. Clara then proclaims loudly that she "know(s)" why" the water
level has risen. Her declaration along with her intonation, increased volume, and facial expression suggests that
this insight was authentic for her; this is a kind of "discovery" to which the teacher was leading. Like Bradley,
Clara links  the addition of  the sand   and rocks    to the increased water level.    However,   whereas Bradley's
explanation refers to the actions (i.e., "pushing") of the rocks and sand, Clara's explanation refers to the relative
locations of the "stuff" (rocks and sand) and the "water" in the jar and suggests a relation between them ("the
water is getting higher and higher").

         After eliciting these possible explanations, Ms. Mendéz pours more sand into the jar and directs the
students' attention to Leon's finger.

50    Ms. Mendéz:    Look at Leon's finger. Now look at the jar and tell me where the sand is at.

         Students note   that the level  of the  solution has  increased. At this    point, Ms.  Mendéz  attempts to
conclude the experiment by summarizing for the students what has been found:

58    Ms. Mendéz:     So WE KNOW then that matter occupies space.

         From the teacher's perspective, the experiment is now complete; she has just stated what they have
learned. Let's  consider how   she    formulated this claim.  She begins  by prefacing      what is now known   with
"so...then" which suggests what will follow is a consequence of what was observed in the experiment. Ms.
Mendéz then states emphatically and with increased volume that "we", an inclusive pronoun that refers to her
and the students, have the knowledge that "matter occupies space".

         Following Ms. Mendéz's summary of what has been found in the experiment, a couple of the students
ask if they can put their fingers on the jar now that Leon has removed his finger:

62    Charlene:       Can I do it?
63    Ms. Mendéz      You can do it.
64    Marissa:        I want to do it!
65    Ms. Mendéz:     You ca- you want to do WHAT? HERE'S our experiment. So this is what I want you to
                      do.

         At line 63, Ms. Mendéz agreed to let Charlene put her finger on the jar. Then, at line 65 she started to
agree to let a second student "do it" as well, but then hesitated and changed her mind ("You ca- you want to do
WHAT?"). The tone of her question (at line 65) along with its increased volume and emphasis on the word
"what" suggest the teacher is surprised by or is feigning surprise at this request.

         From Ms. Mendéz's perspective, the point of keeping a finger on the jar was to be able to see the
change in water level before and after the sand and rocks were added to the solution. This was a critical part of
the experiment because it was meant to make the process under study visible. That students want to put their
fingers on the jar after the sand and rocks have been added suggests they may have a different view of the
activity. One explanation may be that they have not understood what they were meant to learn from the activity.
Other explanations might be that the students are interested simply in putting their finger on the jar or that they

                                                      273
might want to experience for themselves an aspect of the experiment by doing this critical activity of placing
their finger on the jar even though the experiment is over. While any of these explanations may be correct, our
focus here is on how the teacher responded to these requests. At line 65, Ms. Mendéz emphasized her view of the
activity stating, "HERE'S  our     experiment", which along with her attempt to move         on to another activity
suggested the activity is over.

         This scene illustrates what we view as a tension between transmission and discovery in teaching young
children science through inquiry. To help students see and understand what she thought was important in the
experiment without simply telling them, Ms. Mendéz used a few different strategies. First, the teacher set the
stage for discovery by determining what the students "as scientists" would be testing in their "experiment". She
also was responsible for selecting, setting up, and manipulating the materials (jar, water, sand, and rocks). The
metaphor of acting was purposely invoked because there was a certain amount of staging on the teacher's part
involved in this discussion. The teacher had an idea of what she wanted the students to see in the experiment and
she designed the activity and proposed particular roles for the students to take in order to accomplish this goal.

          Ms. Mendéz then proceeded to lead the students through the activity. One discourse strategy employed
here was the use of directives. A directive is defined as a linguistic act "whose function is to request a non-
linguistic response" (Sinclair & Coulthard, 1992). Specifically, she told the students when to look and where to
look in order to guide their perceptions (line 50). By directing the students to notice the increase in the water
level, the teacher did not have to tell them what changed; they would see it for themselves.

         In concluding the experiment, Ms. Mendéz summarized what had been learned from the activity and
phrased it in such a way as to suggest that this meaning was shared with the students.      Her summary is notable
because it is she, the figure with the most authority in the scene, who makes a claim about what the entire group
knows. It is also worth pointing out that this summary is not stated in the language of the children--"matter"
"occupies" and "space"--are sophisticated concepts and words for kindergarten and first graders. This leads one
to question the degree to which the students recognized this idea as something they now know.

         Lastly, at the end of the scene, the teacher addressed the possibility that not all of the students may have
followed the task as intended. Her response was to label explicitly their activity as an "experiment", which
suggested both how the activity and the students' participation in it should be understood.

         One of our aims in presenting this scene was to describe how Ms. Mendéz led her students towards
particular scientific ideas (line 58) and engaged them in scientific processes (lines 1 and 5). The teacher faced
(though not necessarily consciously) a dilemma at the end of the activity that may be familiar to many science
teachers--to tell or not to tell. By presenting a close look at what Ms. Mendéz did in this scene, we hope to
suggest that thinking in terms of a tension between transmission and discovery draws attention to the complexity
involved in inquiry-based science teaching.

Scene 2: Learning Science through Hands-on Activities
         The focus of this scene is on the tension between transmission and discovery when helping students see
what is relevant in a hands-on science activity. In it, a group of five students investigate liquids at a liquids table.
On the table, there are different types of liquids including shampoo, molasses, and oil. This scene takes place in
October and the students have been studying the characteristics of solids since the beginning of the year.
Immediately prior to their work at the liquids table, the students investigated solids at a similarly organized
solids table.

         As the students begin their work, Ms. Gold says to the students, "All of you are chemists. You are going
to start mixing all the different liquids together. See what you come up with." In this way, the students are
positioned as scientists, specifically chemists who are investigating the properties of materials and what happens
when you combine them. As Ms. Mendéz did in Scene 1, Ms. Gold suggests a relation between the students, the
materials, and the activity wherein the students-as-chemists are expected to be active investigators as opposed to
passive recipients of information.

         After the teacher leaves, the students become thoroughly engaged with mixing the different liquids in
cups that have been placed on the table for this purpose. When Ms. Gold checks on their progress, she asks them

                                                    274
to "start thinking about the differences between your experiences" with the solids and liquids. She leaves the
table and returns a few minutes later to ask what differences they have found:

54   Bradley:      Liquids always separates.
55   Ms. Gold:     Liquids can separate? How do they separate?
56   Bradley:      (nods head in agreement)
57   Javier:       No, you cannot separate.
58   Bradley:      (inaudible) something. No, you can mix them together with your own hands but if you just
                   pour them together they separate.
59   Ms. Gold:     If you pull- how can you separate? Where are they separating?
60   Bradley:      You know? It looks like they're not, but they are like in different categories really close
                   together.
61   Ms. Gold:     Close together.
62   Harshad:      Ms. Gold?
63   Ms. Gold:     What?
64   Harshad:      Once you've already poured one and you pour the other they just go on top of each other.

       One of the differences between liquids and solids Ms. Gold wants the students to identify is that liquids
are not as easily separated from each other as compared to solids. In response to Bradley's and Harshad's
descriptions of separating liquids (lines 55 and 59), Ms. Gold poses the following challenge to the students:

70   Ms. Gold:    ...Are you ready for my question? Actually, I'm going to ask you to do something for me.
                  I'm going to ask you now, in this other cup that you have, separate your liquids, please.
                  Separate the molasses, separate the oil, and separate the shampoo for me.
71   Emma:        (looks at Ms. Gold as she walks away) Ho::w?
72   Sofie:       We're just supposed to separate the liquids?
73   Students:    Yeah.
74   Bradley:     What?
75   Javier:      Ho::w?
76   Emma:        This is going to be hard.

       When Ms. Gold says "Actually I'm going to ask you do something for me" she indicates that she is
about to make a change in her plan for the lesson. She decides to follow up on Bradley's claim and poses the
challenge of "separat(ing) the liquids" to the students. The tension between transmission and discovery that
emerged in this episode specifically involved engaging students in hands-on activities so they can discover and
notice things and helping students to see what they think is important within a limited amount of time. Ms. Gold
managed this tension by strategically posing a challenge (line 70) rooted in the students' experiences with the
liquids and initiated by an observation made by one of the students. Her question focused the students' activities
and led a few of them to wonder out loud about the plausibility of separating liquids.

       Ms. Gold again leaves the table. When she returns, she sees that the students have not separated the
liquids. Emma, still perplexed by the teacher's question, asks, "How, how could that be?" Ms. Gold states that
Bradley said, "You could separate liquids." She then asks the students:

90   Ms. Gold:    Can you separate the liquids?
91   Students:    NO.
92   Ms. Gold:    Could you separate the solids?
93   Students:    YES.
94   Ms. Gold:    (pauses and holds out both hands palms up)
95   Emma:        AH HA! THAT'S THE DIFFERENCE! (points at Ms. Gold) You can't- you can't separate
                  liquids, but you could separate solids.

       Emma's     "ah ha!" moment,   when    she identifies "the difference"    between   liquids and solids,  is an
interactional achievement. Specifically, Ms.  Gold's  questions  were    designed  to   lead Emma   (and the   other
students) to focus on whether liquids and solids can be separated. In turn 94, Ms. Gold pauses and waits with her

                                                   275
hands raised as if waiting to receive what the students have found. Emma then puts the questions and their
answers together and declares the difference to which Ms. Gold was leading.

         Immediately after Emma's declaration, Bradley expands on his initial comment that liquids can be
separated to say that "actually you can..." separate liquids "if you have certain kinds of liquids" that don't mix
together. Following his line of thought, Ms. Gold asks the students to identify "which liquids do not mix easily":

105   Bradley:     Like (reaches for a bottle of oil)
106   Ms. Gold:    Which liquids did you find out that don't mix easily? Like what? What is that? (points to the
                   bottle of oil)
107   Bradley:     I don't know (laughs).
108   Ms. Gold:    What is this? (reaches for the almost empty bottle of oil) What was this? (holds up the bottle)
                   ...
112   Emma:        (reads the label on the bottle) Wes::son
113   Ms. Gold:    But what is it?
114   Emma:        Wesson
115   Ms. Gold:    This is, but-but what is it?
116   Emma:        Oi::l
117   Ms. Gold:    It's oil!
118   Bradley:     That's what I was trying to get.
119   Ms. Gold:    Oil and water do not mix easily.
120   Bradley:     I know. That's what I was trying to s-
                   ...
122   Ms. Gold:    So you are saying that some liquids you can separate but others you can't? Is that what
                   you're saying?
123   Bradley:     (nods head affirmatively)

         Rather than agreeing with Emma, Bradley proposed an exception to the general claim that liquids
cannot be separated. While he has some difficulty identifying those liquids that do not mix easily, he reaches for
the oil bottle suggesting that he thinks oil does not mix easily with other liquids. Ms. Gold tries to get the
students to say that oil is one type of liquid that does not combine easily with other liquids. She holds up the
bottle and Emma reads its label ("Wes::son"-the brand of oil), but Ms. Gold wants to know what it is. When
Emma says the word oil, Ms. Gold quickly offers oil and water as a combination that does not mix easily.
Bradley states that he knows this and while he does not finish his sentence, it seems that he starts to claim that
this was  what he  "was  trying   to" say. At   line 122, the teacher checks in with Bradley   to make  sure  she
understands him and to summarize. Additionally, by phrasing her question to emphasize what "you" (Bradley)
are saying, Ms. Gold emphasizes his ownership of the claim.

         Teaching using hands-on science activities involves a tension between making sure students see what
you, as the teacher, think is relevant and allowing them to see what they see. In this scene, Ms. Gold improvised
a balance between transmission and discovery by guiding the students to see certain things and providing them
with the opportunity to investigate materials on their own. Importantly, by selecting which liquids were placed
on the table, the teacher also shaped the kinds of discoveries the students could make (i.e., including oil on the
table). While  Ms. Gold   seemed   to  be  leading   the students to make a  particular claim (liquids cannot      be
separated), she changed direction in response to Bradley's insight. Thus, while the teacher guided the students to
make a particular type of discovery, the process was not unidirectional. Bradley's contribution re-directed the
conversation by raising an exception based on his experience of mixing and exploring the characteristics of
liquids and his reflection on this experience. In addition, by asking Bradley and the other students to provide an
example of liquids that do not mix easily, Ms. Gold engaged them in the scientific practice of supporting claims
with evidence.

Discussion
         Throughout the past century, there have been attempts to organize school learning through discovery or
transmission (Cuban, 1988). While this may be an ideological dilemma, in classroom practice as Dewey (1938)
and Bruner (1961) emphasize, teaching does not necessarily require making a choice between discovery and
transmission.

                                                      276
         This perspective was valuable in revealing how the students engaged in a type of guided scientific
inquiry. For example,   in  Scene  1,  Ms. Mendéz    was   primarily responsible      for designing  and leading the
experiment; students participated as active observers of phenomena that the teacher identified and as respondents
to her questions. In Scene 2, Ms. Gold organized the activity and selected the materials to be used, but students
were unsupervised as they worked with the materials. The tension between transmission and discovery was
evident in how the teachers used language to guide the students' actions in the scenes. For example, in both
scenes, the teachers heavily guided the students' interactions using directives (Scene 1, Line 50, "Look at Leon's
finger" and Scene 2, Line 70, "separate your liquids, please"). The use of such directives served to reaffirm the
teachers' authority in relation to the students, but at the same time the content of their statements provided a way
for the students to gain access to scientific phenomena and thereby take more responsibility for participating in
scientific inquiry. This dialogical relation between transmission and discovery characterized the interactions in
both of the classroom scenes.

         By describing inquiry-based science teaching in terms of tensions between transmission and discovery,
this paper suggests that it is not necessary for teachers to choose between transmission and discovery. Rather,
embracing this tension can help teachers listen carefully to students' ideas and observe students' actions to
identify clues to their understandings  (Ball,   1993). In this way,  teachers      can figure out how and when   to
encourage discovery and to share knowledge more directly with students.

Endnotes
(1) All proper names are pseudonyms.
(2) (...) Parentheses indicates transcriber comments, = contiguous utterances are indicated with equal signs, ::
    elongated syllables are indicated with double colons, CAPS indicate emphasis, [ onset of overlapping talk is
    indicated with a left bracket, and English translation is written in italics.

References
Ball, D.L. (1993).  With   an  eye  of the mathematical    horizon:  Dilemmas        of teaching   elementary school
         mathematics. The Elementary School Journal, (93)4, 373-397.
Billig, M., Condor, S., Edwards, D., Gane, M, Middleton, D., Radley, A. (1998). Ideological dilemmas: A social
         psychology of everyday thinking. London: Sage.
Bransford, J., Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R.R. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.
         Committee on Developments in the Science of Learning, National Research Council.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J.C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.)
         Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
         pp. 229-270.
Bruner, J. S. (1961). The act of discovery. Harvard Educational Review, 31(1), 21-32.
Cuban, L. (1988). A fundamental puzzle of school reform. Phi Delta Kappan, (69)5, 341-344.
Dewey, J. (1938). Experience and education. New York: Collier Books.
Goffman, E. (1981). Forms of talk. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Goodwin, M. H. (1990). He-said-she-said: Talk as social organization among black children. Bloomington:
         Indiana University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
         University Press.
Loughran, J. J. (2002). Teaching about electricity. In J. Wallace & W. Louden (Eds.), Dilemmas of Science
         Teaching (pp. 196-199). New York: Routledge-Falmer.
Merriam-Webster's collegiate dictionary (10th ed.). (1993). Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster.
National Research Council (1995). National science education standards. Washington: National Academy Press.
Sinclair, J., & Coulthard, M. (1992). Towards an analysis of discourse. In M. Coulthard (Ed.) Advances in
         spoken discourse analysis (pp. 1-34). London: Routledge.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Ms. Mendéz, Ms. Gold, Ms. Fine and their students for their participation in this study. We are also
grateful to Frederick Erickson, Steve Guberman, and three anonymous reviewers for their insights into these
interactions and helpful feedback on this paper.

                                                     277
