                               The Video Analyst's Manifesto
(or The Implications of Garfinkel's Policies for the Development of a
 Program of Video Analytic Research within the Learning Sciences)

                                             Timothy Koschmann
              Department of Medical Education, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine
                                   Tel: 217/545-6843, Fax: 217/545-0120
                                        Email: tkoschmann@siumed.edu

                                                   Gerry Stahl
                     College of Information Science and Technology, Drexel University
                                   Tel: 215/895-0544, Fax: 215/895-2494
                                         Email: Gerry.Stahl@drexel.edu

                                                   Alan Zemel
              Department of Medical Education, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine
                                   Tel: 217/ 545-4975, Fax: 217/545-0120
                                           Email: azemel@siumed.edu

        Abstract:  Cast  as  a manifesto,  this chapter   presents    a set of  foundational principles for
        conducting  "video   research"  within  the   learning  sciences.   Our  proposed  approach  draws
        chiefly upon the literature and methodology of Conversation Analysis (CA). Conversation
        Analysis developed out of and shares the thematic interests of the broader field of inquiry
        known as Ethnomethodology (EM). EM is centrally concerned with practical reasoning and the
        procedures (i.e., "methods") participants (i.e., "members") employ in making sense of their
        own actions  and the   actions  of others,  that  is in creating  "local  rationality." CA  focuses
        specifically on the methods members employ in competently producing conversation. Our
        proposal calls for analogous research into how members engage in instruction and learning. A
        rigorous methodology has been developed for conducting CA studies and an elaborate and
        carefully-integrated research   literature has   been   amassed   over  the years. In   some of the
        foundational writing on EM, Garfinkel proposed a set of policies for EM research. Since we
        suggest that video   analytic   research   in the    learning   sciences be  conducted   using  CA
        methodology and given CA's thematic link to EM studies, we believe that Garfinkel's policies
        might provide useful guidelines for future research on learning practices.

The Role of the Video Analyst in Educational Research
        The work of educational research is to identify ways of improving instructional practice through the
design and introduction of instructional innovations. This work is traditionally carried out by two kinds of
specialists: Curricular designers, including learning theorists, technology developers, and content experts (e.g.,
mathematicians, natural scientists, etc.), who develop the innovation, and program evaluators who assess its
effectiveness. Instructional innovations, however, do not exist as abstractions. They are brought to life through
the moment-to-moment interactions of classroom participants (i.e., teachers, students, curriculum designers) as
they go about their  daily  activities. Documenting      how    innovations  are  produced   as  practical, emergent
interactional achievements is the work of the video analyst.

        Research on educational innovation requires a diversity of research skills and approaches. A typical
attempt at significant reform involves the design of technical artifacts, activity structures, institutional practices,
instructional scaffolds and curricula that interact with each other. Not only is a multidisciplinary team needed in
the curricular design role, but the program evaluation role also needs a diversity of methods. This need has been
partially addressed by discussions of design-based research (Brown, 1992; Design-Based Research Collective,
2003). However, it is not just a matter of measuring complex outcomes. It is necessary to look at the actual
practices of instruction and learning that take place under evolving conditions. Innovations do not directly

                                                      278
produce outcomes, but are mediated by the activities and interactions that instantiate the innovations in the
classroom.   This essentially transforms  and  interprets the intended  innovations    of  the curricular designers
(Remillard   &  Bryans, forthcoming).    Special  techniques  and  methodologies     are  needed  to analyze  these
mediational processes. Digital video provides an enabling technology and we propose a specific approach to
conducting video analysis.

       As video analysts, we are concerned with what might be termed the practices of learning. Instruction is
one aspect   of these practices,  but if we  say  video   analysts study    instructional practices, this might    be
misconstrued to mean that we are only interested in the activities of teachers. All who are engaged in the conduct
of education (i.e., students, teachers, administrators, evaluators, curriculum developers, etc.) are inevitably
engaged in the practices of learning (though their roles may be different in each case), and so the province of
study for video analysts in the learning sciences is indeed quite broad. Studies of the details of the practices of
learning are only rarely included as part of the work of designing and evaluating instructional innovations. Such
forms of analysis, however, could enable designers and evaluators of instructional innovations to become more
articulate about the nature of the innovation itself. Video analysis offers a means for overcoming the `theory-
into-practice' problem by documenting how a pedagogical theory is actually constituted through concrete,
interactional practices. Video analysis can be fruitfully performed at different stages of a project. First, an
analysis of practice prior to development of an innovation can inform design work by revealing aspects of
existing practice that are difficult or problematic. Second, an analysis of practice during the introduction of the
innovation can help us understand the process (and problems) of changing practice. Finally, analyzing practice
after introduction of the innovation can provide a basis for documenting the effective features of the innovation.

       This paper is offered as a manifesto or declaration of principles for how a program of video research
within the learning sciences might be undertaken. Our approach draws most directly upon the literature and
methodology    of Conversation   Analysis   (CA). Conversation  Analysis     (Sacks, 1992;  Heritage,  1984, 1995)
developed out of and shares the thematic interests of the broader field of inquiry known as Ethnomethodology
(EM) (Garfinkel, 1967, 2002; Heritage, 1984; Psathas, 1995; ten Have, 1999). EM is centrally concerned with
practical reasoning and the procedures (i.e., "methods") participants (i.e., "members") employ in making sense of
their own actions and the actions of others, that is in producing what could be called "local rationality" (Heap,
1995). A variety of different methodologies have been developed for doing EM research. CA focuses specifically
on the methods members employ in competently producing conversation. Research in CA employs specialized
transcription  conventions and  a logic  of "analytic induction"   (Heritage,  1995).1 A  well-elaborated  research
literature  employing this methodology   has been  amassed   over  the years.   Heath (1987) introduced the term
"video analysis" to describe a program of studies employing CA methods and with strong ties to the CA research
literature. Video analysis represented a departure from traditional CA research, however, on two grounds first,
as the name suggests, video analytic studies are based upon video-based materials (as opposed, for example, to
audio recordings of phone conversations); second, video analysis concerns itself, not only with talk, but also with
embodied aspects of interaction and the ways in which interaction depends upon and employs the material
environment in which it is produced.2

       In his foundational work, Garfinkel (1967) advanced a set of policies for EM research. Since we
propose that CA methodology be appropriated for video analytic research in the learning sciences, and given
CA's thematic link to EM studies, we believe that Garfinkel's policies serve as useful organizing principles for
research on learning practices. An ethnomethodologically-informed approach to the study of learning practices,
however, requires thinking about learning in new ways. Before addressing Garfinkel's policies, therefore, we
will first address re-thinking learning as a phenomenon of social practice.

Transactional Inquiry into Instruction-and-Learning
       Educational research in the United States is built upon the disciplinary foundations of educational
psychology (Lagemann, 2000). Although educational psychology is dedicated as a discipline to the study of how
educational practices might lead to improvements in learning, it has no tools for directly studying learning
practices themselves. Its stock in trade is the development of instruments for indirectly measuring learning
construed as an internal, "occult" mental event that is not directly observable by researchers. In this way,
educational research devotes extensive resources to evaluating innovations in practice without having means of
inquiring into the nature of the innovations as a form of practical accomplishment. Since instruction is an

                                                    279
inherently social activity, it might make sense to turn to the social sciences for a means of studying the practices
of learning. Mainstream sociology, however, suffers from a problem similar to that of educational psychology in
that it attempts to identify structural elements that effect social order without ever studying the actual practices
through which social order is produced and recognized (Garfinkel, 1967, 2002). It, like educational psychology,
therefore, fails to offer appropriate tools for studying learning practice.

        Ethnomethodology, on the other hand, does provide a framework for studying learning practice as
member's   methods  of    sense production. EM   emerged   historically     from  sociology  and serves as   a critical
response   to  the  "structural   functionalist"    (Heritage,  1984)       tradition  in  sociology.  To   apply   an
ethnomethodological lens to learning practices, however, we need to re-think what we mean by `learning,'
understanding it not in its conventional and psychologically-infused sense, but rather treating it as a form of
practical reasoning embedded in social interaction.

        Instruction and learning are such slippery ideas. They are used in so many ways to describe so many
different kinds of activities. This, of course, can be a source of considerable confusion if people have different
ideas about what instruction and learning are and what they are not. People conventionally talk of learning as an
experienced,  but  not observable,  mental   event. Instruction  is construed     as  a procedure  for fostering  this
experience in others. Dewey and Bentley (1949/1991) in their call for what they termed "transactional inquiry"
into human behavior wrote:

        In ordinary everyday behavior, in what sense can we examine a talking unless we bring a
        hearing along into account? Or a writing without a reading? Or a buying without a selling? (p.
        127)

Similarly, to speak of some activity as instructive, we must give an account of the ways in which it was taken up
as such by participants. It is not enough to hypothesize that something was learned. One must also explain how
the participants jointly went about treating some matter as learnable and learned. To distinguish between our
sense of  doing   learning  as  a transactional phenomenon     and  the      more common     sense of  learning  as a
psychological matter, we will introduce the hyphenated form instruction-and-learning for the latter phenomenon.
Our task here is to show how Garfinkel's policies might inform the study of instruction-and-learning.

Garfinkel's Policies for Ethnomethodological Inquiry
        Garfinkel (1967) provided five policies as a starting point for ethnomethodological studies. Garfinkel's
policies are densely worded and, though presented as five independent items, are complexly interconnected and
overlap considerably in their scope. In attempting to summarize them here, therefore, we have extracted a key
theme from each policy statement and have attempted to explain the significance of the themes to video analytic
research. In  particular, we have   translated Garfinkel's terminology       (indifference, inspectability, relevance,
accountability and indexicality) into the manifesto proclamation that data for video analysis is everywhere,
visible, grounded, meaningful and situated.

Policy 1: Data Is Everywhere

        An indefinitely large domain of appropriate settings can be located if one uses a search policy
        that any occasion whatsoever be examined for the feature that "choice" among alternatives of
        sense, of facticity, of objectivity, of cause, of explanation, of communality of practical actions
        is a project of members' actions. Such a policy provides that inquiries of every imaginable
        kind, from divination to theoretical physics, claim our interest as socially organized artful
        practices. (Garfinkel, 1967, p. 32)

EM is concerned with the practices people engage in to make sense of each other's activities. Since human
interaction always constructs meaningful order, the EM researcher can analyze almost any interaction and
discover interesting processes of meaning construction and order negotiation. Sacks (1992), for instance, argued
that for people to be able to understand each other within a complex culture, social practices must be relatively
standardized and ubiquitous, and that this has methodological implications for the researcher:

                                                     280
        Then it really wouldn't matter very much what it is you look at--if you look at it carefully
        enough. And you may well find that you got an enormous generalizability because things are
        so arranged that you could get them; given that for a member encountering a very limited
        environment, he has to be able to do that, and things are so arranged as to permit him to. (p.
        485)

        This addresses the problem of case studies. A traditional sociological approach seeks out special events
to analyze or imposes laboratory controls on large numbers of cases and computes sophisticated averages. But
the phenomena of everyday practice that are of interest to EM and fall below the radar of more mainstream social
science and folk theories can be studied in depth in arbitrary individual instantiations. Such studies are not
"merely anecdotal," as some critics might suggest, however. The charge of being anecdotal refers to the making
of general or universally-quantified claims based on a single case. Most descriptive work is designed to warrant
existensially-quantified claims, however something is noticed and argued to be true in a particular case. The
charge of being anecdotal does not apply, therefore.  Because any site is as likely as another to reveal the artful
practices of rational action, the EM analyst has great latitude in selecting settings in which to do analysis. In
particular, any circumstance, situation or activity which participants treat as one in which instruction-and-
learning is occurring can be investigated for how instruction and learning are being produced by and among
participants.

        As we will discuss in reference to Policy 3, below, the criteria by which site selection is to be done has
to do with what the participants took what they were doing to be. The work of the analyst is to conduct an
empirical investigation into what participants are doing through their interaction ­ it is not to impose a theoretical
category from outside the interaction. If researchers begin their investigation by seeking out a site that represents
`best practice'  or `exemplary  instruction' or `an   example  of innovation x,' they will       have begun   their
investigation by presuming what their investigation is ostensibly designed to investigate. As analysts, we do not
presume that we are more informed about learning-and-instruction than the practitioners who do learning-and-
instruction. It is not for us to bring to the table preconceived notions or theories of learning and instruction and
then see if they are operational within a scene. Instead, the video analysis we propose consists of descriptions of
the actions that practitioners perform. These descriptions are specifically oriented to display the sequential
organization and orderliness that informs these actions and that these actions are designed to produce. The
analyst does not select data as `cases of x,' but determines what the data is about based on what the data shows
the participants to be attending to; as Schegloff (Prevignano & Thibault, 2003) describes the methodology of CA
or EM,

        The most important consideration, theoretically speaking, is (and ought to be) that whatever
        seems to animate, to preoccupy, to shape the interaction for the participants in the interaction
        mandates how we do our work, and what work we have to do. (p. 25)

The policy of setting aside or bracketing out externally-supplied characterizations of what participants are doing
in conducting an analysis is sometimes described as ethnomethodology's studied indifference to members'
matters, that is, refusing to impose one's own interests. It is this indifference that makes ethnomethodological
input to a project problematic. Video analysis, conducted under the auspices of Garfinkel's policies, cannot pass
judgment on what might serve as good or bad or even representative practice. EM studies are purely descriptive
and cannot be used to form prescriptive judgments. We believe these problems can be overcome, however,
through an appropriate division of labor among curricular designers, program evaluators and video analysts. EM
studies can be used to document what members do in carrying out educational activities and, in so doing,
produce the data by which curricular designers and evaluators carry out their respective tasks.

Policy 2: Data Is Visible

        It is not satisfactory to describe how actual investigative procedures, as constituent features of
        members'    ordinary and organized   affairs, are accomplished by members   as recognizably
        rational actions in actual occasions of organizational circumstances by saying that members
        invoke some rule with which to define the coherent or consistent or planful, i.e., rational,

                                                  281
         character of their actual activities. Nor is it satisfactory to propose that the rational properties
         of members' inquiries are produced by members' compliance to rules of inquiry. (Garfinkel,
         1967, p. 32-33).

The idea that social practices are a matter of following culturally defined rules is incoherent, as Wittgenstein had
already argued (Wittgenstein, 1953): Tacit practices and group negotiations are necessary at some level to put
rules into practice, if only because the idea of rules for implementing rules involves an impossible recourse.
Although there is certainly order in social interactions that people are not explicitly aware of but that can be
uncovered through micro-analysis, this order is an interactive accomplishment of the people participating in the
interactions. While the order has aspects of rationality and meaning, it is not the result of simply invoking or
complying with a determinate rule. Consider, for instance, the orderliness of traffic flows at stop signs. The
smooth functioning in accordance with traffic laws is continuously negotiated with glances, false starts and
various signals. Although we do not usually explicitly focus on how this is accomplished unless we take on an
analyst's perspective (because explicit awareness is not usually necessary for achieving the practical ends), the
signs that are exchanged are necessarily visible to the participants and accordingly accessible to a researcher with
appropriate means of data capture.

         Participants, "as members to an organized arrangement" (Garfinkel, 1967, p. 32), are continuously
engaged in the work of making sense or meaning of their own and others' actions. The imputed sense or meaning
of an action or of a sequence of actions is not determinate, however, but is instead endlessly open to new
interpretation. As Heritage (1984) explained, "The task of fellow-actors ... is necessarily one of inferring from a
fragment of the other's conduct and its context what the other's project is, or is likely to be" (p. 60). In other
words, it is the way that actions unfold that gives them the sense they have. Furthermore, actors are selective in
what they treat as relevant so that many aspects of an action's sense remain indeterminate. The only requirement
that actors themselves place on their sense-making is that it be adequate for the purposes at hand. Meaning,
therefore, is "a contingent accomplishment of socially organized practices" (p. 33).

         Members' talk and action has a reflexive character, which is to say that it is simultaneously "context-
shaped" and "context-shaping" (Heritage, 1984). The meaning of any action depends crucially upon the context
within which it is performed. At the same time, the action itself re-shapes the context in ways that will inform the
understandability of other actions that follow. Heritage (1984) referred to this as being "doubly contextual" (p.
242). To study instruction-and-learning as a form of practice, therefore, we need to examine how particular
actions provide for their own understandability as instruction-and-learning. Said another way, we need to study
observed actions as resources by which actors can produce the sense of prior actions in light of the current action,
and make relevant and sensible possible subsequent actions.

         An investigation must rely on the actual practices of the participants as they are engaged in the work of
instruction-and-learning to provide an adequate description of this work. Such an analysis would constitute a
description of the determinate sense of the situation that members construct through their actions. In order to
document members' practices in detail, repeated inspectability of these practices is necessary. Video technology
provides  for the  repeated inspectability of instruction-and-learning.     This inspectability serves as     the only
legitimate basis for making claims about instruction-and-learning. As EM pioneer Schegloff (quoted in an
interview published  in Prevignano   & Thibault,    2003) recently argued,    "These  days, only  such  work      as is
grounded in tape (video tape where the parties are visually accessible to one another) or other repeatably (and
intersubjectively) examinable media can be subjected to serious comparative and competitive analysis" (p. 27f).
In other words, analytical claims about instruction-and-learning practices must be grounded in observable actions
captured in the recordings which establish the facticity and relevance of the claimed matter for the participants
themselves. This point is closely related to the remaining three policies.

Policy 3: Data Is Grounded

         A leading policy is to refuse serious consideration to the prevailing proposal that efficiency,
         efficacy, effectiveness,  intelligibility, consistency,   planfulness,   typicality, uniformity,
         reproducibility of activities--i.e., that rational properties of practical activities--be assessed,
         recognized, categorized, described by using a rule or a standard obtained outside actual settings
         within which such properties are recognized, used, produced, and talked about by settings'
         members. (Garfinkel, 1967, p. 33)

                                                     282
It does not suffice to offer descriptions that depend upon categories defined outside of the situation under study
(e.g., student, teacher, gender, learning-disabled, low-achieving, socio-economic status, language ability, etc.) as
accounts for what participants do or don't do. Garfinkel's third policy dictates that our theories about learning
practices must not only be substantiated in the observational data, but should arise from and be grounded in that
data. Specifically, we must "bracket out" our pre-existing theories and understandings while constructing our
analyses and introducing categories to account for behaviors only when we can empirically demonstrate their
"relevance" as evidenced by the talk and activities of the participants. As Schegloff (1991) observed,

         There is still the problem of showing from the details of the talk or other conduct in the
         materials that we are analyzing that those aspects of the scene are what the parties are oriented
         to. For that is to show how the parties are embodying for one another the relevancies of the
         interaction and are thereby producing the social structure. (p. 51)

         Further, this policy specifies that actors are not "judgmental dopes" who are incapable of monitoring
and acting upon their circumstances. They are capable of making choices and they have a shared, if provisional
and defeasible, sense of propriety with respect to what they both can and cannot do and what they should and
should not do. While this sense of propriety may or may not be something actors can account for, it is evident in
what they do and the way they do it. The work of instruction-and-learning, therefore, as it is actually done is an
ongoing sequence of contingent practices commonly shared among and recognizable by participants. Whether or
not a situation is an instance of learning-and-instruction or of successful innovation is not a matter for curricular
designers or program evaluators to judge a priori, but for video analysts to demonstrate in their empirical
analysis of how the participants took  their own   activities.    This does   not mean that  it is a matter for the
participants to address in post hoc surveys, interviews or focus groups either. For retrospective rationalizations
are not the same as the sense making that is enacted in situ. It is up to the video analysis to ground judgments in
the traces of the interactive actions of the participants.

Policy 4: Actions are Accountable

         The policy is recommended that any social setting be viewed as self-organizing with respect to
         the intelligible character of its own appearances as either representations of or as evidences-of-
         a-social-order. Any setting organizes its activities     to make its  properties as an  organized
         environment of practical activities detectable, countable, recordable, reportable, tell-a-story-
         aboutable, analyzable--in short, accountable. (Garfinkel, 1967, p. 33)

Actors organize their activities in ways that provide for their intelligibility as reportable and inspectable. To be a
bit more specific, we assume that people do things in ways that are inherently designed to make sense. This is a
powerful assumption because it allows us to say that actions and the sense associated with them are sequential in
nature and that this sequential organization produces, sustains and is informed by members' shared sense of the
local social order. This allows members to recognize prospectively and retrospectively that they are engaged in
the work of instruction-and-learning as they engage in that work.

         When Garfinkel refers to behavior as being accountable, the word can be understood in two senses.
First, members can (and are) responsible for their actions and are accountable to their interlocutors for utterances
and actions which may appear to be without reason or rationale. Second, and more obliquely, Garfinkel is
contending that all behavior is designed in ways to give an account of the action as an instance of something or
the other. It is the work of the video analyst to document how this is accomplished.

Policy 5: Data Is Situated

         The demonstrably rational properties of indexical expressions and indexical actions is an
         ongoing achievement of the organized activities of everyday life. (Garfinkel, 1967, p. 34).

Indexical expressions are those whose sense depends crucially upon knowledge of the context within which the
expressions were produced. The most obvious examples are expressions that contain deictic terms such as here,
there, I, you, we, now, then, etc. To make sense of an utterance containing such terms, it will generally be
necessary to know who is the speaker, who is the audience, where the speaker and audience are located, when the

                                                   283
utterance was  produced,  etc. Any    sentence containing    such   elements will have  different interpretations or
meanings depending on the circumstances in which it is produced. Because of this, deictics are sometimes
referred to as "shifters" by   linguists. Logicians    and  linguists "have  encountered indexical  expressions   as
troublesome sources of resistance to the formal analysis of language and of reasoning practices" (Heritage, 1984,
p. 142).

         One of Garfinkel's contributions was to note that deictic terms are not the only ones that have indexical
properties. Heritage (1984) provides the example of the assessment, "That's a nice one," offered while the
speaker and the listener are attending to a particular photograph. What qualifies the picture as nice (e.g., its
composition, color rendering, content, etc.) is not made evident by the utterance and must somehow be worked
out by the listener by inspecting the object in question. In this way, non-deictic terms such as nice are also
indexical in use.   Not only expressions, but also socially-organized actions can have indexical properties.
Imagine two people standing face-to-face and one participant reaching out and touching the other. The meaning
of this act, however, as a warning, provocation, greeting, demonstration, empathetic gesture, act of belligerence,
etc. depends crucially on context, on the nature of the interaction that immediately preceded and immediately
follows the touch.

         The fact that the meaning of indexical expressions and actions cannot be determined isolated from the
circumstances within which they were produced does not usually present a problem for participants. For starters,
participants inhabit the situations within which the expressions and actions are produced and, as a result, are
naturally supplied with many resources for resolving their meaning for present purposes. Further, participants
have the opportunity to dispel any residual ambiguity through additional sense negotiation. Ultimately, however,
all indexical expressions and actions are always contingent and to some degree indeterminate in ways that are
deemed acceptable to actors themselves. For Garfinkel, the question of how this indeterminacy is managed in the
nonce on a routine basis was at the heart of all ethnomethodological inquiry. It would appear to have similar
importance for video-analytic work in the learning sciences.

Bridging the Gap: The Proper Role of Video Analysis
         An example of ethnomethodologically-informed research on an instructional innovation can be seen in a
decade-long  (and  ongoing)   project at  Southern     Illinois University School of Medicine  to  document  what
participants do in Problem-Based Learning (PBL) tutorial meetings (Koschmann et al., in press). In this case,
PBL is a well-established instructional innovation, but one for which the documentation of how learners actually
produce PBL as an interactional achievement is sparse (Hak & McGuire, 2000). This project illustrates not only
the power, but also the challenge of doing video analysis in the way in which we have proposed here.       To the
extent that the analysis attempts to evaluate participants' activities as `good PBL' or `bad PBL' or, more
generically, as `good instruction' or `bad instruction,' it places itself in bad faith with regard to Garfinkel's
policies (particularly the third). After all, it is a policy of EM research "to refuse serious consideration to the
prevailing proposal that ... intelligibility ... be assessed ... using a rule or a standard obtained outside the actual
settings within which such properties are recognized, used, produced, and talked about by setting's members"
(Garfinkel, 1967, p. 33). Schegloff's (1991) notion of "the relevancies of the interaction" (p. 51) dictates that
what the participants are actually doing through their interaction is not a given, but rather is the very matter to be
discovered through the analysis.   Although EM's policies would seem to preclude using video analysis as an
assessment  framework,    it does not  rule  out the     possibility  of video analytic work making    meaningful
contributions to a larger instructional reform effort.

         The mechanism for bridging the gap between the purely descriptive work of video analysis as we have
described it here and the prescriptive aspects of designing and evaluating instructional innovations is to be
achieved through an appropriate division of labor within a project. Curriculum designers, for example, might
design settings for studying an innovation, but would depend upon video analysis to describe and document what
participants might be doing within these settings. In cycles of design research, designers could propose software
and procedures to support instruction and rely on video analysis to better understand what participants do while
interacting in the presence of these artifacts (cf., Koschmann et al., 2003). To the extent that the member
methods described by video analysis can be seen as relevant to the objectives of the designed innovation, this
documentation of the members' methods can contribute to the development of a specification for the innovation.
To our knowledge, such an approach to incorporating video analysis in learning sciences research has not been

                                                        284
systematically attempted to date and the problems of conducting such forms of multi-disciplinary research have
yet to be explored. We nonetheless hold it up as a promising direction for future work.

Endnotes
(1) We do not have space to provide a full description of this methodology here but instead refer the interested to reader to
    any of the several available introductory guides (e.g., Psathas, 1995; ten Have, 1999).
(2) Though Heath coined the term, he followed within a tradition of research that was already exploring situated aspects of
    communication (cf., Goodwin, 1981; Scheflen, 1974).      Jordan and Henderson (1995) proposed the term "interaction
    analysis" to describe a related program of study, one that highlighted the practical aspects of learning and instruction.
    Despite the differing labels, CA, video analysis, and interaction analysis all have a common lineage that traces back to
    EM.

References
Brown, A.  (1992).  Design  experiments: Theoretical  and methodological   challenges   in  creating complex  interventions in
         classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.
Design-Based  Research    Collective. (2003). Design-based   research:  An  emerging        paradigm for   educational inquiry.
         Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
Dewey, J. & Bentley, A. (1991/1949). Knowing and the known. In J. A. Boydston (Ed.), John Dewey: The later works,
         1949­1952, Vol. 16. Carbondale, IL: SIU Press. [Originally published as Dewey, J. & Bentley, A. (1949). Knowing
         and the known. Boston: Beacon Press].
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Garfinkel, H. (2002).    Ethnomethodology's   program:  Working    out Durkheim's     aphorism.   Lanham,    MD:  Rowman    &
         Littlefield.
Goodwin, C. (1981).   Conversational organization: Interaction between speakers and hearers. NY:   Academic Press.
Hak T, & Maguire P. (2000). Group Process: The Black Box of Studies on Problem-Based Learning. Academic Medicine,
         75,      769­72.       Retrieved      October       27,      2000      from        the    world       wide      web:
         http://www.academicmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/75/7/769
Heath, C. (1987). Body movement and speech in medical interaction.   NY: Cambridge University Press.
Heap, J. (1990).  Applied ethnomethodology:   Looking   for the local  rationality of reading  activities. Human  Studies, 13,
         39­72.
Heritage, J. (1984). Garfinkel and ethnomethodology. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Heritage, J. (1995). Conversation analysis: Methodological aspects. In U. Quasthoff (Ed.) Aspects of oral communication
         (pp. 391-418). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Jordan, B. & Henderson, A. (1995).    Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice.   Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4,
         39­104.
Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., Robbs, J., & Barnhart, A. (2003). Problematizing the problem: A
         single case analysis in a dPBL meeting. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for change in
         networked     learning environments:  Proceedings   of  the  international   conference   on  computer   support  for
         collaborative learning (CSCL '03) (pp. 37-46). Amsterdam: Kluwer Academic Press.
Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., Robbs, J., & Barnhart, A. (in press). How do people learn?
         Member methods and communicative mediation. To appear in R. Bromme, F. Hesse, & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers
         and  biases  in computer-mediated   knowledge   communication   (and   how   they   may  be overcome).  Amsterdam:
         Kluwer Academic Press.
Lagemann, E. C. (2000). An elusive science: The troubling history of education research. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
         Press.
Prevignano, C., & Thibault, P. (2003). Discussing conversation analysis: The work of Emanuel A. Schegloff. Amsterdam,
         Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Psathas, G. (1995). Conversation analysis: The study of talk-in-interaction. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Remillard, J., & Bryans, M. (forthcoming). Teachers' orientations toward mathematics curriculum materials: Implications for
         curricular change. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education.
Sacks, H. (1992). Lectures on conversation. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Scheflen, A. (1974). How behavior means.  Garden City: Anchor Press.
Schegloff, E. (1991). Reflections on talk and social structure. In E. Boden & D. Zimmerman (Eds.), Talk and social structure:
         Studies in ethnomethodology and conversation analysis (pp. 44-70). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
ten Have, P. (1999). Doing conversation analysis: A practical guide. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. New York, NY: Macmillan.

Acknowledgments
Partial support for the writing of this paper came from various grants from the National Science Foundation.    Any opinions,
findings, and recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
funding agency.

                                                        285
