                         Strengthening Learning Communities by
                           Promoting Social Skill Development

                                       Samuel M. Kwon & Louis M. Gomez
          The Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools, School of Education and Social Policy,
                         Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
                                       Tel: 847-467-3829, Fax: 847-491-8999
                           Email: smkwon@northwestern.edu, l-gomez@northwestern.edu

          Abstract: There are many documented efforts of designers creating community environments
          to enable improved    student  learning.   Many    of these efforts involve giving  students  the
          opportunity to participate in interesting settings with novel, educationally beneficial roles.
          Sometimes, these roles can be complex, and students can find themselves without the social
          skills to participate effectively. When widespread, social deficiencies can interfere with the
          functioning of a learning environment, and reduce the overall effectiveness of the environment
          for promoting student learning.    While many successful learning community designs have been
          documented,    there is not  a lot   of literature discussing  what  to  do to strengthen weak
          implementations.   This paper attempts to contribute to the literature by describing the effect of
          one approach to addressing this kind of problem.      It describes the design and outcomes of an
          intervention to strengthen a sub-optimally functioning learning community by promoting social
          skill development.

Introduction
          There are many documented efforts of designers creating community environments to enable improved
student learning.  In school situations for example, there are learning communities that support the learning of
science  (e.g., Brown    & Campione,    1994;   Scardamalia   &  Bereiter, 1994),  mathematics  (e.g., Cobb,   1993;
Lampert, 1986), and reading (e.g., Palincsar & Brown, 1985).       In outside-of-school settings, there are examples
of communities where students learn to use technology in a variety of ways including computer programming,
graphic design, and other media construction activities (e.g., Brown & Cole, 1997; Bruckman, 1997; Resnick,
Rusk, & Cooke, 1998).

          Many of these efforts involve giving students the opportunity to participate in interesting settings with
novel, educationally beneficial roles. For example, some of the roles in the literature include the following:
             Artifact/product producers (Brown and Campione, 1994; Resnick, Rusk, & Cooke, 1998)
             Project managers (Bruckman, 1997; Roth, 1996)
             Idea discussants (Hatano and Inagaki, 1991; Palincsar & Brown, 1985; Riel, 1998)
             Knowledge sharers (Lampert, 1986; Rogoff, 1994; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994)

          Sometimes, these roles can be complex, and students can find themselves without the social skills to
participate effectively. For example, Cohen (1986) claims that most children have not experienced "constructive
collegial interactions"   and  need to  learn  how   to offer  advice or help,  allow others to contribute,    solicit
information, and assess group processes.      Children can have trouble with shared decision-making (Patterson &
Roberts,  1982)   and coordinating     joint efforts (Ellis  &  Gauvain,   1992), which  is sometimes   crucial   for
accomplishing interdependent community tasks.

          When widespread, social deficiencies can interfere with the functioning of a learning environment, and
reduce the overall effectiveness of the environment for promoting student learning.

          Efforts to create communities for challenging academic learning can and have been successful, but
when problems emerge during implementation efforts (whether at the beginning or somewhere in the middle),
there is not a lot of literature documenting what to do to strengthen those weak implementations.        This paper
attempts to contribute to the literature by describing the effect of one approach to addressing this kind of

                                                        286
problem.   It describes the design and outcomes of an intervention to promote social skill development in a sub-
optimally functioning learning community.

Theoretical Background and Setting
Communities of Practice Perspective
          One useful perspective for analyzing the functioning of learning communities is the "community of
practice perspective".   The term community of practice was first introduced by Lave and Wenger (1991).           The
perspective is considered useful for both (a) attempting to explain how people learn and work in existing
situations (e.g., Roth, 1995; Wenger, 1998), and (b) providing direction for designing new situations for work
and learning (e.g., McDermott 1999; Palincsar, Magnusson, Marano, Ford & Brown, 1998).           Examples of its use
can be found in both education and industry.

          A community of practice is any group of people who share a common interest in a topic or area, and
work together to accomplish something--their practice.      A community of practice is thought to be characterized
by the common task(s) in which its members engage and by some set of shared practices, traditions, resources, or
culture (Roth, 1996).   It can be very large and span great distances, or it can be very small and include only a few
people focused on a very local concern (Riel, 1998).     For example, a group of applied mathematicians working
across various universities can be a community of practice.        A local carpenter's guild can be a community of
practice. A group of students in a chess club or a computer club can be a community of practice.

          In any  community,    those who   have been   in  it for a while, are highly  skilled, and   help keep  the
community    functioning,   can  be considered   "oldtimers"   or  "core participants"  (Lave, 1991).   Newcomers
"participate in the periphery" by watching oldtimers and sometimes taking part in legitimate practices; they may
help with    easier tasks  or they  may   participate with  the  assistance of  another member.    This   peripheral
participation helps them learn and gradually enables them to participate more fully.       As they increase in skill,
they are  often   given  greater responsibility, and   they engage   even   more  fully in  practices  central to the
community.    At some point, they themselves become "oldtimers" or "core participants" helping the community
persist for another generation.   The apprenticeship relationship between novice and master in some trade like
carpentry or blacksmithing often demonstrates this dynamic.

Characteristics of Stronger Communities
          Not all communities function equally well.   Some communities seem to work better than others in terms
of helping members learn and in terms of carrying forward the practice of the community.          A community that
"works better" and is "more together" can be said to have greater coherence as a community of practice.

          Wenger    (1998)  claims  that there are three dimensions    by   which practice   generates this sense    of
coherence in a community of practice: (1) mutual engagement, (2) a joint enterprise, and (3) a shared repertoire.
Joint enterprise refers to the common task being performed or common product being created.             There is an
outcome that is being pursued together with each member making a contribution, and the choice of this outcome
is a result of a "collective process of negotiation" among members.       Mutual  engagement refers to   the   state of
many members being interested in, committed to, and engaged in a common task--they find the group's practice
to be meaningful and joint experience to be important.     Shared repertoire refers to the set of common resources
shared by community members.          These can  be   tangible tools like computers  or  needle-and-thread,    or less
tangible practices like ways of talking or common methods for accomplishing certain tasks.

          Thinking of communities in this manner, communities where students do not participate in productive
ways (for lack of skill or desire), can be thought of as having a weak shared    repertoire. Therefore, one tactic to
help such a community is to promote the social skill development of members.        This should then lead to better
social practices within the community (stronger shared repertoire) which should then lead to the community
functioning more effectively (greater community coherence).        With the community functioning more effectively,
we should    then   be able to see  improved   overall learning   outcomes.   This line  of  reasoning explains   our
conjecture that communities can be strengthened by promoting social skill development.

                                                       287
Setting
         The setting of this work was an after-school technology-enrichment program being developed at an
urban high school in a large Midwestern city.     The program was called NU-PEAK, and in brief, its goal was to
bring access to new and emerging technological tools to under-served populations like those from urban high
school settings, by focusing on design activities with technology.   Students were to learn skills by participating in
the building of computer artifacts around themes of interest that they had chosen.

         The host school had a total enrollment of about 2000 students, and the student demographics were 85%
Hispanic, 7% White, 5% Asian/Pacific Islander, and 3% Black.        The school was not in a wealthy neighborhood
and it would not have been considered an academically elite school.       24% of the students were deemed to have
limited English proficiency and 93% were from low-income families.        The school's graduation rate was 78% and
it was on academic probation (a warning status within the district for schools with low test scores) till just a
couple years prior to the formation of the NU-PEAK program.         Also, by student accounts, the high school was
not well equipped with modern computing facilities and did not have many enrichment programs.

         NU-PEAK provided a small sample of the school's population, with an opportunity to work with new
computers, software, and computer peripherals, in a supervised setting every day, during periods near the end of
the school day and after-school.   Students were to learn how to use various computer-based tools provided by the
program, by participating in group activities, experimenting on their own, and interacting with other people in
the lab.

         It was similar in many ways to other technology enrichment programs like the Boston computer club
(Resnick, Rusk, & Cooke, 1998), but a similarly strong community dynamic did not emerge.               Student social
practices in NU-PEAK were sub-optimal, and learning outcomes in many cases were extremely poor.                     For
example, we observed students spending an entire year in the program, still being unable to independently open
and save   files  in appropriate   folders.  Also,  very  few    students took   advantage  of  the after-school    lab
opportunities, which would have helped them progress technically.          In interviews during this period though,
almost   every student  said  they  found   the main  activities of the   program  to  be interesting.  This curious
combination    of expressed  interest, but  poor outcomes,   led us to  think that the  joint enterprise and mutual
engagement     of members    was not as   problematic as the weak   shared  repertoire  of the  group.  Viewing the
community as a whole, there were (a) problems with access and resource use, (b) problems with individual skill
development, and (c) problems with over-dependence on staff.

The Intervention
         Promoting social skill development, was seen as being more than just providing a few additional
activities to teach  certain social skills.  Such  instruction could  result  in inert and unused   knowledge,     with
students not using the new skills in the already existing everyday program context.       Instead, it seemed to make
sense that a concurrent attempt be made to alter the context as well, creating new long-term sanctioned roles in
the community that would require the use of the better social skills we were hoping to promote.

         An attempt was made to do this through the intervention design.      We tried to (a) alter the community to
create roles in smaller settings for which certain social skills were considered important; (b) provide instruction
and support for learning the social skills for those settings; and (c) leverage regular mechanisms of a "community
of practice" to spread these skills to the entire community (from core to peripheral members).

         The three main components of the intervention were as follows:
1. Participation Structures
         Create formal participation structures to (a) establish productive social roles for students in a smaller
         setting; (b) explicitly guide how they interact in formal situations; and (c) suggest how they ought to
         interact in informal situations.
2. Summer Expertise Seeding
         Seed expertise in a small group of students over the summer, to enable them to become the first group
         of expert "core members" or "old-timers" who could help spread skills to the rest of the NU-PEAK
         community.
3. Auxiliary Technology Resource Enhancements
         A few auxiliary technology resource enhancements seemed helpful and appropriate.

                                                       288
          1.  New Construction Tool
              Students already possessed certain roles (or "social status") within the community that were
              partially defined by their proficiency with the existing tools. There were "web experts" who
              commanded lots of computer time and "web novices" who deferred to the experts.       A new tool
              would help in the establishment of new student roles as every member, with regards to the new
              tool, would start over as a novice. In addition, the new tool could help make sure advanced
              students continued to come to NU-PEAK and have interesting and challenging things to learn.
          2.  Tool Related Resources
              To accommodate a new tool, some additional resources including computers with more memory
              and faster processors were needed.   In addition, tool-related manuals were made available.

The four participation structures that were used were:
   1.     Group Design Projects
   2.     Seminars
   3.     Community Meetings
   4.     Artifact Demonstrations

          In group design   projects, students    would work   on building    a common  artifact around  a  theme of
interest. Seminars were for helping students learn various technical skills in short 30 minutes sessions in a small
2-4 student setting.   Community      meetings    were  large group gatherings    to take care  of community-wide
administrative issues. Artifact demonstrations were events where all members of the community would get a
chance to show their work to others and get feedback.         In addition to establishing productive social roles for
students, the hope was that these participation structures would guide formal student interaction in the short term,
and provide a model for informal student interaction in the long term.        For example, it was hoped that students
would participate in seminars first as learners, then as seminar assistants, and eventually seminar leaders. Then it
was hoped that students would use the interaction patterns learned in seminars in other informal settings.

          With the implementation of this intervention, there were several predicted outcomes.      Primarily, it was
anticipated that we would see better peer-to-peer social behavior, better use of resources, and better student
learning.  More specifically, we expected to see the following:
         Increased frequency of students helping other students learn.
         Student members being more involved in the management of project work progress.
         Members using non-computer time to do other productive design activities--instead of simply leaving
          when no computer stations were available.
         Student members on average attaining a higher level of technical skill development.

Methods
          For this work, the most important indicators of progress should have been apparent in the following
three areas:
         Student behavior
         Student work artifacts
         Student attitudes and opinions

          An attempt was made to collect salient data about these areas using multiple overlapping data-gathering
methods.     Collectively, the various methods    attempted   to both (a) capture    external indicators of students'
experiences and (b) offer examinations of student interpretations of their experience.    The specific methods used
in this work were as follows:
         Ethnographic observations
         Videography
         Student project artifact analysis
         Surveys
         Individual and group interviews

          The observational work was carried out by three researchers over the course of one school year.       The
program was in session every day during the periods near the end of the school day and after-school from

                                                       289
October to May.    The researchers played varying roles throughout a typical program day, thereby providing
different perspectives on the same events.   There were standard protocols established to help assure consistent
data collection.

Results and Discussion
Implementation Overview
        Expertise   seeding with a small  group    of students was  attempted  over one summer  for  a period of  10
weeks. Three students agreed to participate in summer sessions where they learned to work with the various
participation structures  and with the new     computer     tools.  They  completed   two   group design   projects,
participated in numerous seminars, and practiced demonstrating their work to others.

        With the beginning of the school year, NU-PEAK was re-formed with 12 returning student members
and 8 new student members.    (The size had to be limited because of a limited number of computers.        Only five
were made available to the program initially, with two laptops being borrowed for certain periods of time during
the year.) Through a series of beginning community meetings, program goals and rules were explained, project
groups were formed, and initial seminars were scheduled.

        Three project groups were formed based on student input and student-staff discussions.
1. Teenage Pregnancy Prevention Group
        This group would attempt to address what was perceived to be a growing problem among students at the
        school.   The group had existed the previous year, and was continuing this year.
2. Games Group
        This group was interested in attempting to build computer games.    This was a new group that was
        formed in response to repeated requests from students about this topic.
3. School Publicity Group
        This group wanted to create a school web site that was meant to highlight the positive features of their
        school with the purpose of affirming the choice of the high school for current and incoming students.
        The group had existed the previous year, and was continuing this year.

        The projects groups were scheduled to meet formally for project planning meetings on either a weekly
or bi-weekly basis (this was similar to what had been done in previous years).      They were led initially by adult
staff members with students being given roles of increasing responsibility within the project groups (explicit
attention to students roles was new for the intervention year).     When projects were completed, students were
given the opportunity to start new projects. Technical seminars were scheduled throughout the school year on a
regular basis with students signing up for sessions they found interesting.  Seminar topics were based on general
student skill levels initially, and also based on requests. They were led by adults at first with advanced students
being asked to serve as seminar assistants, and then later, students themselves led some of the seminars.   Artifact
demonstrations were scheduled for the entire group at the end of each semester.        Smaller project groups held
more frequent demonstrations on their own to show the progress of their work.        Other unscheduled times were
for students to work on anything of their choosing (although project work was encouraged) in the NU-PEAK
computer lab.    Members were allowed to bring friends as guests to NU-PEAK, and these guests were also
allowed to use NU-PEAK equipment.      All participation was voluntary, and students had the opportunity to stay
as late as 5 PM when they wanted to do so.

Outcomes
        By the end of the school year, our data seemed to show the following:
       Better social practices in formal settings
       Transfer of positive formal social interaction patterns from formal settings to informal settings
       Increased after-school attendance
       Increased overall technical skill development
       Variations in social and technical skill development that seemed to be a function of (a) student
        attendance patterns and (b) student project group affiliation (which influenced the level of interaction
        with students in whom expertise had been seeded in the summer).

        1. Better social practices in formal settings.        Over  the course of the year, students became   more
skilled as participants in the various formal structures.   In project groups, students became more involved in the
management and planning of project artifacts, and acted conscientiously in roles with greater responsibility.    One

                                                       290
group in particular completed two sophisticated group artifacts--the previous year, none of the groups had fully
completed even one.    Students kept track of each other's progress and formed teams that worked on sub-sections
of their artifact. As necessary, more skilled students helped the less skilled team members learn technical skills,
even offering to run informal seminars of their own.               In interviews, students revealed that there was a lot of pride
associated with this kind of supportive peer role.                 In   formal    seminar      sessions,  students started as expected
primarily as participants.  Some then participated as seminar assistants.                       Eventually there were several students
who were able and willing to be seminar leaders on their own.                      Large group demonstrations also were a setting
where students' participation skills grew.           At first, participation was timid and students were somewhat shy about
showing their work.    As time progressed, students showed greater skill and confidence during demonstrations,
and also learned to be good audience members, making constructive comments and asking appropriate questions
as modeled by adults and the summer students.

          2. Transfer of positive formal social interaction patterns from formal settings to informal settings.
The transfer of positive formal social interaction patterns to informal settings was very visible.                        For example,
students  mimicked    formal  seminar            and    demonstration     practices     in    private  informal settings.  There were
numerous instances of students offering to help their friends learn new skills through informal seminar-like
sessions. Within the project groups, smaller work group leaders used self-organized demonstration sessions to
keep track of each other's progress and to provide constructive comments for improving each other's work.

          The altered social behavior was even quantifiable.                   From observations and student interview responses
the previous year, it was estimated that approximately 10% of what students learned, they learned from other
students, and another 10% they learned through personal experimentation.                         When asked to estimate their learning
sources for the intervention year, students estimated that approximately 22% of what they learned, they learned
from other students and 23% they learned through personal experimentation.

          3. Increased after-school attendance.                 The previous year, after-school attendance was poor with only
two or three students taking advantage of after-school lab time on occasion.                         During the intervention, voluntary
after-school attendance started low--identical to how things were the previous year--but progressively grew
from month to month (see Figure 1).                There was a slight lowering toward the end of the year when various
factors including warmer weather and the reduction of computer station numbers affected attendance, but overall,
attendance remained strong considering only five computer stations were regularly available for use in the lab.

                                                 9th Period Monthly Mean Attendance

                                       12
                                       10
                                        8
                                        6
                                        4
                                        2
                                        0
                                             Oct    Nov     Dec    Jan     Feb    Mar     Apr    May

                              Figure 1. After-school monthly attendance mean.

          4. Increased overall technical skill development.                     The previous year, students worked exclusively on
web site development.    Based on the artifacts they were able to create, students were given a technical skill level
score on a scale of 1 to 7. A text-only web page was a level 1 artifact.                      A web page with formatted text, graphics,
and hyperlinks was a level 4 artifact.           Building level 7 artifacts required proficiency with lists, tables, frames, and
programmed   functionality.    The          average      skill   level  of     students  the    previous  year  was  2.5.  During  the
intervention year, students created both web and Director artifacts (Director is a media creation tool produced by
the company Macromedia).       The level of sophistication displayed through web artifacts was higher than the
previous year for both new students (3.8) and returning students (4.5).                         The level of sophistication displayed
through Director artifacts was also high for both new students (4.2) and returning students (4.6).                     Figure 2 shows
the distribution of students at the various skill levels for the previous year and the intervention year.

                                                                  291
                                                                                  StudentsStudents
                                                                                                                                                                                                Students
                                     Web Artifact Skill Levels                                                                                                      Director Artifact Skill Levels
Pre-Intervention                                                                           5
                                                                                           4

                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (N / A)
                                                                                           2

                                                                                           1

                                                                                           0
                                                                                                  1       2       3       4       5       6       7
                                                                                                             Web Artifact Skill Levels

Post-Intervention                                                                          10                                                                                                            5
                                                                                             8                                                                                                           4

                                                                                             6                                                                                                           3

                                                                                             4                                                                                                           2

                                                                                             2                                                                                                           1

                                                                                             0                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                   1       2      3       4       5       6       7                                                            1       2       3       4       5       6       7
                                                                                                             Web Artifact Skill Levels                                                                                  Director Artifact Skill Levels

                                Figure 2. Graphs of the skill level distribution of students.

        5. Variations in social and technical skill development that seemed to be a function of (a) student
attendance patterns and (b) student project group affiliation.                                                                                            Observations of students, student interview
comments, and student attendance records, were used to generate frequency scores of certain productive social
practices like peer-to-peer knowledge sharing, participation in group management, and use of after-school time.
Similarly, scores of technical skill development were generated based on the sophistication of student artifacts.
These sets of scores seemed to show that those students with better attendance, and those who were socially
affiliated with summer students (by being in the same project group for example), tended to have higher social
practice and technical skill scores. This is an important observation when considering alternative explanations to
the improvement of this particular learning community.                                                                                 Two of the stronger alternative explanations for the data
were as follows:
        1.    New technology tools caused more the positive community effect.
        2.    Outcomes were more of an "adult effect" with improved adults' interactions with students having
              the greatest impact on student learning and community change.

        All students had equal access to the new technology, so any technology effect would tend to not favor
any particular group of students.    Adult interactions with students were fairly uniform as well and not a good
predictor of skill development.   In fact, the project group supervised during the school year by the most senior
researcher (who developed most of the seminars and worked intensively with the summer student seeding
program) did not show greater technical or social skill development.

        As far as why more contact with the summer students helped, student responses to interview questions
were illuminating.  For example, when asked questions about peers during interviews, students often talked
specifically and appreciatively about the summer students.
        RESEARCHER: [Regarding two students who were just mentioned]...what do they do?
        STUDENT1: Diana helps me whenever I get into a problem of what to do.                                                                                                                              Vanessa the same
                  thing.
        STUDENT2: Cause she's like always telling you that, "You can do really cool stuff in Director" ... and
                  I really want to learn how to do that, and she's like, "Do it, do it, try it, you'll like it!"

Conclusion
        Successful student learning communities can be designed and implemented.                                                                                                                                         There are many factors
that contribute to the functioning of these learning communities and so any number of problems can occur.                                                                                                                                                        With
children, social skill deficiencies can cause a learning environment to function sub-optimally.                                                                                                                                          In this study, an
attempt was made to strengthen a student learning community by promoting social skill development.                                                                                                                                                                The
outcomes of this work suggest that the targeting of social skills was appropriate and effective.                                                                                                                                   Improved student
social practices  were   observed along                                                              with     overall               improved            student technical                                   learning.                    The      patterns          of
improvement    suggest that the outcomes                                                              were           not      merely                a result of new technology                                            tools           or     better          adult
instruction. The positive impact of better student-to-student social interactions was apparent in the data.                                                                                                                                                       This
work provides a case study of how to strengthen weak community implementations.                                                                                                                                  It suggests the importance
of a healthy social culture in enabling the proper functioning of community learning environments, and provides
an example of how to promote social skill development in community learning environments.

                                                                                                                             292
References
Brown, A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1994).       Guided discovery in a community of learners.      In K. McGilly (Ed.)
          Classroom   Lessons:   Integrating Cognitive Theory   and   Classroom  Practice.  Cambridge, MA: MIT
          Press.
Brown, K. & Cole, M. (1997).       Fifth Dimension and 4-H: Complementary Goals and Strategies.      In the Center
          for Youth Development Newsletter FOCUS.      Davis, CA: University of California, Davis.
Bruckman, A.S. (1997).      MOOSE Crossing: Construction, Community, and Learning in a Networked Virtual
          World for Kids.  Unpublished doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA.
Cobb, P. (1993).   Cultural tools and mathematical learning: A   case study. Paper presented at the annual meeting
          of the American Educational Research Association, Atlanta, GA
Cohen, E. (1986).   On the sociology of the classroom.   In J. Hannaway & M. Lockheed (Eds.), The contributions
          of the social sciences to educational policy and practice: 1965-1985 (pp. 127-162).       Berkeley, CA:
          McCutchan.
Ellis, S., & Gauvain, M. (1992).   Social and cultural influences on children's collaborative interactions.    In L.T.
          Winegar & J. Valsiner (Eds.), Children's development within social context. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hatano, G. & Inagaki, K. (1991).    Sharing Cognition Through Collective Comprehension Activity.            In Resnick,
          Lauren B., Levine, J. M., and Teasley, S. D., Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition. Washington,
          DC: American Psychological Association.
Lampert, M. (1986).   Knowing, doing, and teaching multiplication.    Cognition and Instruction, 3, 305-342.
Lave, J. (1991).   Situated Learning in Communities of Practice.      In L.B. Resnick (ed.) Perspectives on Social
          Shared Cognition.  Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Lave, J., & Wenger,    E.  (1991). Situated  learning: Legitimate    peripheral participation. Cambridge,      United
          Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
McDermott, R. (1999).      Learning across teams: How to build communities of practice in team organizations.
          Knowledge Management Journal, 8, 32-36.
Palincsar, A.S., & Brown, A.L. (1985). Reciprocal teaching: Activities to promote read(ing) with your mind. In
          T.L. Harris & E.J. Cooper (Eds.),     Reading,   thinking  and concept development:   Strategies     for the
          classroom. New York: The College Board.
Palincsar, A.S., Magnusson, S. J., Marano, N., Ford, D., and Brown, N. (1998). Designing a Community of
          Practice: Principles and Practices of the GIsML Community. Teaching and Teacher Education, 14(1),
          5-19.
Patterson, C. & Roberts, R. (1982).   Planning and the development of communication skills.     In D. Forbes & M.
          Greenberg (Eds.), Children's planning strategies: New directions for child development (pp. 29-46).
          San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Riel, M. (1998). Learning communities through computer networking.         In J. G. Greeno & S. Goldman (Eds.),
          Thinking  Practices:  Math  and   Science Learning    (pp. 369-398).  Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
          Associates.
Resnick, M., Rusk, N., and Cooke, S. (1998).      The Computer Clubhouse: Technological Fluency in the Inner
          City.  In D. Schon, B. Sanyal, and W. Mitchell (Eds), High Technology and Low-Income Communities
          (pp. 266-286).  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rogoff, B. (1994).    Developing   understanding   of  the idea of   communities of learners.  Mind, Culture, and
          Activity, 4, 209-229.
Roth, W. (1995).   Inventors, copycats, and everyone else: The Emergence of shared resources and practices as
          defining aspects of classroom communities.   Science Education, 79 (5) 475-502.
Roth, W. (1996).   Knowledge diffusion in a grade 4-5 classroom during a unit on civil engineering: An analysis
          of a classroom community in terms of its changing resources and practices. Cognition and Instruction,
          14 (2), 179-220.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of
          the Learning Sciences ,3(3), 265-283.
Wenger, E. (1998).     Communities    of practice:  Learning,   meaning,   and  identity.  Cambridge:       Cambridge
          University Press.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Science Foundation through grants ESI-962-7091 and REC-9720383.

                                                      293
