        Investigating Students' Collaborative Scientific Reasoning
                       During a Natural Selection Investigation

                                                   Eleni A. Kyza
   School of Education and Social Policy, 2120 Campus Drive, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208
                                       Tel: 847.491.3585, Fax: 208.247.1506
                                         Email: ekyza@northwestern.edu

         Abstract:    Recent calls to  reform science    education  propose  changes  in  the  content and
         structure  of the learning of  science.     At the classroom   level, among   others, these   calls
         emphasize investigations that parallel the nature of scientific work, and advocate the value of
         peer collaboration.  Many existing studies of individual students' scientific reasoning claim
         that middle-school students do poorly, when asked to explain complex problems and provide
         evidence in support of their explanations. This study investigates how middle-school students,
         working in academically homogeneous dyads, investigate an extended, data-rich problem.
         Findings suggest that middle-school students can collaboratively construct evidence-based
         explanations, but that they still face important challenges that need further support.   Both of
         these points are discussed in more detail in the paper.

Introduction
         In recent years, science education reform efforts have advocated changes in the learning of science to
reflect important  elements  from  the practices  of actual  scientists (NRC,  1996).  Among other things, such
practices should help students understand the nature of science by providing them with extended problem solving
opportunities. In these, students would have to take control of their own learning and would need to engage in
practices that resemble the work of real-world scientists, such as making sense of multiple sources of data
(Blumenfeld et al., 1991). Peer collaboration has also been advocated as a support to these processes, with
several researchers arguing that collaboration can help foster collective and individual learning (Barron, 2000;
Okada & Simon, 1997).    Currently we do not have many rich accounts of how students reason while engaging in
authentic inquiry. Understanding how students reason collaboratively in complex investigations can help us
ground discussions and guide further design efforts. The goal of the present study was to characterize middle-
school students' scientific reasoning, in particular the interaction of students' theories and interpretation of the
data in  guiding  the  problem solving   activity and   the formulation  of evidence-based    explanations.     The
coordination of theory and evidence is considered one of the most crucial aspects of doing science (Klahr &
Dunbar, 1988; Kuhn, Amsel, & O'Loughlin, 1988) and is an interesting topic to investigate since there are
conflicting reports regarding  students' ability  to do  this.  The results of this study can  thus provide   further
insights into how students coordinate theory and evidence and inform our understanding of how the educational
community could address potential challenges.

Theoretical Framework
         Students' reasoning, and in particular scientific reasoning is a complex topic to study.      This research
looks at one aspect of it: that of coordinating theory with evidence.     I define the coordination of theory and
evidence as the ability to engage in scientific problem solving using one's theories to guide the discovery and
interpretation of evidence, but without allowing a strong belief in the theory distort the examination of the data.
The ability to maintain one's theory distinct from the interpretation of the data is proposed to be at the crux of
theory-evidence coordination (Kuhn et al., 1988).    Nonetheless, the literature has been divided on what parts of
this process children and adolescents can do and by when. Klahr & Simon (1999) have called this "the paradox
of children's thinking and its development". For instance, in a long line of laboratory-based research, Kuhn et al.
argue that middle-school students cannot coordinate between theory and evidence. Several other researchers have
argued that the fact that many students were not able to coordinate theory and evidence does not mean that they
are not truly able to do so, providing evidence in support of the argument that individual children can reason
scientifically from a young age (Koslowski, 1996; Leach, 1999; Samarapungavan, 1992).          Finally, research in
students' collaborative reasoning has shown that same-ability students working together perform better than if

                                                      294
they were working alone; this benefit was measured at both the individual and the collective level (Barron,
2002).

         The present study was undertook in the context of a larger research project, which examined the role of
software scaffolding in supporting middle-school students' scientific reasoning. Our assumptions were that
students have the ability to coordinate theory and evidence but that they face many challenges in trying to do so,
and part of our work was to understand more about these challenges.      The theoretical framework of this study is
grounded in Simon and Lea's (1974) idea of a dual space model of scientific discovery.    In this model, scientific
discovery is seen as one example of problem solving, involving search and reasoning in two distinct spaces: the
hypothesis and the experiment space.  This model was later expanded by Klahr & Dunbar (1988) who described
scientific discovery as the process of coordinating the two spaces.      Klahr & Dunbar suggested that scientific
discovery is difficult because the two problem spaces have different representations, which, in turn, require
different search strategies.  The reasoner can coordinate the two spaces through evidence evaluation (Klahr,
2000) using theories to constrain experimentation and the results of the search in the experiment space to
generate new theories. In this study, I used this model of the dual space search and developed analytic categories
to help specify what the evidence evaluation space would look like in the context of the students' inquiry. I have
also replaced   the terms "experiment  space"  with "inquiry space",       and "evidence evaluation space"    with
"coordination space".

Methods
Context
         I tested the assumption that many middle-school students are able to coordinate theory and evidence but
to various degrees, in the context of the enactment of a Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools
(LeTUS) evolutionary biology curriculum, the Struggle for Survival (Carney et al., 2002). Most of the data were
collected during the culminating task of this curriculum, the Galapagos Finches investigation [GF] (Tabak,
Sandoval, Reiser, & Steinmuller, 2000), which is a computer-based natural selection investigation. In the GF
investigation students investigate the reasons leading to the death of many finches on the Galapagos Island of
Daphne Major during the late 1970's.   Students can browse the GF database and examine finch records for a
period of years, including measurements of the finches' physical characteristics, such as beak or wing sizes, and
finch behaviours such as foraging and mating. Students can ask questions of the data, by selecting variables such
as season, finch characteristic, and gender; as a result to these queries, the program generates graphs that are
permanently stored in the Finch Data log section of the GF. With the help of the GF software, the students collect
data to support their hypothesis on why many finches died and why some survived during the crisis years on
Daphne Major.    This is a valuable context to study because the data can support several different hypotheses.
This presents the opportunity to study how students try to coordinate theory and evidence during a complex
investigation.

Participants
         I gathered data from six pairs of middle school students as they worked with the GF investigation. The
pairs came from two seventh-grade classes taught by the same teacher. The school was located in a suburb of a
large mid-western city and had a mixed student population. The activities that students engaged with, the time
they had to complete their investigation, and opportunities to interact with the teacher were comparable across
classes. Based on the teacher's assessment of his students' overall academic achievement in science, we selected
homogenous pairs, representing different academic abilities to observe the potential range of inquiry activities
and discussions.

Data Sources
         The data for the current analysis come from the videotaped interactions of the six pairs of students as
they worked on the computer and daily records of the groups' artifacts during the GF investigation. We closely
followed three pairs of students in each class and collected data from all collaborative investigation sessions,
gathering data from approximately eight 45-minute periods for each group. At the end of the unit we conducted
exit interviews with each pair of students, and interviewed the teacher.

                                                  295
Data Analysis
       Students' discourse and videotaped interactions were transcribed verbatim.          The transcription process
was contextual (Lemke, 1998), meaning that transcriptions included all of the groups' actions, relating to their
investigation, on or off the computer, including gestures. The researcher and an undergraduate coded all of the
data together.  The primary goal of the data analysis was to understand the students' process and extent of
theory-evidence    coordination in  the context   of a  classroom-based       complex    inquiry investigation.   To
operationalize this we looked at the students' investigation pattern in the hypothesis, inquiry, and coordination
spaces, whether students kept their theories distinct from their interpretations of the data, and the sufficiency of
the evidence the groups provided in support of their theories. We coded the data for episodes in which students
were engaging   in processes in each problem    space.  We   also coded      students' evolving theories for the four
components of a natural selection explanation and the evidence they provided to support them using a rubric
developed by Sandoval (2003).   These four components are the concepts of environmental pressure, the selective
pressure on the population, the existence of a differential trait, accounting for the differential survival in a
population, and differential fitness, that is the causal mechanism in place.

Findings
       The underlying assumption of this study was that if students were successfully coordinating theory and
evidence they would exhibit different patterns of activity in the hypothesis, inquiry, and coordination spaces, as
compared to the groups who were not.    In particular, we would expect to see the groups who were successfully
coordinating theory and evidence to frequently move between spaces, show sustained patterns of activity in each
space until the last stages of the investigation, and use the activity in the coordination space to inform their
activity in the hypothesis and inquiry spaces. The more successful groups would also keep their theories distinct
from their interpretation of the data, and thus would not engage in biased reasoning.      Finally, we would expect
that these students' theories would show an evolving understanding of important epistemic domain-specific
distinctions and that these theories would be supported by the data.  Findings are presented in three sections: in
the first section, I explore the students' activity patterns in the three spaces.  The second section addresses the
issue of whether the groups exhibited confirmation bias.   The last section discusses the evidentiary support for
the groups' theories.

Activity Pattern in the Hypothesis, Inquiry, and Coordination Spaces
       All groups attempted to coordinate theory and evidence but to different degrees.           I use investigation
process maps (IPMs) from two of the groups to illustrate this range of activity: one from a group who were
coordinating their theories and evidence well and one from a group who were not.         The IPM of Group 1 (Figure
1) shows a sustained pattern of activity in each space throughout the investigation and frequent interaction
between the spaces.    This pattern is  consistent with  the pattern we      would expect  from  a group  who    were
successfully coordinating theory and evidence.   Looking at the activity within each space we find that Group 1
frequently revisited the hypothesis space, generating and revising hypotheses. The search in the hypothesis space
was informed by students' work in the inquiry space. The group was systematic in querying the data and was
careful to triangulate their interpretations by looking at a variety of data sources.   The students' activities were
primarily theory-driven but students appropriately considered data that went against their current theories,
resulting in a reconsideration of existing theories and the development of new ones.

                                                     296
                           Figure 1. Group 1 Investigation Process Map (IPM1)

        In contrast, Group 2 pursued the testing of their theories much less than Group 1, as suggested by the
activities coded as attempts to coordinate theory and evidence. From their IPM (Figure 2) we see that this group
generated all of their new hypotheses at the very beginning of their investigation, did not generate any other new
hypotheses, and revised their hypothesis on only two more occasions.  Even so, our examination of the revisions
indicated that students extended their hypothesis a little but not to the extent that it significantly expanded their
theory or impacted their subsequent investigation.  In their activity in the inquiry space, the students' discourse
showed that they were aware of their theory as they were interpreting their data but that they did not use the
theory to constrain their searches.  Rather, students ignored a significant portion of the data since they did not
query the database to compare      the finches'  physical characteristics.  We  saw several instances of biased
interpretations of the data with this group. Students rarely expressed doubts about the plausibility of their theory
and almost always concluded that they had enough evidence to support their hypothesis.

                                    Figure 2. Group 2 Investigation Process Map

        On the other hand, we observed other groups who did not use their hypotheses to guide their search in
the experiment space.  Even though these groups did engage in activities in the coordination space, these
activities did not help them as they were not able to use them in deciding which data would be most informative
to examine. These students came up with several hypotheses but their pattern of activity suggests that they were
not metacognitively aware as to how they could use their theories to guide their experimentation: for instance,
the students might have articulated one hypothesis but queried the data for another, or abandoned a hypothesis,
without really having explored it.

                                                    297
Challenges in Students' Coordination of Theory and Evidence
        Our analysis suggests that some middle-school students are able to engage in data interpretation without
exhibiting confirmation bias. The following is such an excerpt from one group's discourse.     In this, Group 1 is
querying the Finch database for the finches' weight in the wet 77 season, when they find evidence disconfirming
their current hypothesis that the lighter finches survived.

1    Lydia:    [Specifying the finch population comparison.] Okay, we want live to dead?
2    Lilly:    Try dead. Try the weight of the people, of the finches who died.
3    Looking at the results of the comparison in the GF data log:
4    Lilly:    Only two died?
5    Lydia:    And they were light. [They are referring to the finches' weight]
6    Lilly:    That's weird. How many died in [season] 77? Yeah, see 77 is when they all died and they
               were the heavier ones.
7    Lydia:    But look at the wet. [season]
8    Lilly:    The lighter ones died. That's odd.   It's like the normal [average] for the living ones was
               higher so...who knows...all right wet 77.
9    Lydia:    Okay, look all died in wet, not dry.
10   Lilly:    Yeah, I know.

        The results of the students' query (lines 4-5) contradict their current hypothesis since they show that the
finches which died in wet 77 were lighter than the finches which had survived.       If students were interpreting
these data with a confirmation bias, they could have chosen to ignore or reject these results, since they were only
valid for two finches. Nonetheless, as the steps they next took show, this group not only acknowledged the
discrepancy but they questioned whether they had queried the data for the wrong season.          Following this,
students repeated the query only to get the same results.    These findings led them to the formulation and testing
of  several new  hypotheses  (e.g. the finches   which      died were lighter because  they were fledglings), by
constructing queries of the data that could help them explain the discrepant phenomena.

Biased Interpretation of the Data
        The espoused hypotheses were at times detrimental to some groups' interpretation of the data.  We saw
several data misinterpretations with these groups, while at other times they failed to notice data that could have
been helpful in solving the problem. The following excerpt is one of these cases.   This group's (Group 2) current
hypothesis is that some of the finches survived because they were smart and flew away, a hypothesis not
supported by the data in the GF database.

  1  Researcher:    So what is your explanation for why some finches survived?
  2  Tom:           Cause some finches had the beaks to dig into the ground and some were smart to fly
                    away.
  3  Researcher:    Do you have evidence for that?
  4  Tom:           Yeah, Because in our graphs it showed that...
  5  Researcher:    Where does it show that they were smart and flew away? Show me the evidence for
                    that.
  6  Tom:           See here, it's 60 (pointing to a data page with a pie graph).
  7  Miles:         But there, it's only 32.
  8  Tom:           And then for the dry season, there were...
  9  Miles:         32...38
10   Tom:           So we know that some flew away.

        In line 2, Tom states that some finches were smart and flew away to avoid death.      When prompted to
support this with evidence, he interprets the difference in the number of finches from one season to the next as
evidence that the finches must have flown away, even though this response can not be supported using the data in
the GF database.

                                                     298
Considering Competing and Alternative Explanations of the Data
          During the early stages of scientific inquiry one may contemplate several competing hypotheses, while
towards   the later stages  one  needs  to  look back  at the interpreted   data to  examine  if any  other   possible
explanation exists.    If students were successfully coordinating theory and evidence we would expect to see
evidence for both these things.    All groups considered multiple hypotheses during their investigation of the data
but to varied   degrees.   The   groups  who  more  successfully   coordinated   theory  and evidence   treated    these
hypotheses as competing ones, whereas other groups examined them one at a time, moving to another one when
having trouble to support the first one. We also saw a case of one group whose belief in their hypothesis was so
great that they were not willing to examine the data for the plausibility of any other explanation.

          The  groups   who    considered    competing   explanations   within   the natural  selection   framework
acknowledged the possibility of a link between the finches' physical characteristics and the environmental
pressure.  This led these groups to question which one of the available four characteristics (weight, leg length,
wing length, or beak length) was the one that gave the surviving finches the advantage.       We found differences
with the two groups who fully considered these.        One of the two groups followed a process of elimination,
exploring   each  one  of these  characteristics until they concluded   that the  trait was  not responsible   for  the
differential survival. The other group found supporting evidence for their initial hypothesis early on in their
investigation and, because of this, briefly addressed the ones for which they did not hold a strong belief about.
Even though this group queried the data for competing explanations, their belief about the plausibility of their
primary hypothesis prohibited them from pursuing them to the point where they would have adequate evidence
to refute them.   Late in their investigation, when they are confident that the key characteristic is the beak size,
students   continue to query   the data  for alternative explanations.  The  following   excerpt  is from    their fifth
investigation day; in this excerpt students are querying the database comparing measurements of the finches' leg
size in wet 78, the season after the drought that killed many of the finch population:

1   Alicia:    Now let's look at the live ones.
2   They do another query and move to the data log, presumably looking at the live finches for wet 78.
3   Alicia:    They tend to have longer legs but it doesn't really matter. Let's look at wing length, oh wait let's
               look at weight actually.

          In this excerpt, the group concludes that one trait (e.g. the leg size) is not important for the finches'
survival.  In this case, and several others, they choose not to explain why the trait does not matter or look for
evidence supporting their claim.   We found a similar pattern of not fully considering other plausible hypotheses,
or not willing to entertain the idea of looking into possible alternative explanations in most other groups.

Students' Theories and Sufficiency of Evidence
          We expected that groups who were coordinating theory and evidence would show changes in their
understanding of the natural selection phenomenon. Examining the evolution of the groups' theories over the
course of their investigation, we see significant changes in their conceptual understanding of the domain.      All of
the groups proposed simple but plausible theories before they delved into the data, most influenced by the
activities which   led to the   GF investigation.   Nonetheless,   with one   exception,  these  theories were     later
abandoned in favor of theories which evolved from an interaction with the data.         In all cases, the final theories
had more explanatory power than the initial ones, and included important domain-specific distinctions, such as
references to an environmental pressure, the relation of that to specific finch traits, and explanations of the
finches' differential fitness. Another place where one could look to see if students were coordinating theory and
evidence appropriately is the evidentiary basis of their claims.   In the best-case scenario this support would be
explicitly  cited and, at  a   minimum,  it  should be   warranted by  the  data  students  interpreted during     their
investigation.    We found that all groups presented adequate support for the existence of an environmental
pressure and provided some evidence describing how this pressure had an effect on the finches' survival.           Four
of the groups provided sufficient evidence for claiming the existence of a differential trait, and two of the groups
provided some evidence.    Most groups did not provide good evidence to support the claim for differential fitness.
This would require them to show evidence that related to the differential trait, for both the dead and the surviving
finch population.   Most groups provided evidence only for the surviving finches.    Thus, in brief, groups provided
evidence in support of their theories to varying degrees and even though they did manage to support their
theories with evidence they did not achieve full coordination of theory & evidence.

                                                       299
Discussion
        One of the goals of this study was to characterize students' scientific reasoning during an inquiry
investigation. Our data show evidence that middle-school students, working collaboratively, can coordinate their
theories with evidence, even though the extent to which they do varies. The question then becomes what
accounts for the differences between the picture depicted in our data and that painted by Kuhn et al.'s research.
One answer is that the task and the support provided to the students, as well as the assumptions of the study were
different. In contrast to the Kuhn et al's study setup, this study's task setup had students working in groups and
allowed room for students' theories and independent exploration of the data in pursuing these theories. The GF
investigation environment provided domain-specific support to the students by structuring the task so that their
search in the hypothesis and inquiry spaces would focus on domain important aspects, even though students
could choose to ignore it.  In our analysis of the data we also considered the ecological validity of students'
thinking, looking at their investigation as an unfolding story rather than considering their unsuccessful choices as
evidence of an inability to coordinate their theories with the evidence.   These   results  support   prior research
findings that some middle-school students have the ability to develop coherent theories, evaluate data against
their theories and provide evidence to support their ideas (Koslowski, 1996; Leach, 1999; Samarapungavan,
1992). At the same time we saw that some groups faced some of the problems that Kuhn et al. documented in
their studies, such as confirmation bias and not considering alternative explanations of their data. Other observed
problems had to do with understanding how to coordinate search the hypothesis and inquiry space: for instance,
using one's hypothesis to guide their selection of queries to run. Even though this study was not designed to
address issues of causality, there is good reason to believe that if some of our subjects were able to successfully
engage in coordinating theory and evidence, then the problem of not doing so might be caused by reasons other
than developmental ability. In fact, these kinds of problems might be caused by several other things, such as
students' repertoire of inquiry strategies or gaps in their domain-specific understanding. These problems can be
potentially addressed through the appropriate scaffolding.

Implications for Design
        The    findings suggest   that the students we  followed needed   further support   in two    categories: a)
addressing inquiry challenges, such as biased interpretations of the data and understanding the value of searching
for alternative explanations of the data; and, b) how to use their theories to constrain their search in the inquiry
space and vice versa. Both issues are quite complicated, especially since in an ill-structured curriculum one
cannot anticipate which challenges are going to be most problematic for whom.     Addressing these most probably
requires more time than the duration of the enactment of any single curriculum, since they touch on students'
understanding of the nature of science.    For instance, it was extremely difficult to help students understand that
they were engaging in a biased interpretation of their data. Confronting students with the fact, or simply asking
them probing questions did not seem to work well.    Encouraging students to consider alternative explanations did
help them re-examine part of their data, but students were reluctant to do so, and could not see the need for it.
Following Collin & Ferguson's (1993) discussion of epistemic forms and games, these students seemed not to
fully understand both the form of scientific explanations and the game they were supposed to play. It is, thus, my
impression that the problem transcends the specific investigation and it is something that cannot be instilled to
students; rather they have to come to understand it more deeply through extended experiences. Other researchers
have also suggested the value of repeated exposures to complex data coupled by appropriate scaffolding (Chinn
& Brewer, 2001).   Secondly, some groups were not able to use their theories productively in their search of the
inquiry space and vice versa. This might be a product of two things: a) the theories were not at a level that could
guide their inquiry, in which case students might need support in formulating better theories -one such kind of
support could be exposure to more domain-specific core ideas; b) students were not explicitly aware of their
theories and past interpretations at all times, especially when they interpreted new data.   One possible way to
assist with these processes could be through metacognitive facilitation, providing students with the means to
keep theories and data interpretations in the working memory and encouraging them to engage in processes that
help the coordination of the two.

Conclusion
        The    findings of this study   argue that, as expected, there is diversity in students'      processes and
understanding of scientific reasoning.     This study was exploratory and only looked at the investigation of six
groups of students.  Even though further studies will provide more insights into this topic, one important

                                                     300
implication is that some students are able to collaboratively coordinate theory and evidence but that they need
further support in addressing the documented challenges.   This support might be the result of repeated exposure
in engaging in solving complex   scientific  problems.   Furthermore,  it might be possible to  scaffold  learning
environments and provide cognitive facilitation tools to help students consider the different aspects of scientific
reasoning. For instance, such scaffolding might introduce the idea of the scientific enterprise as a search for the
falsification of theories rather than their confirmation, and support students' understanding of the game of
constructing scientific explanations.

References
AAAS. (1993). Benchmarks for Science Literacy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Barron, B. (2000). Problem solving in video-based microworlds: Collaborative and individual outcomes of high
        achieving sixth grade students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92, 391-398.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., &     Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivating
        project-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26,
        369-398.
Carney, K., Golan, R., Holum, A., Laczina, E., Mundt-Leimberer, J., Reiser, B. J., et al. (2002). The Struggle for
        Survival:  an  ecosystems     and natural selection  project. Evanston,  IL:  NSF  Center   for  Learning
        Technologies in Urban Schools (LeTUS).
Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (2001). Models of Data: a theory of how people evaluate data. Cognition and
        Instruction, 19(3), 323-393.
Collins, A., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and Strategies to guide
        inquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28(1), 25-42.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring Science: The cognition and development of discovery process. Cambridge, MA:
        MIT Press.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual Space search during scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-48.
Klahr, D., & Simon, H. A. (1999). Studies of Scientific Discovery: Complementary approaches and convergent
        findings. Psychological Bulletin, 125(5), 524-543.
Koslowski, B. (1996). Theory and evidence: the development of scientific reasoning. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
        Press.
Kuhn, D.,  Amsel,  E., &  O'Loughlin,     M. (1988). The development   of  scientific thinking skills. San  Diego:
        Academic Press.
Leach, J. (1999). Students' understanding of the co-ordination of theory and evidence in science. International
        Journal of Science Education, 21(8), 789-806.
Lemke, J. L. (1998). Analysing Verbal Data: Principles, Methods and Problems. In B. J. Fraser & K. Tobin
        (Eds.), International Handbook of Science Education. Dordrecht:Kluwer.
NRC. (1996). National science education standards. Washington, D. C.: National Academy Press.
Okada, T., & Simon, H. A. (1997). Collaborative Discovery in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21(2),
        109-146.
Samarapungavan.   (1992). Children's    judgements  in theory choice  tasks: scientific rationality in  childhood.
        Cognition, 45, 1-32.
Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects of students' scientific explanations. Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 12(1), 5-51.
Simon, H. A., & Lea, G. (1974). Problem solving and rule induction: A unified view. In L. W. Gregg (Ed.),
        Knowledge and cognition (pp. 105-128). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tabak, I., Sandoval, W. A., Reiser, B. J., & Steinmuller, F. (2000). The Galapagos Finches. San Diego, CA:
        Academic Press.

Acknowledgments
This research  was funded    by the   U.S. National  Science  Foundation   under grants   #REC-9980055      to the
KDI/ASSESS project, and #REC-9720383 to the Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools. The
opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily of these foundations. I would like to thank
Danny Edelson for his invaluable feedback on this work, and Helen Wong for helping with the data analysis.

                                                     301
