                               What Makes Teaching Special?

                                        Victor R. Lee & Bruce L. Sherin
                       Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
                                    Tel: (847) 491-7494 Fax: (847) 491-8999
                          Email: victor@northwestern.edu, bsherin@northwestern.edu

        Abstract: The aim of this paper is to articulate some of our early attempts to understand how
        teaching interactions differ from everyday communicative interactions. In order to do this, we
        integrate theories from linguistics, particularly the branch of pragmatics, with work in math
        education and the learning sciences.  Recognizing that communication is an inferential activity,
        we explore what makes teaching interactions a unique class of communication.        Specifically,
        we suggest that individuals who take on a teaching role must deal with a prediction problem
        because   knowledge    is not equally shared between  the communicators.      Our    analysis    of
        classroom observations and tutoring interviews with third grade students learning single digit
        multiplication elucidate a few of the ways that the prediction problem is addressed in teaching
        activities.

Introduction
        What makes teaching special in comparison to everyday communicative interactions?        An underlying,
though questionable, assumption commonly held in math education is that we must already know the answer to
that question. That assumed understanding has been foundational in the design of curricula, pedagogical tools,
and professional development interventions. How can we account for the activity in which these interventions are
played out? Can we confidently say that we have a deep understanding of the factors that are involved in the
moment-by-moment communicative interactions between a teacher and learner?        We feel that it is imperative
that as we continue to design and develop new teaching and learning interventions, we also work to develop a
deeper understanding of what is involved in the communicative activity of teaching.   This paper articulates our
attempt to draw from multiple disciplinary backgrounds to answer the above question.

        In keeping with the interdisciplinary nature of the learning sciences, we are integrating perspectives
from multiple fields, including mathematics education, cognitive science, and linguistics. In particular, we draw
from theories  and  models in  pragmatics,  the branch  of linguistics that most deals  with   the interpretation
processes and constraints involved in communication. As a practical matter, our work has proceeded both top-
down and bottom-up. We have worked from our understanding of certain theories of pragmatics. In addition, we
have worked through iterative analyses of a corpus of observations and interviews with elementary school
mathematics students.

        While some work has been done in education research that has merged linguistic theory with education,
very little of it has dealt with pragmatics, and in particular, the pragmatics in teaching interactions. Often what
we see in analysis of communication in the classroom is an explication of the discourse patterns that appear
(Lemke, 1990) or how language functions in constituting the classroom culture (Lampert, 2001; Yackel & Cobb,
1996). Teaching studies that address communication tend to emphasize the particular moves that teachers make
to promote a focus on student thinking (Carpenter & Fennema, 1992; Rittenhouse, 1998; Sherin, 2002; Williams
& Baxter, 1996; Wood, 1994).      Research that has addressed pragmatics has tended to emphasize the symbolic
aspects of meaning (Pimm, 1987, 1995) or pragmatic obstacles that exist without shared experiences (Spanos,
Rhodes, Dale, & Crandall, 1988).

        In our own research, we start from the premise, drawn from pragmatics, that communication is strongly
dependent   on  the inferences made    by participants. One  participant introduces  an    utterance.    Then other
participants infer the utterer's meaning, based on the utterance, as well as other knowledge and presumed
constraints. Our focus is on how this process of inferring meaning works. This stands in contrast to typical
analyses of classroom discourse patterns. These more typical analyses focus on the function that contributions

                                                   302
play within a dialogue. For example, a contribution might function to pose a question, or to provide a response
(Clark & Schaefer, 1989; Greeno & Engel, 1995; Lemke, 1990).

         We are interested in communicative interactions in which one individual is taking on a teaching role.
Typically, this would be a classroom teacher, but our intent is to speak to a whole class of communicative
activities in which an individual is working to develop a content understanding in another individual. One
marked difference between these teaching interactions and everyday communication is that the participating
individuals may possess very different knowledge resources.     Individuals who take on a teaching role are then
posed with a challenge to do additional communicative work to coordinate the students understanding with their
own.  But rather than doing simply more communicative work, we posit that these individuals, whom we will for
convenience refer to as teachers, do a different type of communicative work. To illustrate our view, we will first
present a short excerpt from a classroom observation of third grade students, and use this as one vehicle for
discussing our claims.  We will proceed to introduce ideas from pragmatics that we have built upon in our own
work. Finally, our discussion will explore further a couple of the communicative "tricks" that are used in these
teaching  interactions  and  relate  them    to diagrammatic-interpretive  norms,  a     set of implicitly   shared
communicative resources that take on some of the inferential work in these interactions.

Stephanie and the Ambiguous Cookies
         We present here a short excerpt from a classroom observation to illustrate some of the interpretive
ambiguity and   online  inferential activity in  which participants are engaged.  This excerpt comes from an
enactment of Children's Math Worlds (CMW), an elementary reform mathematics curriculum designed at
Northwestern University. All of the data we present here is drawn from three years of the CMW project, from
1998-2000, during which the project was engaged in the design and study of full-year curricula for third and
fourth-grade mathematics.

         In this excerpt, the teacher is facilitating a CMW lesson in which third grade students are learning about
single-digit multiplication, and they are making use of a specific kind of drawn representations.   Students were
selected to come to the board and write down a multiplication number sentence, which they were free to choose,
such as "2¥3=6," and to make a drawing that could show this number sentence.   One of the students who came to
the board, Stephanie, produced the mathematical drawing shown in Figure 1.

                             Figure 1.  Stephanie's mathematical drawing of 6 ¥ 3.

         T: What's your multiplication sentence?
         S: 6 times 3.
         T: Ok, Stephanie, explain what you were doing.
         S: I put 6 times 3 because there's umm, there's all these cookies together equals 6 and there's 3
         boxes.
           Stephanie touches the two leftmost large circles, motions over the entire drawing, then touches each
           of the rectangles as she moves from left to right.

                                                     303
          T: Wow! Look at this. Stephanie, I was a little confused when I first looked at this. Third graders look
            up here because this is really interesting. I looked at this and Stephanie had 6 times 3. And I thought
            this kind of looks like 2 times 3 to me. But what she is saying is 2 times 3. <sic>    What if these were
            plates and these were cookies on the plate and I wanted to know how many plates. What would my
            problem be if I wanted to know plates?  Christina?
            Teacher walks to chalkboard, briefly touches space next to drawing on the chalkboard with all
            fingers, then faces the class.
          C: 2 times 3.
          T: Right. If I wanted to know how many plates there were it would be 2 times 3, but what if I wanted to
            know how many cookies there were? There's 3 cookies on each plate and how many plates are there?
          C: 6.
          T: 6. So Stephanie was right.

          What is immediately striking about this excerpt is the apparent ambiguity inherent in interpreting
Stephanie's drawing.    Given the abstract nature of her representation, it is reasonable that multiple interpretations
could occur here.   Stephanie's interpretation of her drawing appears to be inconsistent with the number sentence
she selected.   She states that the six in her number sentence refers to the total number of cookies, represented by
the large circles, and the three is represented by the rectangles.

          The teacher is working to assess Stephanie's understanding given the evidence that Stephanie presented
in her above explanation.   The teacher's interpretation is that the drawing represents 2 ¥ 3 since she sees three
equal groups, contained by the rectangles, with two large circles, representing plates, in each.    This is consistent
with her understanding of multiplication as repeated groups with an equal number of items.         She articulates her
interpretation of the drawing for the rest of the class and uses that as a platform to introduce alternative number
sentences  that  the drawing  could also    represent. She  eventually    concludes   that, under one  interpretation,
Stephanie's drawing could represent six times three.    These differing interpretations are recorded in Table 1. We
believe that, although this excerpt is very brief, there is nonetheless interesting interpretive and inferential work
being done both by the teacher and the students.       How do the teacher and the students make their respective
attributions, both numerical and representational, to Stephanie's drawing?     On what evidence do they base their
understanding?

Table 1. Individual attributions of representational relations of situation to math drawing

                                                 Stephanie'sInterpretationTeacher's andChristina'sInterpretation
                             Small Circles     Chocolate Chips              Cookies
                             Large Circles        Cookies                   Plates
                              Rectangles           Boxes                  Groupings

Relevant Pragmatics
          In this section, we will articulate a subset of assumptions in pragmatics from which we draw, both at the
level of theory and at the level of posited models of communication.        We feel that pragmatics is an appropriate
area to use as a resource as it deals specifically with meaning and ambiguity reduction in communicative activity.
The area of pragmatics has also shown significant success in increasing the visibility of the more subtle workings
of interpretation. Pragmatics, as it has developed as an area, has also taken on a more cognitive focus, as it has
extended its model of communication to account for individual interpretive processes.

The Code Model
          According to Sperber and Wilson (1986), the dominant model of communication, traced as far back as
Aristotle and   throughout  semiotics,  had  historically been     the code model.    The   code model assumes that
communication is a linear process in which a message starts at an information source and is then converted into a
signal, or code.   This signal then travels to the recipient, who uses her own decoding mechanism to extract the
information in the signal. That information is then processed and stored by her, and then she can encode her own
signal to transmit.     The consequent foci in linguistic research had been centered on the purported codes that

                                                       304
were transmitted, including how they were structured and what they meant.        Research on syntax and semantics,
for example, were primarily focused on the transmitted signal and the encoding/decoding processes.

        An analogy can be drawn to a transmission model of teaching and learning.          By substituting a teacher
and a learner as the communicators in the situation above, it is simple to map teaching and learning to a code
model. Knowledge is assumed to be encoded as signals that are then decoded and stored by the student.          These
signals take the form of lectures, textbooks, and other information-bearing tools.     In this case, there is nothing
remarkably special about the teacher except he has more information about a particular content area.       As long as
he can articulate the knowledge as words, he can teach.        Teaching then becomes synonymous with extended
telling, and then nothing is different about teaching interactions in comparison to everyday communication.
Although   this  model   is  extremely  simplistic, it appears   to   accurately    characterize   the model  of the
communicative activity of teaching that is frequently assumed.    One major piece that appears to be missing is an
account of how   ambiguity    or multiple interpretations can  exist.  Also  missing  are  the specialized bodies of
knowledge teachers must have in order to be effective (Ma, 1999; Shulman 1986).

The Inferential Model
        Grice,   a philosopher   of language,  led the way  in  his   early work,   toward an  alternative model  of
communication exploring meaning (Grice, 1957, 1969).        His work emphasized the observation that meaning
must always be inferred, and that an understanding of intention by all participants, is essential. Grice is also
credited with developing a set of communicative maxims for conversation (the maxims of quality, quantity,
relation, and manner) as part of his cooperative principle (Grice, 1975).        The maxims function as understood
norms that do part of the communicative work in an interaction.     They set expectations for likely and acceptable
responses when knowledge is shared. The intersubjective understanding that these maxims are followed allows a
communicator to constrain the likely inferences a listener makes about the speaker's intention and consequently
constrain meaning. Violations of these maxims are also informative, as they provide additional evidence about
the communicator's informative intent.

        The inferential model of communication, suggested by Grice's work and later developed more fully by
Sperber and Wilson (1986; Wilson & Sperber, in press) captures more of the ambiguity and online interpretation
than the traditional code model.  A communicator, rather than transmitting a signal, makes manifest evidence and
assumptions in the mutual cognitive environment.     In a teaching interaction, this mutual environment includes
the physical   setting, representations that have   been  constructed,  previous    utterances and  gestures, shared
presuppositions,   and   the shared  bodies  of cultural  knowledge.     Contributions     to  the mutual  cognitive
environment are made through ostensive communicative acts.       The interpreter then constructs an understanding
based on what new evidence or assumptions have been introduced in the mutual cognitive environment and
formulates the most reasonable yet least cognitively demanding interpretation given the resources they have at
their disposal in their cognitive environment.  Sperber and Wilson use the term relevance to describe the degree
to which an inferred understanding satisfies these conditions.

        What we draw from this inferential model is that both a teacher and a learner are actively engaged in a
continual process through which they are each contributing evidence and assumptions to a mutual cognitive
environment, and they are also inferring each other's meaning.        In standard inferential communication, each
individual also shares the expectation that contributions to the mutual cognitive environment will bear a high
degree of communicative relevance.      However, this expectation may not be borne out in the case of teaching
interactions.

Working to Constrain Responses
        In teaching interactions, there is often a dramatic asymmetry in the knowledge possessed by teacher and
learner. Specifically, the content understanding that a teacher and student would normally share in knowledge-
symmetric situations is conspicuously absent.    From the point of view of pragmatics, this asymmetry leads to
some specific difficulties for the teacher. Most significantly, as compared to everyday interaction, the teacher
faces much higher uncertainty of what the learner will construct as his interpretation of the teacher's utterance. It
is the need to deal with this uncertainty that we believe makes teaching interactions qualitatively different from
everyday   communication;      individuals  who  take  on   a  teaching     role must  regularly   leverage   special
communicative tricks to constrain the possible interpretations of their utterances.

                                                     305
       One of the foci of our work has been to begin to catalog these "tricks" and to understand how they
work. A full catalog and description of the range of tricks we have seen is beyond the scope of this paper.
Instead, we will overview two of the basic tricks that have been observed, both in a third-grade classroom setting
and in individual tutoring interviews with the same set of third grade students.  The interviews that we discuss
here were structured around a set of challenging multiplication and division word problems. Initially, a student
was encouraged to attempt to solve each problem without assistance from the interview. But then, if a student
struggled, the interviewer progressively increased the amount of assistance provided and took on a teaching role.

Enriching Contributions to Capitalize on Shared Knowledge
       We emphasized above that teaching, like all communication, is strongly dependent on inferences made
by participants. For the student, these inferences take off from the communicative contributions of the other
participants, especially the teacher. Thus, one technique that a teacher can use is simply to add additional
contributions to the mutual cognitive environment.   According to this strategy, when communication becomes
problematic, a teacher simply increases the number and content of the utterances that the student has as a base for
inferences. This is especially effective when the utterances are chosen so that the inferences required by the
student draw on knowledge that is shared by the teacher and student.

       In the case of the interactions around elementary mathematics that we analyzed, this strategy took a
specific form. In elementary mathematics, students are asked to solve or model word problems that are extremely
concise in description. A teacher can choose to add to this description, by introducing real world knowledge that
is not given in the problem, but that leverages established connections a student may have with objects or
situations in the world. Doing so helps to elicit a particular understanding in the child of the activity or situation
described in the word problem.

       A simple example can be found in the cookie episode described above. The teacher introduces the idea
of a plate being a part of the picture and uses that added detail to make sense of the drawing and communicate
that understanding to the class. By introducing the plates as being in the drawing and having three cookies on
each of them, the teacher is evoking a specific interpretation for other students to make, thus dealing with the
prediction problem inherent in the interaction. This then gives her and the students an agreed upon referent with
which to work and shapes the spoken responses and interpretations that will follow.   What is noteworthy, in this
simple example, is that the teacher has manipulated the space of likely interpretations for the students through
her use of everyday knowledge.   We would like to mention, though, that this only works as long as the plates and
cookies are consistent with the body of cultural and experiential knowledge that the students have, which
typically is passively assessed in such a way that if no objections or inconsistencies are expressed, then mutual
understanding of the referent is, albeit sometimes incorrectly, assumed.

       Similarly, this works on a smaller scale.   Take, for example, one of the interview questions posed to the
same group of students: If Susan can make three cups of coffee in five minutes, how many can she make in 30
minutes?    If a student is appearing to have difficulty with this question, then the interviewer can choose to
elaborate and enrich the mutual cognitive environment in a multitude of ways.    For example, the interviewer can
give the characters in the word problem a specific purpose, or describe other items that could be used in the
situation.  If the repeating five minute increments of the coffee problem are completely opaque to the student,
then the interviewer can elaborate it by situating the problem as having a character who places the three cups of
coffee that take five minutes to make on a serving tray.  The question then changes to how many cups of coffee
will be on the serving tray after 30 minutes, which may be more easily represented in a student's drawing. In
order for this to work effectively, the student must be able to easily manifest knowledge of the objects and
situations being described as usable resources in their individual cognitive environment.

       We believe that the use of these small pieces of real world knowledge is not a trivial matter.      It has a
significant influence on   how   interpretation happens  and ambiguity    is reduced, and   it fits very well in  a
pragmatics-oriented analysis of the teaching interaction. An effective teacher will have knowledge of the real
world experience that a student can easily access as a resource.

Intermediate Value Assessment
       Another way that a teacher can deal with the difficult problem of predicting students' inferences, is to
initiate active cycles of assessment of a learner's understanding, using the evidence and assumptions that a
student introduces in the mutual cognitive environment. Thus many of the communicative tricks that we have

                                                    306
observed have to do with this active assessment. Here we illustrate this with a brief discussion of one of those
assessment tricks.

         This    assessment  trick, which   we  refer to as intermediate     value assessment,   allows  the teacher  or
interviewer to constrain the space of likely predictable responses.    If the learner presents a value that is correct, it
provides more evidence to suggest a mutually coordinated understanding.            Alternately, if the learner presents a
value that is incorrect or inconsistent with the desired model, the teacher still has the benefit of new evidence
about the  learner's understanding.      If the learner's   response  is  consistent with a  reasonable  `bug' in their
thinking, then the teacher or interviewer can begin to infer the possible origins of the bug.        When the value is
incorrect, and    there is no indication    of its origin,  the teacher   or interviewer  has strong  evidence  for  an
uncoordinated understanding and the need to use a different trick and re-evaluate her understanding of the
learner's understanding.

         In the case of the coffee problem discussed above, we observed several instances of intermediate value
assessment.   Often, as the interviewers adopted a teaching role, they would work with the student to re-represent
the problem using their computational activity as a representation for the situation described in the word
problem.   For example, the interviewer would work with the student to decompose the problem into five-minute
increments. The students would then figure out how many cups of coffee were made in the first five minutes,
then proceed   to compute    how    many  cups  were  made   in the  next five minutes,  and  so on.  Each step in the
computation in part served as a representation of a five-minute time step in a model of the word problem.            At
each time step, an intermediate value was produced at the request of the interviewer, such as how many cups of
coffee were made after 10 minutes and how were made after 15 minutes. These acts served as overt assessments
to evaluate the student's understanding of the steps in the representational activity.    In this trick, the interviewer
is making certain conditions manifest. In the coffee problem, the state of ten minutes is one such condition.

         The teacher made use of intermediate value assessment in the cookie episode described above, though
in the context of the classroom and much less formally.       When the teacher asks the class how one would figure
out the number of plates represented by Stephanie's drawing assuming that part of the drawing included cookies
on plates, she is checking for an explanation that would serve as an intermediate value in the computation
process.  An affirmative answer provides evidence that another student is making the same interpretation as the
teacher and is therefore likely to generate the appropriate model for computing a solution.              In the cookie
situation, Christina provides such a response (2 times 3) and the teacher can assume that she is being understood
and can continue her work to elicit a desired understanding.

         In   our proposed    inferential framework      of teaching  interactions,  the  trick of intermediate   value
assessment is more than simply incidental. While these interactions often have the structure of inquiry-response-
evaluation, the pragmatic aspects of these interactions suggest that a certain amount of important and useful
evidence is being gathered for the teacher through the posed constraints. We believe that this is particular to
situations where significant guidance is needed for the student to get started in order to work toward a solution.
In a more general case, consider the situation where a student is asked to answer a question for which there are
just a few possible response choices. If the student gets it right, the teacher has limited evidence from which to
infer the student's understanding. On the other hand, if there are an abundance of possible choices and the
student selects the correct one, then the teacher has much stronger evidence that the student had constructed the
right answer. When math questions are constructed properly such that the potential misinterpretations of a
student's understanding are minimized, then a teacher can easily generate a question where there are a large
number of possible answers.    The key is for the teacher to construct the intermediate value assessment in such a
way  that  it is extremely   unlikely that  a  student could    give the  correct  answer accidentally,  and  without a
reasonable understanding. For example, if the teacher constructs an intermediate value assessment so that the
answer should be 58, and the student gives that, then in most cases she can be nearly positive that the student's
interpretation is correct.

Diagrammatic-Interpretive Norms
         We now turn our discussion to what must also exist beyond just teaching tricks in order for shared
diagrammatic interpretation to happen.      Given the absence of any ostensive gestures by the teacher in the above
cookie excerpt,   how   can  Christina   successfully  interpret what    the teacher  means   when   she is  referencing
Stephanie's math drawing?      We believe that for the teacher and students in Stephanie's cookie problem to be
able to interpret each other, a certain set of shared general assumptions must exist in the backdrop.        In part, we

                                                         307
were inspired by Grice's communicative maxims and how he claimed they function to facilitate conversation.
Specifically, we recognized that in these classroom interactions and in interviews, these Gricean-like rules or
assumptions    were taking   on    a portion  of  the  communicative      work,  and   thus we  extracted what  we  call
diagrammatic-interpretive norms.        These   norms   constrain    likely interpretations  of mathematical   drawings
whenever they are used in a communicative interaction.       We will briefly describe three of these norms.

       One     such norm    deals  with the  interpretation of identical  elements.    In a mathematical drawing that is
intended to have abstract representations, figures that are roughly identical are considered to represent instances
of the same thing within a particular problem.         This is particularly useful for a communicator who does not
necessarily need to go through a process of enumerating every instance of a particular element. Instead, they can
refer to one or a few of the identical elements as representatives of the element set and still elicit the correct
inference. For example, Stephanie, when first explaining "there are 6 cookies altogether", points at each of the
two left-most   large    circles and then    motions  her  hand  over   the rest of  the entire drawing.   What she is
communicating here, with the aid of the identical elements norm, is that elements that are identical to the two
circles to which she had pointed first were meant to be included in the set of cookies to which she is referring.

       A second norm is that of numerical exhaustiveness.            An attribution made to a drawing should be such
that the number of instances of a particular identical element corresponds with the number in the situation that
the drawing is intended to represent. For instance, in the above excerpt, the teacher says:

          T: Right. If I wanted to know how many plates there were it would be 2 times 3, but what if I wanted to
            know how many cookies there were? There's 3 cookies on each plate and how many plates are there?

Interpreting what the teacher is referring to as plates and cookies without the aid of specific highlighting gestures
is not a trivial matter. The student, Christina, is able to use the information from the teacher's utterance to shape
her interpretation.  Knowing that a shared interpretation requires there to be three cookies represented in the
drawing, Christina's inference is constrained by the need to attribute the label of cookies to a drawn element of
which there are three instances.       Following from numerical exhaustiveness, there are two elements that can
represent  the number    3: the   rectangles  and the  small   circles.  The  added  information  that cookies must be
represented on a plate further constrains the interpretation that the small circles must be cookies and the large
circles must be plates.

       Another     norm   that appears  to   exist is that of global    exhaustiveness.  Every element in the drawing
should map to a part of the situation being represented diagrammatically.          Misuse of this norm tends to be very
informative, as it reflects a learner's misunderstanding of parts of the situation that need to be represented. For
example,   in  Stephanie's   number     sentence   there   are only   two   quantities that  appear: 6 and  3. But  her
mathematical    drawing    has   three  entities: small    circles, large circles,  and  rectangles.   Most   immediate
interpretations of the diagram in terms of the number sentence must violate the global exhaustiveness norm,
since an element of the diagram will not be used, and thus interpretive ambiguity ensues.

       At   first glance,   it   could appear   that  these norms    simply  reflect a  consistency  with standards for
representation in the sense described by Palmer (1977).        However, we believe there is a subtle difference. These
norms are less a property of the drawn representation itself and more a property of the communicative activity
that involves the interpretation of the drawing.      Evidence that is introduced in the mutual cognitive environment
drives the understanding of what the representation represents, and we have witnessed in other classroom
observations   and  in   interviews    that, within   seconds,  new     evidence introduced   in the   mutual cognitive
environment does indeed dramatically change what in the drawing are considered to be representational units and
what those units represent. We believe that this dynamic interpretation of a representation is part of the nature of
an inferential model of teaching that draws from multiple cognitive environments.

       The utility of these norms in teaching interactions is realized as they are automatically invoked through
teaching tricks.  Adherence to them is meant to reduce ambiguity and deal with the prediction problem by
constraining the possible responses.     Violations, though rare, produce evidence of a communicative breakdown
and consequently a need for repair. None of this is accidental. In a sense, these representations are introduced
precisely because they create a circumstance in which there is a set of norms of this sort, and they can be
leveraged to constrain interpretation of the utterances of all participants.     We would like to point out that these
norms typically work in concert with each other, rather than in isolation.       Items that are identical elements are the

                                                          308
same items that must align with numerical exhaustiveness.            It is very likely that other norms exist beyond the
ones described here and that norms are specific to particular communicative media.

Conclusion
         The incorporation of pragmatic models and ideas has the potential to be very informative to math
education and the learning sciences.          In our  own   work,   we   have  suggested  that   the communicative     activity
involved   in   math teaching    interactions    is inferential,  rather    than code-like,   in nature.    These    particular
interactions are different from standard communicative activity because of the knowledge asymmetry that exists
between the teacher and student in the situation.        That knowledge asymmetry introduces a prediction problem for
the individual who takes on a teaching role, in which the explanation that a student has for particular problem or
task can be constructed in unanticipated ways that are different from a desired understanding.             Teachers can use a
variety of tricks to deal with the prediction problem that they face, and by reducing ambiguity and the space of
likely relevant responses, they are able to better manage a focus on student thinking.                 We have discussed a
couple of those tricks here and some of the norms that do a portion of the cognitive work involved in inferring
meaning. As we continue this work, we are examining other higher-level tricks that teachers use to constrain
interpretation and are further exploring situations in which diagrammatic-interpretive norms are being violated.
Still, much more research remains to be done to understand the inferential processes that are unique to teaching.

References
Carpenter, T. P., & Fennema, E. (1992). Cognitively guided instruction: Building on the knowledge of students and teachers.
         International Journal of Educational Research, 17, 457-470.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to discourse. Cognitive Science, 13(2), 259-294.
Greeno, J.  G., & Engel, R.   A.  (1995).  Combining    analyses of cognitive  processes, meanings,    and  social participation:
         Understanding symbolic representations. Paper presented at the Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
         Science Society, Hillsdale, NJ.
Grice, H. P. (1957). Meaning. The philosophical review, 66(3), 377-388.
Grice, H. P. (1969). Utterer's meaning and intention. The philosophical review, 78(2), 147-177.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics (Vol. 3, pp. 41-58).
         New York: Academic Press.
Lampert, M. (2001). Teaching problems and the problems of teaching. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning, and values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Palmer. (1977).  Fundamental     aspects  of  cognitive  representation. In E. Rosch    & B.  B. Lloyd    (Eds.), Cognition  and
         categorization (pp. 259-303). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pimm, D. (1987). Speaking mathematically: Communications in mathematics classrooms. New York, NY: Routledge &
         Kegan Paul Ltd.
Pimm, D. (1995). Symbols and meanings in school mathematics. London ; New York: Routledge.
Rittenhouse, P. S. (1998). The teacher's role in mathematical conversation: Stepping in and stepping out. In M. Lampert & M.
         L. Blunk   (Eds.),   Talking mathematics   in  school: Studies  of teaching and  learning   (pp. 163-189).  New York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Sherin, M.  G.  (2002). A   balancing    act: Developing  a discourse    community   in a mathematics     classroom. Journal  of
         Mathematics Teacher Education, 5, 205-233.
Spanos, G., Rhodes, N. C., Dale, T. C., & Crandall, J. (1988). Linguistic features of mathematical problem solving: insights
         and    applications. In R.   R. Cocking    & J. P. Mestre  (Eds.),   Linguistic  and cultural influences   on learning
         mathematics (pp. xii, 315). Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance: communication and cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Williams, S., & Baxter, J. (1996). Dilemmas of discourse-oriented teaching in one middle school mathematics classroom.
         Elementary School Journal, 97, 21-38.
Wilson, D., & Sperber, D. (in press). Relevance Theory. In G. Ward & L. Horn (Eds.), Handbook of pragmatics. Oxford:
         Blackwell.
Wood, T. (1994). Patterns of interaction and the culture of mathematics classrooms. In S. Lerman (Ed.), The culture of the
         mathematics classroom (pp. 149-168). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.
Yackel, E., &   Cobb, P. (1996).   Sociomathematical     norms,  argumentation,   and   autonomy  in mathematics.    Journal for
         Research in Mathematics Education, 27(4), 458-477.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge Miriam Sherin and three anonymous reviewers for their insightful feedback.

                                                            309
