   How Should Learning Be Structured in Inquiry-based Science
                      Instruction?: Investigating the Interplay of
                                1st- and 2nd-hand Investigations

                          S. J. Magnusson, A. S. Palincsar, S. Hapgood & A. Lomangino
                 4002 SEB, Univ. of Michigan, 610 E. Univ. Ave., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1259
                                         Tel: 734.616.6855, Fax: 734.936.1606
                                              Email: smag@umich.edu

         Abstract:    Inquiry-based   elementary    school   science  curricula    present   science learning   as
         predominantly 1st-hand investigations where students directly interact with phenomena. Text-
         based experiences     are limited  and  not generally    integrated    with  1st-hand experiences.    We
         conceptualize  inquiry  instruction as  the interplay    of 1st- and   2nd-hand   investigations that are
         text-based.  Our study    of   2nd-hand investigation    utilized   texts that  are modeled   after   key
         elements of the notebook of a scientist. In an experimental study, we investigated the efficacy
         of four interplay conditions created by counterbalancing type of investigation (1st- or 2nd-hand)
         and context of investigation (ramp or table) for learning about the role of mass and force on the
         motion  of   objects. Participants  were    4th grade students      from   a  low   SES  working-class
         community. Results of non-parametric statistical tests of pre-post instruction items on a paper-
         pencil assessment indicated a preferred sequence and mode of investigation of contexts to
         support learning  when    1st- and 2nd-hand investigations    are   in interplay. We  argue  that  these
         results suggest it is possible and important to examine learning from instruction at this level of
         specificity.

The Problem
         The national   standard   that  science teaching    will be  inquiry-based      (NRC,  1996)  is  defined  in  the
standards document as dealing predominantly with "real phenomena . . . where students are given investigations
or guided toward fashioning investigations that are demanding but within their capabilities . . . [but] as more
complex   topics are   addressed    [and]   students cannot    return     to basic    phenomena   for  every   conceptual
understanding . . . teachers can take an inquiry approach as they guide students in acquiring and interpreting
information from experts or secondary sources such as text-based or multimedia materials"1 (p. 31). The primacy
placed on direct experience with the physical world ­which we might call 1st-hand investigation ­ is reflected in
the kit-based materials that are advocated for use in elementary classrooms. These materials primarily contain
physical resources for 1st-hand investigation, and even though additions of some text-based resources have been
added in the last couple of years, many teachers see text-based materials as antithetical to inquiry-based science
instruction (Shymanski, Yore &, Good, 1991), going so far as to characterize use of text as a step backwards
(Alonzo & Jones 2003).

         While students' use of physical materials and involvement in actual investigation are an important
departure from textbook-based teaching in which targeted scientific knowledge is "delivered" to the children, the
view implied by the national standards ­ that involvement in investigation alone can foster learning, until
concepts  become  too   complex    ­  is an unfortunately    simplistic   view     about learning science.   Whereas   the
standards are partly based on the principle that "school science reflects the intellectual and cultural traditions that
characterize the practice of contemporary science" (Ibid., p. 19), the focus of materials at the elementary school
level bears only superficial resemblance to the practice of science. First, as Kathy Metz points out, many
materials assume  that   the logic   of  inquiry is beyond   children's      capabilities, engaging   children  instead in
practicing "one or more science process skills" (p. 3, Metz, in press). Second, the texts that are included offer
few opportunities to use text in the ways that scientists use text (Crawford, Hurd, & Weller, 1996).

         Our conceptualization      of   inquiry-based   science  instruction      is that children   engage   in  1st-hand
investigation involving inquiry about common phenomena in our world, as well as 2nd-hand investigation in
which they learn about and evaluate other's investigations of the same or similar phenomena, as would a scientist

                                                         318
(Magnusson & Palincsar, 1995). This view has led us to devise text that support such 2nd-hand investigation.
These texts are modeled after the notebook of a scientist, and are referred to as notebook texts (Palincsar &
Magnusson, 2001). The use of notebook texts is assumed to be in interplay with 1st-hand investigation, as would
be the case for scientists. Given that curriculum units are not designed in this fashion, the question arises: Which
contexts students should investigate 1st-hand and which are best experienced in a 2nd-hand way, and how should
these investigations fit together? While we have identified a set of theoretically-based principles that guide our
thinking about the answer to this question (Magnusson & Palincsar, in press), the research described in this paper
sought to examine the question empirically.

Theoretical Framework
       The  writings of biologist-and-curriculum theorist, Joseph Schwab (1962) have influenced our thinking
in important ways. Drawing upon his own experiences as a scientist, as well as his knowledge of contemporary
work in the history and philosophy of science (e.g., Kuhn, 1970), Schwab argued for 1st-hand investigative
contexts that provide opportunities for students to understand the uncertainties and difficulties of knowledge
production. He advocated for contexts that feature "phenomena which give rise to problems, the circumstances
surrounding the acquisition of data for solving these problems, and the difficulties of working with and among
these circumstances," because such a context no longer tells the student "what to do and what to expect"
(Schwab, 1962, p. 54, 55).
       With respect to 2nd-hand investigation, Schwab advocated the use of original papers "translated" for
specific student use. In his words:
       Each individual     paper    poses the problem of  discovering its basic parts (problem, data,
       interpretation, and so on). Each poses the further problem of discerning the relationship among
       these parts: why the data sought were the appropriate data for the problem; why the data
       actually acquired depart from the data sought; what principles justify the interpretation of the
       data. . . . Are the actual data as appropriate as the reporting scientist considers them to be?
       What additional     assumptions,    beyond  those noted by the  author,  are involved in [t]his
       interpretation? (p. 73-74).
       In this spirit, we developed "notebook texts" that model key elements of the notebooks of scientists. In
our notebook texts, a fictitious scientist named Lesley Park uses her entries to: (a) identify a problem to
investigate, (b) think about how to model the problem for investigation, (c) represent the data collected to
support its analysis, (d) describe claims she believes she can make from these data, (e) respond to the critical
reactions of her colleagues as they weigh the evidence for her claims, and (f) revise her thinking in light of new
data. Notebook texts typically begin with the scientist describing a real-world event she noticed and decided to
study, followed by a description of how it was studied, and a series of investigations in which data were
collected, analyzed, and claims were made. Figures 1 and 2 show excerpts from one of the notebook texts used in

the study reported in this paper.
          Figure 1. The first page from Lesley's notebook regarding the study of horizontal motion.

                                                    319
       Figure 2. A page from the Lesley's notebook regarding the study of motion down an inclined plane.

        The  data  collected  by  Lesley are actual   or slightly modified data2  that  we  have collected, and    we
sometimes feature data from actual scientific investigation of the past (e.g., Newton's study of light through
prisms). Notebook texts do not make explicit all of the thinking and decision-making behind what is written, or
represented in drawings, partly to resemble an actual notebook where every step in the thinking process is not
generally  spelled out, but  also to provide  genuine    reasons  to  discuss the information  in  text, as Schwab
encouraged.

        Our deliberations about how to design the texts to be used in interplay consider the type of opportunities
that they each provide, which we refer to as affordances, as well as the ways in which they might limit learning
opportunities, which we refer to as constraints. For example, during second-hand investigations with notebook
texts students trace a "single" line of reasoning from question to conclusion, which they are encouraged to
critique. 3 A single line of reasoning has the advantage of providing students with a simpler conceptual terrain
than one   featuring multiple lines  of reasoning.   Moreover,    the notebook   text presentation places the same
information at all of the students' disposal, supporting collaborative reasoning across the classroom community.

        In contrast, 1st-hand investigations result in multiple lines of reasoning from question to conclusion
across student investigative groups. This can be a more challenging context for students to understand because
the conceptual terrain under discussion is less distinct, but it can also motivate students to better concretize and
clarify their ideas in order to explore the extent to which their ideas are really the same or different from one
another's.  Furthermore, 1st-hand investigations    provide the   opportunity to  explore concretely the  results  of
various methods for collecting and analyzing data, which can enrich students' thinking, while at the same time
potentially "muddying    the  waters" for students    building  new   knowledge.  Table   1 provides  a  conceptual
comparison of 1st- and 2nd-hand modes of investigation.

        The differences in opportunities between these modes of investigation, as well as the trade-offs within a
mode of investigation, raise the question of how to ascertain when student learning is better supported via work
in the more conceptually-varied context of 1st-hand investigation, and when is it better for students to engage in
learning via the more streamlined, but "once-removed" context of 2nd-hand investigation. This is the question
that motivated the research reported in this paper.

                                                      320
Table 1. Comparison of the attributes of different modes of scientific inquiry.
                                Affordances                                               Constraints
  1st-hand      Direct experiences can be powerful in             · Variations in the data (due to the complexities of the
                concretizing scientific relationships               real world and the many possible sources of error)
                describing the physical world.                      increase the challenge of seeing patterns in the data
                                                                  · Students may make sense of their experiences in quite
                                                                    different ways from scientists.
                Direct experiences in which one                   · The social and physical demands of 1st-hand
                manipulates the physical world, are                 investigations (e.g., coordinating thinking and activity
                powerful means for trying out and testing           within a group, coordinating an array of materials)
                one's thinking.                                     leave little room for students to focus conceptually,
                                                                    requiring additional time for conceptual invention to
                                                                    make meaning of what occurred.
                                                                  · Students may lose sight of the targeted question and
                                                                    become more engaged in pursing their own questions.
  1st-hand      Collaborating to produce knowledge claims         Children's independent inquiry is not automatically
     (cont.)    is an important part of scientific activity.      guided by the cultural values, beliefs, norms, and
                                                                  conventions of the scientific community (e.g., need for
                                                                  adequate evidence, role of disconfirming evidence in
                                                                  revising thinking). Thus, students' claims might be quite
                                                                  contrary to the claims developed by scientists, sometimes
                                                                  across years of study.
  2nd-hand      A common set of pertinent information for         Interpretation of the information represented in static
                the doing of science ­ question, method,           terms is required, and children's interpretations in the
                data, knowledge claims ­ is presented to all       face of static presentation may be erroneous.
                children.                                         The static nature of the information in the text may
                                                                   constrain children's abilities to employ the type of
                                                                   reasoning illustrated, when they inquire on their own.
                The processes of thinking that produce            The process of scientific reasoning is embedded within a
                scientific knowledge are "laid bare,"             context and particular conceptual ideas; thus, is it not
                serving as a model for one's own thinking         transparent, and teacher guidance is required to help
                during scientific investigation.                  students identify and evaluate the scientific reasoning and
                                                                  decision making modeled in the text.

Methodology and Research Design
         Our research called for an experimental design with multiple conditions that were counterbalanced
for order. We selected to focus on the topic of motion for three reasons: (1) it is commonly studied in the
elementary school at the level we were working (in fact, it is now specified by the state of Michigan as a
topic for the grade at which we conducted this study), (2) it is an easy context to conduct meaningful
investigation of the physical world (i.e., does not require complex procedures or highly specialized or
sophisticated tools), and (3) there are relatively easy relationships that can be identified from the study of
this topic    (e.g., force-motion      relationships,   mass-motion      relationships)    as  well   as  more   complex
relationships (force-mass-motion relationship).

         We    chose   to  focus   the  investigation   on    the study  of motion  in    two investigative  contexts        ­
horizontal   motion    across   a table versus    motion     down  a ramp.    Materials   for these   two contexts      were
designed     such that either   context could    be   investigated  in a 1st- or 2nd-hand   way.    This permitted     us   to
investigate learning across conditions in a 2 x 2 design. Both the topic of investigation and the investigation
type were counter-balanced, creating four conditions (Figure 3). Each investigation took five, one-hour
sessions, and were taught by the co-PIs of the project (Palincsar and Magnusson). Both contexts for
learning about motion were designed to promote the development of student understanding regarding the
influence of force and mass on the motion of objects, albeit only in a straight line trajectory.

         Participants came from two, intact 4th grade classes from a district with an urban profile, with
51% of the students in the school being African American, and 58.5% receiving free or reduced-cost lunch.
Students in each class (n24) were matched on a combined score from an assessment of prior knowledge
about motion and a standardized reading achievement measure, and were split in half for the study, with
students randomly assigned to conditions. Twelve students participated in each condition.

                                                              321
                        Investigation            Conditions              Investigation          Conditions
                            Type                1            2              Type              3            4
     WEEK 1                1st-hand         table           ramp          2nd-hand          table        ramp
     WEEK 2                2nd-hand         ramp            table         1st-hand          ramp         table

                                 Figure 3. Experimental research conditions.

        A paper-pencil assessment was administered prior to any instruction, giving us an indication of
students' prior knowledge of the topic area, and subsets of that assessment were administered following
each investigation ­ involving only those items pertaining to the context just investigated, giving us an
indication of what was learned. The assessment was designed to examine student understanding with
respect to  scientific content and   reasoning    regarding the   motion of objects,   and contained 29 items,
approximately half of which concerned motion on a flat surface and half motion down an inclined plane. In
terms of scientific content, questions addressed the role of force and mass in influencing motion, and the
interpretation of time data from changes in those variables presented in tables. Figure 4a shows an example
of a science content item. The questions pertaining to scientific reasoning concerned the proper use of tools
for measuring motion, the use of appropriate procedures for investigating motion, accurate analysis of
motion data, and identification of accurate knowledge claims from the results of investigations. Figure 4b
illustrates a scientific reasoning item regarding motion.4

Findings
        Figure  5 shows    mean     score changes   for students  by condition,  according   to type of item ­
scientific content versus scientific reasoning ­ for the two contexts in which students studied motion: across
a table (horizontal plane) and down ramp (inclined plane). Results in term of these subsets of items on the
assessment raise the question of whether students' prior knowledge across conditions was equivalent.5
Statistical comparisons showed that they were, with the exception of reasoning about motion across a
table: students in Condition 2 had statistically significantly less prior knowledge than students in the other
conditions.

        One important observation from these results is that there was no one condition in which student
performance was most advantaged across both contexts and with respect to the development of scientific
content and reasoning. Instead, there was a complex interaction of learning by condition. Furthermore, and
unexpected result was that in each condition, there was a decrease in student performance for one of the
subtests. We hypothesize that these decreases result from interference effects due to the short time span of
the instruction. Specifically, while the variables of mass and force influence motion in both contexts, the
influence of mass is not salient in the ramp context; students had to be guided to measure force in relation
to mass differences, but indirectly. (stretch of a spring attached to the cart at the top of the ramp). This
apparent difference might have interfered with the development of desired knowledge due to insufficient
instructional time to fully discuss this issue.

                       (a)                                                                    (b)
        Figure 4. Items assessing student science content (a) and reasoning (b) knowledge about motion.

                                                      322
                    Correct%Correct%
                                                                                   correct%correct%
                              TABLE:   Sci.  Content    Knowledge                                   TABLE:     Scientific   Reasoning
                            0.70                                                                 0.70

                            0.60                                                                 0.60

                            0.50                                                                 0.50

                            0.40                                                                 0.40
                            0.30                                                                 0.30

                            0.20                                                                 0.20
                            0.10                                                                 0.10
                            0.00                                                                 0.00
                                       Pre-test           Post-test                                         Pre-test            Post-test

                                            Condition 1        Condition 2                                      Condition 1         Condition 2
                                            Condition 3        Condition 4                                      Condition 3         Condition 4

                      RAMP:        Science    Content    Knowledge                                  RAMP:     Scientific   Reasoning
                            0.70                                                                 0.70

                            0.60                                                                 0.60

                            0.50                                                                 0.50

                            0.40                                                                 0.40

                            0.30                                                                 0.30

                            0.20                                                                 0.20

                            0.10                                                                 0.10

                            0.00                                                                 0.00
                                       Pre-test           Post-test                                         Pre-test           Post-test

                                            Condition 1        Condition 2                                       Condition 1        Condition 2
                                            Condition 3        Condition 4                                       Condition 3        Condition 4

   Figure 5. Changes in student understanding about motion across a table (top) and down a ramp (bottom).

        Our analysis of these results sought to determine whether we could tease out the effects of the
particular elements of the instructional design; that is, the order of contexts for learning about motion
(table first, ramp second versus ramp first table second), and the mode of investigation in which students
learned about motion             (1st- vs.  2nd-hand    with the   notebook     texts).               We   wondered       whether   students'    initial
investigation of motion, regardless of whether it was about motion across a table or down a ramp, or 1st- or
2nd-hand, advantaged their learning; and we wondered whether students' learning via 1st-hand investigation
or 2nd-hand investigation              was  advantageous,    regardless      of whether                 it was their      initial  or final study   of
motion. Due to our small sample size, we utilized the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test ­ a one-way
analysis of variance for independent samples ­ to examine these questions. Table 2 shows the results of
these comparisons.

Table 2. Significance scores for comparison by condition of results from particular elements of instruction

   Element of Instruction                    Learning about Sci. Content                                Learning about Sci. Reasoning
   Initial Investigation                                     .657                                                            .089
   Final Investigation                                       .089                                                         .004
   1st-hand Investigation                                    .228                                                            .127
   2nd-hand Investigation                                    .122                                                            .060
        These  results            indicate   that there     were    no     general               differences  across       condition   by   mode    of
investigation alone, but students were advantaged in learning about scientific reasoning in their final
investigation. Descriptive statistics indicate that increased understanding resulted from Conditions 1 and 2,
and these were both cases in which the investigation was 2nd-hand. Conditions 3 and 4 led to decreased
understanding. We think this result provides some evidence that 2nd-hand investigations with our notebook

                                                                    323
texts advantaged student development of scientific reasoning, but only in contexts where their use followed
1st-hand investigation.

       A second set of analyses compared changes in learning by investigation characteristics; that is,
whether student learning differed in their initial versus their final investigation, and whether it differed
when learning via 1st-hand versus 2nd-hand investigation. Table 3 shows the Kruskal-Wallis test results of
these comparisons.

Table 3. Significance scores for comparison by condition of results from particular characteristics of
investigation

 Investigation Characteristics                 Learning about Sci. Content        Learning about Sci. Reasoning
 Final VERSUS Initial Investigation                       .163                               .002
 2nd-hand VERSUS 1st-hand Investigation                  .036                                .011

       These results indicate that differences in learning about scientific reasoning depended upon the
amount of experience, as well as the mode of investigation experienced. With respect to amount, when 2nd-
hand investigations with our notebook text followed 1st-hand investigation, students showed more growth
in scientific reasoning. With respect to the mode of investigation, the greatest positive change was in
Condition 4 and the greatest negative change was in Condition 3. These conditions were opposite in the
contexts assigned to 1st- versus 2nd-hand investigation, but both started with 2nd-hand investigations. In that
circumstance, it was an advantage to start with a study of the ramp context.

       At a more conservative level of significance, differences learning about scientific content were
statistically significant, but only relative to the type of investigation. Conditions 1 and 3 resulted in
increased understanding, and Conditions 2 and 4 resulted in a decrease in understanding. The contrast in
results for the extreme cases ­ Conditions 2 and 3 ­ are striking because the primary difference was
whether the table or the ramp context was studied first. The greatest positive change was for the table
context followed by the ramp context (Condition 3). These results indicate that students benefit more if
they study motion on a horizontal plane before studying motion down an inclined plane.

Significance
       The complexity of the interactions in our results suggest that more research is needed in this vein
for us to make broad generalizations. Despite: (1) the relative brevity of instruction (two weeks), , (2) the
children's inexperience with inquiry-based science instruction, and (3) the relatively small sample sizes,
there were statistically significant results that we think make important contributions to our thinking about
instruction in science. First, we think the evidence suggesting an advantage to learning from contexts in a
particular order is sufficiently strong to suggest that this is an important parameter to examine in research
on instruction  in science. Second,   we think   the evidence   suggesting   some advantages to conducting
investigations with notebook texts is sufficiently strong to view it as additional evidence of the benefits of
having notebook texts as a part of inquiry-based science instruction. Third, we think these results are strong
enough to make an argument for the study of motion involving the use of notebook texts, in the following
way: beginning   with   1st-hand investigation on a  horizontal plane followed  by 2nd-hand investigation   of
motion down a ramp using a notebook text, which we also think is defensible purely on conceptual grounds
due to the "hidden" element of force in a ramp context. The fact the our results are consistent with what we
would argue for on theoretical grounds suggests a fourth significant point: it is possible to empirically test
principles of curriculum and instruction, even with short instructional interventions. We believe this is an
important outcome considering the call for teachers to use "best" practices as identified from research.
Many of the materials teachers use in science instruction have not been subjected to empirical studies that
so closely examine learning with respect to the sequence and/or mode of activity employed. We believe
that our findings suggest that such work is needed. Moreover, despite the challenges of conducting rigorous
experimental research (Mosteller & Boruch, 2002), our results suggest that meaningful results are possible
when conducting this research, even from short instructional interventions. Finally, we also submit that
studies of this nature should be replicated, particularly with respect to different topic areas. Our next study
will be conducted in a similar vein, and will utilize the findings from this study by examining learning from

                                                     324
the specified  interplay   condition   compared  to  learning  via  1st-hand    only  and  2nd-hand  only investigative
experiences.

Endnotes
(1)  The standards say that the processes by which knowledge presented was acquired "should be identified and note
     sources as "authoritative and accepted within the scientific community" (NRC, 1996, p. 31).
(2)  There are a considerable number of issues that we can discuss regarding our decisions about what data to feature,
     how much, and to what level of precision, but that is beyond the scope of this paper. Perhaps what is important to
     know is that our intent to feature data that are as close to what would actually be observed for the specific context.
     Modifications are sometimes made to accommodate perceived student imitations in knowledge, such as reporting
     data to the tenths, rather than hundredths place, as occurs in our electricity texts regarding the measurement of
     current.  In the case of the motion text, despite our knowledge that students would be unfamiliar with reading
     values to the hundredths place, the instruction (which was modified from the Science and Technology for Children
     unit entitled Motion and Design) called for students to observe time with stopwatches that measured time to the
     hundredths of a second.  So, we kept the time of data as we collected it.
(3)  We've placed the word single in quotation marks because the fictitious scientist may follow more that one line of
     reasoning across a notebook text.
(4)  This item is a modified version of a released item that appeared on the TIMSS assessment, which can be accessed
     via: http://timss.bc.edu/timss1995i/Items.html
(5)  Students' prior knowledge as indicated by total scores for the whole assessment or totals for all the content or all
     the reasoning items also showed no statistically-significant differences across students in the conditions.

References
Alonzo, A., Jones, M., Aschbacher, P., & Roth, E. (2003). Albatross, Add-On, or Tool:      How Teachers Conceptualized
         the Relationship of the Second Hand Investigation Text to a Hands-On Inquiry Science Curriculum. Paper
         presented at the American Educational Research Assoc. conference. Chicago, IL, April.
Crawford,  S.  Y., Hurd, J. M., & Weller,  A. C. (1996).   From   print to electronic:  The  transformation of    scientific
         communication. Medford, NJ: Information Today, Inc.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970).  The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Magnusson, S. J. & Palincsar, A. S. (in press). The application of theory to the design of innovative texts supporting
         science instruction. In M. Constas & R. Sternberg (Eds.), Translating Educational Theory and Research into
         Practice. Mahweh, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates.
Magnusson, S. J., & Palincsar, A. S. (1995). Learning environments as a site of science education reform. Theory into
         Practice, 34(1), 1-8.
Metz, K. E. (in press). Children's understanding of scientific inquiry: Their thinking as designers of research and
         interpreters of data. Cognition and Instruction.
Mosteller, F., &   Boruch, R. (2002).  Evidence matters:  Randomized    trials  in education research. Washington,    DC:
         Brookings Institution Press.
National Research    Council  (NRC)   (1996). National    Science Education     Standards. Washington,   D.C.:     National
         Academy Press.
Palincsar, A. S. & Magnusson, S. J. (2001). The interplay of first-hand and text-based investigations to model and
         support the development of scientific knowledge and reasoning. In S. Carver & D. Klahr (Eds.), Cognition
         and Instruction: Twenty-five years of progress (pp. 151-193). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schwab, J. J. (1962). The teaching of science as enquiry. In J. Schwab & P. Brandwein (Eds.), The Teaching of Science
         (pp. 1-103). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Shymansky, J. A., Yore, L. D., & Good, R. (1991). Elementary school teachers' beliefs about and perceptions of
         elementary school science, science reading, science textbook, and supportive instructional factors. Journal of
         Research in Science Teaching, 28 (5), 437-454.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation under the program for Research on
Learning in Education (REC-0207651). All opinions expressed in this work are the authors' and do not necessarily
represent the view of either the funding agency or the University of Michigan.

                                                           325
