                  World Knowledge Driving Young Readers'
                               Comprehension Difficulties

                  Danielle S. McNamara, Randy G. Floyd, Rachel Best, & Max Louwerse
                  202 Psychology Building, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN       38152
                                  Tel: 901 678 2326, Fax: 901 678 2579
                               Email: d.mcnamara@mail.psyc.memphis.edu

         Abstract: Our goal in this project is to develop a better understanding of young readers'
         difficulties in comprehending text, and how those difficulties vary as a function of reader
         aptitudes and text genre. Therefore, we examined the effects of reading decoding abilities
         and world knowledge (assessed using the Woodcock­Johnson III Tests of Achievement)
         on 61 third-grade readers' comprehension of narrative and expository texts.     The children
         read a narrative (445 words) and an expository (464 words) text. Comprehension of each
         text was assessed with 12 multiple-choice questions.  Comprehension of the narrative text
         improved as a function of decoding ability.  In contrast, expository text comprehension
         was driven  by  world knowledge.   The  latter result indicates   that the low-knowledge
         children were   not able to   make  the knowledge-based       inferences required     by the
         expository text,  replicating previous  work   conducted   with   adult populations   (e.g.,
         McNamara, 2001). Potential solutions to facilitate comprehension from expository texts,
         such as increased text cohesion and reading strategy instruction are discussed.

Introduction
         Texts are used as educational tools from the onset of schooling in the elementary school years.
Therefore, understanding and learning from written material is of paramount importance to academic
success.  Of course, children's reading competency develops throughout the school years.          However, a
critical period in reading development seems to occur between the third and fifth grades.   An emergence of
comprehension difficulties around the middle of this period is sometimes referred to as the fourth-grade
slump (Meichenbaum & Biemiller, 1998; Sweet & Snow, 2003). Our study explored children's reading
comprehension near the beginning of this period, in the third grade. We considered the demands children
face when comprehending school-based texts (narrative or expository) and, accordingly the importance of
two reader-based competencies (prior knowledge level and reading decoding ability) in the comprehension
of narrative and expository texts. We anticipate that our research will be of crucial educational importance;
that is if we understand factors that drive the comprehension of school-based texts, we are in a better
position to remedy comprehension problems among struggling young readers.

         Our interest in  investigating  reading comprehension      in young    readers   stemmed   from   the
observation that the fourth-grade slump may be related to a change in reading requirements around the third
and fourth grade levels.  Prior to the third grade, most reading activities are geared toward the goal of
learning how to read. Subsequently, children are increasingly required to read to learn. To learn new topics
such as  science, children are exposed   to increasingly  difficult texts  and,  perhaps   for the first time,
expository texts. The increased exposure to expository texts has important implications for third and fourth
grade students. In particular, these students face critical comprehension challenges from expository texts,
particularly those covering scientific material (Bowen, 1999; Snow, 2002).

         Successful reading comprehension requires the efficient coordination and integration of a number
of underlying processes (Snow, 2002), which include word decoding abilities (Perfetti, 1985) and the
utilization of world knowledge (Kintsch, 1988). Science texts present a special case for comprehension
because they introduce many new concepts (Carey, 1986), which are oftentimes abstract and esoteric
(Meyerson, Ford, Jones, & Ward, 1991). Accordingly, the reader's prior knowledge plays a vital role in the
integration and assimilation of new content-based information; readers with greater knowledge are more
likely to link new concepts with their existing knowledge schemas. However, often students do not have

                                                   326
enough knowledge to succeed in their courses in the United States (Snow, 2002). Content difficulty is
compounded by the unique style in which expository texts are written. For example, science texts typically
adopt an `objective' method of writing, which contrasts to the narrative-style, to which young children are
frequently  exposed.  Children's  stories usually follow     a uniform   structure, comprising  a  sequence  of
causally related events (Cain, 1996). These events are oftentimes familiar to young children (e.g., going out
to dinner). Overall, narrative texts place fewer demands on the child than expository texts in terms of
information density and complexity.

         Thus far, we have claimed that scientific texts present difficulty for the young reader because of
the style in which they are written and the complexity of the content. A principal difference between
narrative and  expository  texts concerns   the knowledge      demands   placed  on  the child  needed  for the
comprehension of scientific material. As such, one driving factor for the comprehension of expository texts
in contrast to narrative texts is readers' knowledge. A great deal of research has shown that readers' prior
knowledge facilitates and enhances comprehension and learning from expository texts, such as science
texts (e.g., Afflerbach, 1986; Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981; Chiesi, Spilich, & Voss, 1979; Lundeberg,
1987; Means & Voss, 1985). Readers who have greater domain knowledge about the topic of text have
better memory   for  the text and   develop  a  deeper    understanding   of the information   conveyed  (e.g.,
McNamara & Kintsch, 1996; McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, & Kintsch, 1996).              Moreover, the influence of
readers' knowledge on expository text comprehension can be greater than that of reading abilities (e.g.,
Chiesi, Spilich, & Voss, 1979; O'Reilly & McNamara, 2002).

         The effects of knowledge on the comprehension of expository texts led us to the hypothesis that
the fourth  grade slump    may   be related, at  least   in part, to  knowledge  required   for the successful
comprehension of scientific texts. In other words, the shift in reading materials in the third and fourth
grades (i.e., greater emphasis on expository texts) is predicted to have an important bearing on declining
levels of comprehension in the fourth grade. If this is the case, we should find that world knowledge is a
major driving force in children's comprehension of expository texts. In contrast, we should find that the
comprehension of narrative texts is less dependent on prior knowledge, and rather related more to other
reading-related factors, such as reading decoding skills. Thus, it may be that a child who shows little
difficulty reading a narrative text may have sudden comprehension problems when faced with expository
text.  Such a finding would provide evidence that the skill sets that are necessary for understanding
narratives are different from that of expository texts.

         In terms of the theoretical positions of reading comprehension, the "simple view" of reading
similarly proposes that reading comprehension is the product of two variables: reading decoding and
linguistic comprehension (Gough, Hoover, & Peterson, 1996; Hoover & Gough, 1990). Reading decoding
represents the ability to apply letter­sound correspondence rules when reading words and non-words. Many
individuals fail to develop proficient reading decoding ability, which limits their reading for understanding
(Perfetti, 1985; Lyon, 2002; Vellutino, 2003). Linguistic comprehension represents the process by which
the   components   of language    (i.e.,  words,  sentences,      or discourse)  are  understood.   Linguistic
comprehension, as measured by tests of listening comprehension, word knowledge, and world knowledge,
relate conceptually to the deeper-level understanding constructed by the reader. In addition, correlational
and factor analytic evidence provide further support for the relations between linguistic comprehension and
world knowledge (McGrew, 1997; McGrew & Woodcock, 2001).

         Another related theoretical notion regards levels of comprehension, as described by Kintsch's
Construction-Integration   model    of text comprehension      (1988;   1998). His  theory  of  comprehension
distinguishes between  the surface  code, the propositional    textbase, and the situation  model. The  surface
code preserves the exact wording and syntax of clauses, and rapidly fades from memory. The textbase
contains explicit propositions that preserve the meaning but not the exact wording and syntax. The situation
model is the general or global content of the text. For expository text, the situation model refers to the
integration of the  textbase  with  the  reader's knowledge       about  the text's subject matter  and world
knowledge. For narrative text, it refers to the reader's understanding of the characters, settings, actions, and
events in the reader's mental representation of the story. This representation is constructed inferentially

                                                        327
through interactions between the explicit text, world knowledge, and the comprehension goals of the reader
(Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso, 1994; Johnson-Laird, 1983; Kintsch, 1998).

         Most relevant to our current question is the importance placed on the activation and use of prior
knowledge to form a coherent situation model of the text.      Moreover, the availability of prior knowledge
while reading becomes particularly important when the reader is faced with less cohesive text.   Research by
McNamara and colleagues (McNamara, 2001; McNamara, in press; McNamara et al., 1996, McNamara &
Kintsch,  1996) has   indicated that knowledge   deficiencies   are aggravated  by less  cohesive  texts. For
example, McNamara et al. (1996) examined the effects of text cohesion and prior knowledge for middle-
school students' comprehension of a science text about heart disease.   The authors found that increased text
cohesion benefited low-knowledge readers across various measures of comprehension, including free
recall, open-ended comprehension questions, and a keyword sorting task. Essentially, low-knowledge
readers cannot easily fill in gaps in low-cohesion texts because they do not have the knowledge to generate
the necessary inferences.  Therefore, low-knowledge readers need a high-cohesion text to understand and
remember the content.   In contrast, high-knowledge readers are less affected by text cohesion, and often
benefit from low-cohesion texts because they possess the knowledge needed to generate inferences and fill
cohesion  gaps.   Moreover,  inference   processing   induced   by  low-cohesion   text can  increase   active
processing thereby facilitating deeper-level processing. This, in turn, enhances comprehension.

         Our analyses of cohesion for texts used in schools during this critical period indicate that text
cohesion is a particular problem.   Though many texts at those grade levels may use short sentences, and
sometimes even stick to relatively familiar words, they often lack the cohesive devises that young readers
need to make sense of text (Graesser, McNamara, & Louwerse, 2003).       For example, texts for this age level
contain  very few connectives   such  as although,   because,   consequently,  and so   on.  Connectives are
essential for allowing a reader with less knowledge to know what type of relationship exists between to
successive ideas. These types of cohesion gaps in their learning materials would render readily apparent
any knowledge   deficiencies that  a child  may have.   And, those knowledge deficits will most likely to
appear when the child is asked to read the more knowledge demanding material that appears in expository
texts.

         To provide an initial investigation of these ideas, we examined here the effects of text genre, world
knowledge,  and   word decoding   abilities third-graders' text comprehension.  In terms of text genre, we
focus on narrative and science (expository) texts.   The texts that we have chosen for this study are typical
passages from third grade textbooks.  Our hypotheses are that the children's comprehension of the narrative
passage  will be  superior  to  the  expository passage.    Also,  the reader abilities associated with   the
comprehension of the two passages will differ; while the comprehension of the science passage will be
primarily driven by children's level of world knowledge, the comprehension of the narrative text will
primarily be driven by reading decoding abilities. While such results will certainly not close the book on
the question we are pursuing, we believe that it will provide evidence as to whether knowledge is an
important consideration when comprehension problems are observed during this developmental period.

Method
Participants
         Participants  were 61    children  enrolled in the third  grade at two  public  schools  in  a large
metropolitan school district. Children ranged in age from 8 years, 4 months to 10 years, 7 months (M =
109.7 months, SD = 6.0 months). Girls formed 52% of the sample (n = 32), and boys formed 48% of the
sample (n = 29). Approximately, 57% of children were Black (n = 35), 28% were White (n = 17), 7% were
biracial (n = 4), and 3% were Asian­Pacific Islanders (n = 2).

Materials
Texts. The children read two texts, one narrative and one expository (see Table 1). The narrative text,
Orlando, was obtained from Addison Wesley's Phonics Take-Home Reader, Grade 2. The expository text,
Needs of Plants, was obtained from McGraw­Hill's Science, Grade 2. Due to time constraints, only one
text was selected for each genre.

                                                     328
Table 1. Select Characteristics of the Narrative and Expository Texts

   Text                            Number Words         Number Sentences      Flesch­Kincaid grade level
   Narrative (Orlando)                     445                  67                         3.6
   Expository (Needs of Plants)            464                  45                         4.4

         Multiple-choice questions. Twelve multiple-choice questions for each text measured textbase and
situation model levels of understanding (Givón, 1993; Louwerse, 2002; Kintsch, 1998; McNamara et al.,
1996). Each question and three possible answers were presented orally and visually, and the children were
required to vocalize the correct answer.

         Four of the 12 questions from the narrative text were answered correctly by more than 85% of the
sample. In a conservative attempt to eliminate question level ceiling effects and to facilitate a normally
distributed total score for the narrative text, these 4 questions were omitted. Therefore, 8 questions were
used to create the total score. From the expository text, the response patterns to all 12 questions did not
demonstrate ceiling effects. For each child and each text, the proportion of correct answers to the total
number of acceptable questions (8 or 12) was calculated.

         Aptitude Measures. Children completed three tests from the Woodcock­Johnson III Tests (WJ III)
of Achievement (Woodcock, McGrew, & Mather, 2001). The WJ III standardization sample, containing
8,818 individuals, was    formed using   a  stratified sampling plan  that controlled  for 10  individual and
community variables. Test items stemmed from extensive analysis of item content, and item scaling was
accomplished through application of Rasch analyses.

         The tests completed from the WJ III included the Word Attack test, Picture Vocabulary test, and
Academic Knowledge test. The Word Attack test measures reading decoding ability. Participants are
required to pronounce phonically regular non-words. The WJ III Picture Vocabulary test measures word
knowledge   and   requires participants  to name  familiar    and unfamiliar  pictured objects.   The WJ   III
Academic Knowledge test measures knowledge about the biological, physical, and social sciences and the
humanities. It comprises three subtests, Science, Social Studies, and Humanities, which are summed to
produce a test raw score.

         For each WJ III test, age-based standard scores (M = 100, SD = 15) were obtained. For the Word
Attack test, the standard score represents decoding ability. The standard scores for the Picture Vocabulary
and Academic Knowledge tests were averaged together to represent world knowledge.

Procedure
         Recruitment of children consisted of sending letters of invitation to parents of third-grade children
through the children's school classrooms. The letters provided information about the study and requested
that parents contact the researchers to schedule a testing session. Testing sessions were conducted on four
Saturdays during February, March, and May, 2003. After completion of the testing, children were provided
a $20 gift card to a department store, coupons from merchants, and school supplies.

         A  large assessment  battery was   completed    in a 1-hour  testing session, but  only  information
relevant to this study is reported here. Children first silently read a narrative or expository text within a 5-
minute period. After the text was removed from view, children answered 12 multiple-choice questions
about the text. This process was repeated with the remaining text (using a counterbalanced ordering). The
children then completed the aptitude measures for decoding ability and knowledge. Graduate students who
successfully completed a graduate course covering the administration of standardized tests completed all
testing.

Results
         The analysis compared children's performance on the multiple-choice questions relating to the
narrative text and expository text. A 2 x 2 x 2 mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on the
proportion correct scores obtained from the narrative and expository texts. The ANOVA included the
between-subjects variables of decoding ability (high, low), and world knowledge level (high, low), and the
within-subjects variables of text type (narrative, expository). Both between-subjects variables were formed

                                                       329
by grouping all participants who obtained a score below the median in the low group and all participants
who obtained scores at or above the median in the high group. For all effects, alpha was set to .05.

        The results of the ANOVA analysis are reported below in Table 2. In terms of main effects, the
ANOVA yielded a main effect for text genre, F(1,57) = 27.82, p < .001, MSE = .0304, reflecting better
comprehension of the narrative (M = .68, SD = .21) than the expository text (M = .50, SD = .15). Thus, as
expected,  children  comprehended    the  narrative  text more   successfully     than    the expository   text.
Furthermore, there was a main effect of world knowledge, F(1,57) = 5.17, p = .03, MSE = .028. Thus,
children with high levels of world knowledge better comprehended the texts (M = .62) than did the children
with low levels of world knowledge (M = .55). The main effect of decoding ability was not reliable.

        Turning to interaction effects, we predicted that there would be an interaction between genre,
reading   decoding  skill and  world  knowledge,    with  world    knowledge     being    associated  with  the
comprehension of the expository text and reading decoding skill being associated with the comprehension
of the narrative text. However, this 3-way interaction between decoding ability, world knowledge, and text
genre was not reliable, F < 2.   There was,  however,   a significant 2-way     interaction   between decoding
ability and text genre, F(1, 57) = 11.84, p = .001. Children with high decoding ability scored higher on
comprehension questions from the narrative text (M = .75, SD = .16) than the expository text (M = .49, SD
= .16), t(59) = -3.42, p = .001.  In contrast, children with   low decoding     ability  scored similarly when
comprehending the narrative text (M = .58, SD = .22) and the expository text (M = .51, SD = .15). Thus,
there was an effect of decoding ability for the narrative but not the expository text.

        Finally, the interaction between world knowledge and comprehension of different text genres was
marginal, F(1, 57) = 3.25, p = .08. Nonetheless, subsequent analyses confirmed that children with high
world  knowledge    scored  significantly higher  than  the children   with    low     world  knowledge   when
comprehending the expository text, t(59) = -3.11, p = .003, but there was no significant difference between
the children with high and low world knowledge when comprehending the narrative text. In sum, there was
an effect of world knowledge for the expository but not the narrative text.

Table 2. Proportion Correct on Comprehension Questions as a Function of Decoding Ability, World
knowledge, and Text Genre

                                                                      Text Genre
             Decoding ability        World              Expository              Narrative
                                     knowledge          Proportion (SD)         Proportion (SD)
             Low                     Low                    .48 (.12)              .57 (.22)
                                     High                   .57 (.19)              .61 (.24)
             High                    Low                    .36 (.14)              .76 (.21)
                                     High                   .55 (.12)              .75 (.14)

Discussion
        The study was designed to investigate factors that drive the comprehension of school-based texts
in the third grade, as children are entering the period known as the fourth-grade slump. Specifically, we
investigated the importance of two reading skills (world knowledge and reading decoding skill) in the
comprehension of expository and narrative texts. Our findings confirm our hypotheses that (1) narrative
texts are comprehended    more successfully  than   expository texts  and   (2) different   reader skills (prior
knowledge and reading decoding skills) are important for the comprehension of expository and narrative
texts. With regard to the latter point, our analysis has emphasized the importance of reader knowledge in
the comprehension of expository texts. Comprehension success was affected by the level of readers' prior
knowledge; low-knowledge readers were less likely to comprehend the expository text than were high-
knowledge readers. Conversely, comprehension of narrative text was most strongly supported by reading
decoding skills.

          Our results indicate that decoding ability is the driving force for the comprehension of narrative
texts. Efficient and automatic word decoding may free up working memory space, which can be used for
memory of the text base and inference making (Perfetti, 1985; Seigneuric, Ehrlich, Oakhill, & Yuill, 2000).

                                                    330
Most children likely have the necessary knowledge from life and educational experiences to form a sound
situation model for the typical narrative text. In addition, the contribution of decoding ability may be more
apparent because knowledge plays a less central role.

          As hypothesized,      our findings  also implicate knowledge    as    important for comprehending
expository texts. As indicated in the introduction, previous research has shown that there are large effects
of knowledge on reading comprehension for adults and older school students (e.g., Afflerbach, 1986;
McNamara & Kintsch, 1996). Indeed, the effects of knowledge often override effects of reading decoding
and comprehension abilities (Chiesi, Spilich, & Voss, 1979). This study confirms that when children are
confronted with expository texts, such as science texts, their ability to understand what they read is greatly
affected by prior knowledge. Thus, just as studies with young adult readers have shown, young children
with less prior knowledge will struggle to form a coherent situation model when reading expository texts
because they are not able to generate the necessary inferences.

          The current study has provided further evidence for the effect of background knowledge on young
readers' expository text comprehension. Specifically, the young readers in our study better understood the
more familiar narrative than they did the less familiar science text. Furthermore, their world knowledge was
a significant factor influencing their ability to understand the science text. These results are thus indicative
of one problem that children may face when they reach the third grade; that is, how to deal with low
cohesion, difficult science texts which demand knowledge that these readers may not yet possess. This
situation, we expect, could spiral such that the child fails to understand the learning material and thus goes
deeper into a knowledge debt.    By the fourth grade, the situation would be aggravated and readily apparent.
Certainly other factors will come into play, such as changes in the nature of instruction and changes in
reader motivation and strategy use (Artelt, Schiefele, & Schneider, 2001; Carroll, 2000; Mokhtari, &
Reichard, 2002).     However,   our  purpose  here was limited  to examining    whether  knowledge  may   be a
considerable factor for researchers and educators to consider.

          One important question that arises regards solutions to remedy this situation.    In our laboratory,
we are taking two approaches to this problem.       First, we are examining the success of teaching reading
strategies to students that help them to overcome their knowledge deficits.    Research conducted with young
adults and high-school students (e.g., Best, Ozuru, & McNamara, 2004; McNamara, in press; McNamara,
Best, & Castellano, 2003; McNamara & Scott, 1999) has shown that a reading strategy intervention called
Self-Explanation Reading Training (SERT) helps low-knowledge and less strategic readers overcome
knowledge deficits.    SERT teaches students to self-explain text by using active reading strategies, such as
making bridging and elaborative inferences using common sense and logic.          The research has shown that
SERT     facilitates and enhances    low-knowledge    readers'  comprehension     of informational  texts. An
automated system called the Interactive Strategy Trainer for Active Reading and Thinking (iSTART) has
been developed to deliver SERT using pedagogical agents and interactive dialog (McNamara, Levinstein,
& Boonthum, 2003; O'Reilly, Sinclair, & McNamara, 2004).         By using the latest technologies in intelligent
tutoring systems, iSTART guides young readers through text by suggesting different reading strategies.
Although the techniques and systems that we have developed thus far are targeted at young adults, we
believe that a similar system could help younger readers learn strategies that help them navigate difficult
text.

          Second, we assume that text quality can be improved and that this quality can be tailored to reader
ability. For instance, comprehension for low-knowledge readers may be facilitated by more cohesive texts,
which    contain fewer   informational   gaps (McNamara   et al.,  1996; McNamara      &  Kintsch, 1996).  The
general approach to increasing text cohesion is to add surface-level indicators of relations between ideas in
the text, such as explicit linguistic elements (e.g., words, features, cues, signals and constituents), which
guide the reader to the meaning of the text. Thus, signaling causal connections, with terms such as because
and consequently, help the reader interpret and remember relationships between concepts. Accordingly, one
way to help readers comprehend texts is to modify cohesion. This can be done in numerous ways, such as
adding low-level information (e.g., identifying anaphoric referents, synonymous terms, connective ties, and
headers) and supplying background information that was previously left unstated in the text.

          However, one roadblock to that avenue has been the lack of automated measures of cohesion.
Currently,  readers,   writers, editors, educators, researchers,  and policy    makers can  only estimate  the

                                                      331
appropriateness   of  a text using    common       readability formulas,     such    as  Flesch  Reading   Ease   and the
Flesch­Kincaid Grade Level, which are based on superficial factors such as the number of words in the
sentences and the number of letters or syllables per word (i.e., as a reflection of word frequency).              It is for
that reason that we are developing an automated tool, called Coh-Metrix, which provides measures of text
cohesion and text difficulty (McNamara, Louwerse & Graesser, 2003; Graesser, McNamara, Louwerse, &
Cai, 2003).   Coh-Metrix (version 1.0) automatically analyzes texts on over 50 types of cohesion relations
and over 200 measures of language and discourse by applying modules that use lexicons, classifiers,
syntactic parsers, shallow semantic interpreters, conceptual templates, latent semantic analysis, and other
components widely used in computational linguistics.            The ultimate goal is to have a tool that replaces
standard readability formulas by being sensitive to a range of cohesion relations, classes of inferences, as
well as reader abilities. This tool will allow publishing houses, educators, and researchers to measure the
readability of  a particular   text within   a   particular text     genre  tailored  at particular  reader  groups   (see
http://coh-metrix.memphis.edu).       A    better  understanding       of    the  effects  of    cohesion   on   readers'
comprehension will provide valuable insight and explicit direction on how to improve expository texts
while taking into consideration the target readers' aptitudes.

         One of our goals in the Coh-Metrix project has been to develop a better understanding of young
readers' difficulties in comprehending text, and how those difficulties vary as a function of reader aptitudes
and text  genre.  This  study  was    one   step  toward that  goal.      In addition,   the study  highlights   potential
considerations that may be made about struggling readers.            Specifically, comprehension problems exhibited
by  young   readers   may not  be   reading   problems   per   se,    but  rather knowledge      deficits, which  can  be
aggravated by low-cohesion, inconsiderate learning materials.

Acknowledgements
The research was supported by the Institute for Education Sciences (IES R3056020018-02).            Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the IES. We express thanks to a number of individuals who contribute to this project.       We are particularly
thankful to Art Graesser for his help at all levels of this project. We are grateful to Tenaha O'Reilly, Yasuhiro Ozuru,
David Dufty, and Kim Sumara for their contributions to data collection and analysis. We thank Celeste Arps, Scott
Baldwin, Jill Bose­Deakins,  Jennifer     Harmon,  Jennifer Key,     Cheryl  Lykins, Terra Mayberrry,    Melissa McGhee,
Bonnie Parnicky, Renee Shaver, and Kristen Yanchak for serving as test examiners. Finally, we are indebted to the
parents, teachers, staff, and children at Idlewild Elementary and White Station Elementary as well as Memphis City
schools administration for their support.

References
Artelt, C., Schiefele, U., & Schneider, W. (2001). Predictors of reading literacy. European Journal of Psychology of
          Education, 16, 363-383.
Afflerbach, P. (1986). The influence of prior knowledge on expert readers' importance assignment process. In J. A.
         Niles, &  R.V.  Lalik (Eds.),    National reading  conference      yearbook,   35. Solving problems  in  literacy:
         Learners, teachers and researchers (pp. 30-40).    Rochester, NY: National Reading Conference.
Best, R. M., Ozuru, Y., & McNamara, D. S. (2004). Self-explaining science texts: strategies, knowledge and reading
         skill. International Conference for the Learning Sciences, California, LA.
Cain, K.  (1996). Story   knowledge    and   comprehension     skill.  In C.  Cornaldi   &   J. Oakhill, (Eds.), Reading
         comprehension difficulties:. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Processes and Intervention.
Carey, S. (1986). Cognitive Science and Science Education. American Psychologist, 41, 1123-1130.
Carroll, J. B. (2000). The analysis of reading instruction: Perspectives from psychology and linguistics. Scientific
         Studies of Reading, 4, 3-17.
Chi, M., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and
         novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Chiesi, H. I., Spilich, G. J., & Voss, J. F. (1979). Acquisition of domain-related information in relation to high and low
         domain knowledge. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 275-290.
Givón, T. (1993).   English  grammar.     A  function-based  approach     (2 vols.). Amsterdam     and Philadelphia: John
         Benjamins.
Gough, P. B., Hoover, W. A., & Peterson, C. L. (1996). Some observations on a simple view of reading. In C. Cornoldi
         & J. Oakhill (Eds.), Reading comprehension difficulties: Process and intervention (pp. 1-13). Mahwah, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum.
Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., & Louwerse, M. M (2003). What do readers need to learn in order to process
         coherence relations in narrative and expository text. In A. P. Sweet & C. E. Snow (Eds.), Rethinking reading
         comprehension (pp. 82-98). New York: Guilford Press.

                                                         332
Graesser, A.  C., Singer, M.,  &  Trabasso,   T. (1994).  Constructing  inferences during  narrative text  comprehension.
          Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Hoover, W. A. & Gough, P. B. (1990). The simple view of reading. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal,
          2, 127-160.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kintsch,  W.  (1988).  The  role   of knowledge    in discourse   comprehension:    A    construction-integration  model.
          Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. Cambridge, England. Cambridge University Press.
Jurafsky, D., &   Martin, J.H.   (2000). Speech   and Language    Processing:   An  Introduction to   Natural    Language
           Processing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Louwerse, M. M. (2002). Computational retrieval of themes. In M. M. Louwerse & W. Van Peer (Eds.), Thematics:
          Interdisciplinary studies (pp. 189-212). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Lundeberg, M. (1987). Metacognitive aspects of reading comprehension: Studying understanding in legal case analysis.
          Reading Research Quarterly, 22, 407-432.
Lyon, R. G. (2002). Reading development, reading difficulties, and reading instruction: Educational and public health
          issues. Journal of School Psychology, 40, 3-6.
McGrew, K. S. (1997). Analysis of the major intelligence batteries according to a proposed comprehensive Gf-Gc
          framework. In D. P. Flanagan, J. L. Genshaft, & P. L. Harrison (Eds.), Contemporary intellectual assessment:
          Theories, tests, and issues (pp. 131-150). New York: Guilford Press.
McGrew, K. S., & Woodcock, R. W. (2001). Technical manual. Woodcock-Johnson III. Itasca, IL: Riverside.
McNamara, D. S. (2001). Reading both high-coherence and low coherence texts: Effects of text sequence and prior
          knowledge. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 51-62.
McNamara, D. S. (in press). SERT: Self-explanation reading training. Discourse Processes.
McNamara, D. S. (in press) Aprendiendo a través de los textos: efectos de la estructura del texto y las estrategias de los
          lectores. Signos, 37, 123-159.
McNamara, D. S., Best, R., Castellano, C. (2003). Learning from text: Facilitating and enhancing comprehension.
          www.speechpathology.com.
McNamara, D.S., Kintsch, E.., Songer, N.B., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Are good texts always better?: Interactions of text
          coherence,  background    knowledge,    and levels  of understanding   in learning from    text. Cognition   and
          Instruction, 14, 1-43.
McNamara,    D. S., &  Kintsch,   W.  (1996).  Learning   from  texts: Effects of  prior knowledge   and   text coherence.
          Discourse Processes, 22, 247-288.
McNamara, D. S., Levinstein, I. B. & Boonthum, C. (2003). iSTART: Interactive Strategy Trainer for Active Reading
          and Thinking. Manuscript submitted for publication.
McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., & Graesser, A. C. (2002). Coh-Metrix: Automated cohesion and coherence scores
          to predict text readability and facilitate comprehension. Technical Report, The University of Memphis.
McNamara, D. S., & Scott, J. L. (1999). Training reading strategies. Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual Meeting of
          the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.
Meyerson, M. J., Ford, M. S., Jones, W. P. & Ward, A. W. (1991), Science vocabulary knowledge of third and fifth
      grade students. Science Education, 75,     419-428.
Meichenbaum,    D., & Biemiller,   A. (1998).  Nurturing  independent   learners:  Helping students  take  charge  of their
          learning. Cambridge, MA: Brookline.
Means, M. L., & Voss, J. F. (1985). Star Wars: A developmental study of expert and novice knowledge structures.
          Journal of Memory and Language, 24, 746-757.
Mokhtari, K., & Reichard, C. A. (2002). Assessing students' metacognitive awareness of reading strategies. Journal of
          Educational Psychology, 94, 249-259.
O'Reilly, T., & McNamara, D.S. (2002). What's a science student to do? Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth Annual
          Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 726-731.
O'Reilly, T., McNamara, D. S., & Sinclair, G. P. (2004). Reading Strategy Training: Automated versus live.       Submitted
          to the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Perfetti, C. A. (1985). Reading ability. New York. Oxford University Press.
Seigneuric, A., Ehrlich,  M.-F.,  Oakhill, J. V., &   Yuill, N. M. (2000).  Working   memory   resources    and  children's
          reading comprehension. Reading and Writing, 13, 81-103.
Snow, C. (2002). Reading for understanding: Toward an R&D program in reading comprehension. Santa Monica, CA:
          RAND.
Sweet, A. P., & Snow, C. E. (Eds.). (2003). Rethinking reading comprehension.     New York: Guilford Press.
Vellutino, F. R. (2003). Individual differences as sources of variability in reading comprehension in elementary school
          children. In A. P. Sweet & C. E. Snow (Eds.), Rethinking reading comprehension (pp. 51-81). New York:
          Guilford Press.
Woodcock, R. W., McGrew, K. S., & Mather, N. (2001). Woodcock­Johnson III. Itasca, IL: Riverside.

                                                           333
