Professional Development and Teacher Change: A Longitudinal
                Investigation of Teacher Generative Growth
                                              Chrystalla Mouza
            301D Willard Hall, School of Education, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716
                                   Tel: 302.831.3108, Fax: 302.831.4100
                                          Email: cmouza@udel.edu

         Abstract: The purpose of this study is to investigate teacher generative growth as a result
         of participation in a research-based professional development program on the use of
         technology.  Specifically, the study investigates the ways in which teachers integrated
         and extended the key facets of the program two years after its completion with particular
         emphasis on a) individual teacher characteristics, b) school contextual factors, and c) key
         components of professional development.      The paper focuses on the elements of success
         in longitudinal technology integration, rather than on the inhibitors to such technology
         adoption.   Therefore, while    the investigation draws   on  case study research of   eight
         teachers, the center of attention remains on the one exemplary teacher who exhibited the
         maximum     characteristics  of long-term    professional growth.    Results indicate   that
         participation in professional development fostered increased technological knowledge
         and awareness, sustained use of technology integration into classroom instruction, and
         generation of more elaborate beliefs on the role of technology in teaching and learning.
         Finally, key findings from this study are incorporated into a framework for articulating
         teacher generative change.

Introduction
         Nearly every educational reform initiative that seeks to improve student learning is accompanied
by teacher professional development efforts.   Professional development is a key ingredient for both teacher
growth and organizational school change (Fullan, 1991).     Both of these elements are considered necessary
for true educational reform to occur. Yet, it is now widely recognized that many professional development
experiences available to teachers are ineffective and fail to promote self sustaining learning (Garet, Porter,
Desimone, Birman & Yoon, 2001).       Most in-service activities for teachers are still short-term experiences
disconnected from issues of practice, fragmented, and misaligned (Ball & Cohen, 1999).     Such approaches
to professional development fail to recognize the necessity for coherent, on-going teacher learning and,
therefore, are not very useful in helping us understand the process by which teachers learn and grow
professionally (Wilson & Berne, 1999).    Only recently have we started witnessing the development of some
quality professional development programs that are research-based and pay explicit attention to both
teacher change and student learning outcome (e.g. Fishman, Marx, Best, & Tal, 2003).             As a result,
carefully constructed theories of teacher change have slowly begun to emerge in the literature.

         Earlier professional development programs attempted to modify teacher beliefs and attitudes
hoping that such modifications will lead to changes in classroom practices and ultimately to student
learning outcome   (Richardson,  Anders,     Tidwell, &   Lloyed,  1991).   This perspective to  professional
development assumed that teachers change their beliefs and attitudes prior to changing their practices.
Guskey (1986) challenged this view of change and claimed that changes in beliefs and attitudes follow
changes in practice. Changes in practice allow teachers to witness positive effects on students and modify
their beliefs accordingly. More contemporary theories of teacher change recognize that teacher knowledge,
beliefs and attitudes are   formed  interactively with  classroom   practices (Richardson,   1996; Clarke  &
Hollingsworth, 2002).  A recent model of teacher change, proposed by Clarke and Hollingsworth (2002),
suggests that change occurs through the mediating processes of reflection and enactment in four domains:
the personal domain   (teacher  knowledge,    beliefs and  attitudes), the  domain of practice  (professional
experimentation), the domain of consequence (salient outcomes), and the external domain (sources of
information, stimulus or support).  Change can begin in any of the four domains and it produces changes in
other domains. Therefore, there are different entry points and multiple growth pathways between domains.

                                                      364
          In attempting to capture teacher change as a result of participation in professional development, it
is also important  to make   a distinction  between     short-term change  and     long-term   generative change
(Franke, Carpenter, Levi, & Fennema, 2001).    It is not uncommon for teachers to employ newly acquired
teaching strategies demonstrated at professional development.      Yet, many teachers return back to their old
strategies when the professional development program ends.         Even if teachers continue to use the new
strategies, few of them seek to explore additional strategies that would help them further refine their
practice. In their research, Franke et al. (2001) documented the ways in which teachers who participated in
a professional development program on understanding the development of students' mathematical thinking
continued to implement the principles of the program four years after its ending.     Findings revealed that all
teachers sustained into their classroom instruction some elements of teaching which were based on the
children's thinking process. However, only half of the teachers continued to learn and engage in generative
growth.

          The purpose of this study is to investigate teacher generative growth as a result of participation in
a  research-based professional development    program    on  the use of   technology.  Specifically, this study
seeks to a) describe the ways in which teachers integrated and extended the features of the program two
years after its completion, b) identify individual and organizational attributes that enabled or inhibited
teacher self-sustaining change, and c) identify key components of the program that facilitated teacher
change.   The paper focuses on the elements of success in longitudinal technology integration, rather than on
the inhibitors to such technology adoption. Therefore, while the investigation draws on case study research
of eight teachers, the center of attention remains on the one exemplary teacher who exhibited the maximum
characteristics of long-term professional growth.

Context and Methods
Description of the Professional Development Program
          The professional development program employed in this study was designed by the Institute for
Learning Technologies (ILT) at Teachers College, Columbia University.          This program was part of the
Eiffel Project, a five-year  Technology Innovation      Challenge  Grant  Project.   The purpose of the Eiffel
Project was to infuse technology in New York City public schools and prepare teachers to make effective
use of digital resources in their classrooms. During the five-year life cycle of the Project, the ILT staff
designed several professional development programs for teachers.       The programs designed during the last
year of the Eiffel Project, however, were considered the most comprehensive for two reasons.           First, they
built on rich experiences acquired by the ILT staff over time.   Second, they explicitly took into account the
characteristics of effective  professional  development     reported   in the literature (i.e.    sufficient time,
collaboration, follow up support etc.) along with current constructivist principles of learning.

          The ILT professional development program that served as the basis of this investigation was a
year long program that operated during 2000-2001.       This program consisted of three primary components:
a) introductory   workshops   that emphasized     skill development    followed    by discussion    on issues   of
technology integration, b) advanced workshops that focused on project development, and c) in-classroom
support.   All  workshops were  two  hours  long  and   took place  at the ILT     facilities.  Since none of the
participants had prior experience with computer-based instruction, the initial objective was to help teachers
become    comfortable  with  technology  and  acquire    an  understanding    of   technology    integration  into
classroom instruction.  As teachers started using technology into their existing practices, professional
development activities focused on helping them plan and enact more meaningful curriculum projects that
afforded students opportunities for inquiry, collaboration, and critical thinking.

Participants
          Even though this investigation follows a group of eight teachers over a three-year period, this
paper focuses only on Mary, a fourth grade teacher who exhibited the maximum characteristics of long-
term growth.    When she enrolled in the ILT program, Mary was only in her second year of teaching.           She
had a background in English and a Masters degree in writing.       Throughout the duration of the study, Mary
had two computers available in her classroom that were loaded with productivity software, such as word
processors, spreadsheets, authoring tools and painting programs.       Both computers were connected to the
Internet. In the third year, however, Mary was also selected to participate in a notebook program initiative.
As a result, all of her students were distributed notebook computers.     Although these computers were used

                                                    365
primarily within the classroom, students were also allowed to use them at home.          The notebooks were
refurbished and were loaded with Microsoft Office tools and some educational software that included
Inspiration and TimeLiner. Mary's school was an under-resourced school located in a predominantly
Hispanic neighborhood of New York City.      At the time of this study, the school was serving about 1, 400
students with   93.6%  being Hispanic.   In addition,   95.6%  of the students  were  eligible for free lunch
indicating that almost all the students were from economically disadvantaged families.

Data Collection
   Data for this study were collected from multiple sources over a period of three years (2000-2003).
Data sources    included:  Surveys,    interviews,  workshop   and classroom    observations,   collection   of
documents, and email exchanges.     Surveys were used to assess teacher technological skills with regard to
basic computer operations, use of productivity software, and use of the Internet.     The surveys compared
teacher  skills both prior and   after the ILT professional    development.     Interviews  captured  teacher
technological awareness, practices and beliefs with regard to technology at different points in time.    They
also identified the school organizational structures and key professional development elements that enabled
teacher learning.  All interviews were approximately 45 minutes long.     Workshop observations generated
data related to the content and pedagogy of professional development.        They also documented teacher
questions, concerns,     interactions, and  technological    progress during    the course   of  professional
development.    Classroom observations elicited data related to teacher overall teaching style and use of
technology over time (e.g. frequency, types of activities etc.).  Some classroom observations were video-
taped in order to document the ways in which technology activities were structured and the role of the
teacher and the students on the use of technology.      Each classroom observation was followed by a 5-10
minute debriefing session to ensure that the researcher understood the purpose and context of the activities
performed.   Systematic examination of teacher lesson plans and student work was used to corroborate
evidence from other sources (Yin, 1984).     Finally, email exchanges between Mary and the investigator
provided information on curriculum units enacted and obstacles and successes encountered by the teacher.
Table 1 provides a summary of data collected from Mary over the three year period:

Table 1: Summary of data collected from Mary over a three-year period

                                                   Year 1                Year 2                  Year 3
Number of surveys                                    3                     1                       1
Number of interviews                                 3                     1                       1
Number of workshop observations                21 (42 hours)               -                       -
Number of classroom observations               7 (12 hours)            2 (4 hours)             6 (10 hours)
Number of email exchanges                            10                    5                       19

Data Analysis
         Field notes from workshop and classroom observations were transcribed and reviewed.           Audio-
taped interview data were also transcribed and reviewed.     Analysis was ongoing throughout the study and
each phase of data collection was shaped by prior data.    A preliminary coding scheme was developed after
analyzing data from three individual teachers collected in the first year of this study. The coding scheme
was developed through various iterations, and included the following categories: a) changes in teacher
knowledge, b) changes in teacher beliefs, c) changes in teacher practice, d) process and timing of change, e)
elements  of the  school  context  that  facilitate teacher  change,  and f) key    elements of  professional
development that influence teacher learning.   The final iteration of the coding scheme was applied in all
data and a data analysis matrix was developed that displayed teacher knowledge, practices, and beliefs as
they emerged over time.    Other data analysis matrices displayed data relevant to the school context and
effective elements of professional development.     In assessing whether individual change had occurred, the
teacher  display  matrix was thoroughly    analyzed   and  comparisons  were  made   across  the five  sets  of
interviews over the three-year period.   Change was acknowledged when Mary appeared to have modified
her initial practices and beliefs in light of a new set of learned beliefs and practices that resulted from the
acquisition of new knowledge.     Data from other sources were then used to triangulate interview data and
confirm change.

                                                     366
                                        Number of Tasks

                                                              Computer
                                                                       Operations
                                                                                     MS Word
                                                                                                MS
                                                                                                   PowerPoint
                                                                                                                Internet &
                                                                                                                           Email
Findings
Teacher Knowledge
         When Mary started participating in the ILT program in the fall of 2000, she had very limited
familiarity with   technology.  Even                     basic          computer                 operations                        such  as   file management      presented  a
challenge to her.  She was only comfortable with word processing software and use of email.                                                                        During her
participation in the ILT program Mary became more comfortable with basic technology skills and learned
how to use a variety of software tools (e.g. PowerPoint, MS Word, Internet Browsers etc.) and computer
peripherals (e.g. scanner).  The  acquisition                                     of such      skills          was               an  important    accomplishment    because   it
helped Mary build confidence in her ability to use technology in the classroom.                                                                          As shown in Figure 1,
Mary was able to retain and build on her skills over the three-year period of this study.                                                                    In addition to the
technological skills shown in Figure 1, Mary learned how to use a variety of other software tools not
introduced during the ILT program, such as MS Excel, MS FrontPage, MS Publisher etc.                                                                          She also learned
how to troubleshoot equipment, search the web effectively and produce video on the web.

                                                         20
                                                         18
                                                         16
                                                         14                                                                           Year 1 (Beginning)
                                                         12                                                                           Year 1(End)
                                                         10
                                                          8                                                                           Year 2
                                                          6                                                                           Year 3
                                                          4
                                                          2
                                                          0

 Figure 1: Mary's technological competence: Number of successful tasks completed by function over time
Mary did not only become more technologically savvy but she also became increasingly aware of the ways
in which technology can be integrated into the classroom in order to enrich student understanding.                                                                       During
her second year interview Mary explained:
         I have realized over time that there is a plethora of tasks I can do with technology. Prior
         to participating in the ILT program I was just using technology for word processing and
         minor research tasks. Now I use technology in practically every project I initiate in class.
         As I develop my lesson plans, I always come up with activities that integrate technology,
         such   as creating multimedia                      presentations,                      using           Excel                to collect   and    analyze  data,
         developing flowcharts in Inspiration, etc.
Teacher Practices
Year 1
         Prior to participating in the ILT program, Mary's students had mainly used computers for typing
essays and poems and conducting some research on the Internet.                                                                   During the year in which she participated
in the ILT program, Mary initiated two technology-enriched units.                                                                  The first unit was related to science and
ran throughout the entire school year.                      The science project focused on acid rain and was divided into three
phases.  In the first phase, students worked in groups and performed research on the Internet on various
aspects of acid rain. Research findings were culminated in multimedia presentations that were featured in
class.  In  the second   phase, students                     conducted                        experiments                         to determine     whether    the soil  in their
schoolyard had been polluted by acid rain.                              In the last phase, students graphed and analyzed the results of
their experiments using spreadsheets.                       The second unit initiated by Mary was related to language arts and
aimed   at teaching   an audience of                     fourth                   graders      about            various              poetic    elements.     Students   worked
independently and in small groups, wrote definitions, drew and scanned pictures to illustrate their lessons,
and inserted sound files taken from reading their own poetry.                                                                    The final product resulted in a slideshow
presentation that was featured to fourth graders during a poetry day celebration in the school auditorium.

                                                                                             367
Years 2 & 3
          Mary re-enacted the science project on acid rain both during the second and third year.     During the
last stage of the project, students were asked to compare their results with data collected in Mary's class
during the previous year (in the third year, students compared their results with data collected during the
prior two years).   This comparison led to new insights about pollution in the area.       The acid rain project
was highlighted at the district science fair where Mary's students presented their work accompanied by
excel  graphs  and  charts.   After  interviewing  Mary's    students  the  review   committee   was  extremely
impressed with the level of understanding that students exhibited and their enhanced abilities for data
manipulation and graphing.    Moreover, the committee highlighted the seamless integration of science and
technology.   Mary's project received a "superior" grading and her students were awarded a medal. The
science project on acid rain is just one example that illustrates the kind of technology units enacted in
Mary's class.  Similar projects that included long-term investigations or tasks sustained over an extended
period of time were also undertaken in other content areas.   Essentially, every project that she launched was
enhanced by technology.  In social studies for example, students studied the Revolutionary War by creating
electronic newsletters on    various revolutionary  events   (e.g. the Boston    tea party)  and developing an
interactive timeline that featured the major battles of the revolution.    The following example described by
Mary,  illustrates another   exemplary   unit enacted  during  the   third  year of  this study  that integrated
technology in mathematics and language arts:
          Every activity in this unit was related to Judith Viorst's, "Alexander, Who Used to Be
          Rich Last Sunday." This is a story of a boy who kept spending his allowance money
          unwisely. We  first started by  reading  aloud  "Alexander,   Who   Used    to  Be  Rich Last
          Sunday". Students kept track of how much money Alexander was losing. They created
          flowcharts in Inspiration showing how much money Alexander lost and what exactly he
          lost it on. In the next step, students wrote their own fictional stories modeled after
          Alexander's. Their stories were accompanied by an Excel spreadsheet that demonstrated
          the starting amount of money, the items money was spent on, and the remaining amount.
          The remaining  amount     was  calculated automatically     after students   figured out  the
          formula they had to enter in Excel.
          Not only did Mary make technology an integral part of her instruction, but she also took initiative
to lead various technology activities outside the classroom.     Along with another colleague who had also
participated in the ILT program, Mary launched an after-school computer club for selected students.
Teachers and students worked on the development of a school web-based newsletter.            They also received
additional training from   a  non-profit organization  in New   York   City.   This training became possible
through a small grant awarded to Mary for writing a successful proposal through an organization called
Donors Choose (http://www.donorschoose.org). Technology also facilitated other qualitative changes in
Mary's teaching.    In the two years after participating in professional development, Mary initiated more
project-based work and more cooperative group work.       Her role in the classroom shifted in many occasions
to that of an on-site guide. More importantly, she felt comfortable with that role.      Peer teaching became a
routine in Mary's classroom as she often relied on her students to provide help to each other particularly
during the third year when all students had notebook computers.         Finally, Mary developed a variety of
classroom   management   techniques   that allowed  her   to run   a technology   rich environment    smoothly,
something that many teachers struggle with.
Teacher Beliefs
          Since Mary was a novice computer user, her initial beliefs were primarily based on a combination
of intuition, experience with technology for personal purposes, and idealistic images of how technology can
enrich her lessons. Participation in professional development enabled Mary to re-examine her beliefs with
regard to the role of technology in teaching and learning.   Table 2 summarizes Mary's beliefs over time.    In
some cases (e.g. advantages from using technology), Mary merely integrated new beliefs into existing ones.
In other cases, however, Mary was able to modify her initial beliefs in light of a new set of learned beliefs
(e.g. role of technology in   education).  At  the beginning   of  her participation   in the ILT  program, for
example, Mary thought that the primary role of technology was to help students build their technological
skills, something that is widely valued in society.    In subsequent interviews, however, Mary exhibited a
new set of beliefs.  She stated that the primary role of technology is to facilitate and enhance student
learning.  At the end of the first year she commented:

                                                    368
          I think computers play a huge role in education. Prior to participating in the ILT program,
          I did not really think that they were really necessary. Now I strongly believe that they
          enhance the learning process to a great extent. Computers are truly a valuable asset in the
          classroom.
During her third year interview she added:
          I read some articles and I talked with some people who say that technology is not really
          important because it does not raise test scores. But from my perspective, not only did it
          raise my student scores, but it also helped them make significant improvements in other
          areas. I know that everybody mentions how technology motivates students. I am also a
          firm believer. But I think it goes so much beyond that. It really facilitates learning in very
          constructive ways.
Table 2: Summary of Mary's beliefs
                      Year 1 (beginning)      Year 1 (End)             Year 2                   Year 3
Primary role of       1) Fosters skill        1) Enhances student      1) Enhances student      1) Enhances student
technology in         development             learning and             learning and             learning and
education             2) Prepares students    understanding            understanding            understanding
                      for the workplace       2) Fosters skill
                                              development

Advantages from       1) Motivates students   1) Motivates students    1) Motivates students    1) Motivates students
using technology      2) Enhances student     2) Enhances student      2) Enhances student      2) Enhances student
                      writing                 writing & learning       writing & learning       writing & learning
                                              3) Facilitates peer      3) Facilitates peer      3) Facilitates peer
                                              teaching & sharing       teaching & sharing       teaching & sharing
                                              4) Improves student      4) Improves student      4) Improves student
                                              self efficacy            self efficacy            self efficacy
Disadvantages         1) Students lack        1) Computer failure      1) Computer failure      1) Computer failure
from using            typing skills           issues                   issues                   issues
technology            2) Classroom
                      becomes chaotic
                      3) Computer failure
                      issues

Individual and Organizational Variables Influencing Change
          Individual and organizational variables not only shape teacher practice but also influence the
outcome of professional development.        Mary was a highly motivated individual who exhibited willingness
to learn new skills, improve her practice, and experiment with new ideas.             Mary spent time on her own
mastering new skills, redesigning her lesson plans to incorporate technology, and practicing new classroom
management techniques.        After the end of the ILT program, Mary sought support from her colleagues,
joined the advisory board of an online publication for students, and even wrote a grant that allowed her to
receive additional training on web publishing.      Those were important activities that helped Mary extend her
learning over time and refine her practice with regard to technology.       Contrary to Mary, other teachers were
only  able  to  sustain or   stabilize  changes  in  their  practice  that  resulted  from   their   participation   in
professional development.      Personal motivation and persistence were key qualities of Mary's individual
characteristics that enabled her to overcome challenges associated with the use of technology.           During the
third year,   for example,    Mary     experienced   various   difficulties as notebook     computers   continually
malfunctioned     and students  kept    complaining   about    them.  Yet,    Mary   was   able to overcome     these
challenging by seeking support from both within and outside the school and from the students themselves.
Organizational school features were also vital in supporting Mary's change.           Throughout the study, Mary
made  positive   comments     about  the school  context in    which she was   working.     The school valued and
encouraged    her participation     in professional  development,    publicly  acknowledged      her   efforts to   use
technology, provided opportunities for sharing with other teachers, and tried to provide additional resources
for her.   This   was   particularly    evident in  the third   year when     Mary   was    selected by  the   school
administration to participate in the notebook computer program initiative.       Notebook computers themselves
were  also    important  in   promoting     advanced    technology   integration     practices, peer-teaching       and
collaboration.

                                                        369
                                     Professional Development /
                    lead                   Learning Event                  promote

                                                                       Teacher
                   Teacher                                             Knowledg
                   Beliefs                                             e

        influenc                                                                       stimulat
        es                                                                             es

                         Teacher /                                  Practice/
                         Student                                    Enactment
                         Outcome

                                              results
                                     Figure 2: The teacher change process

Key Elements of Professional Development
       During her interviews, Mary acknowledged multiple times that it was her participation in the ILT
program that triggered her interest in technology and enabled her to learn and change over time.         She noted,
"If it wasn't for the ILT program, I would still be stuck in word processing."         Table 3 displays comments
made by Mary illustrating how she valued key elements of the ILT program.

Table 3: Key elements of professional development that enabled teacher learning

Professional development elements       Related comments made by Mary
Emphasis on skill development           I really liked that we started with the basics. Even though I had some skills,
                                        I was getting easily confused. I now feel much more comfortable with the
                                        computer and not just the word processing (Interview 2).
Models for classroom management         The classroom  management   techniques      modeled  at  the workshops were
                                        really great. Now I know how to manage my class when I use technology.
                                        Before, I was thinking that there is no way I could use technology without
                                        loosing control of the class (Interview 2).
Development of curriculum projects      I really liked the fact that we had to develop our own projects because we
                                        focused on what we wanted to learn and what we needed to do in our class.
                                        At the same time the help and support was there and that made our projects
                                        become possible (Interview 3).
Follow up support                       Having the graduate assistant in my class and being able to talk to her was
                                        wonderful. Just having somebody to talk to, write an email and ask things.
                                        That was the best aspect of the program (Interview 2).

Discussion and Conclusions
       This study demonstrates that the ILT professional development program promoted long-term,
generative changes in Mary's knowledge, practices and beliefs.     Mary started implementing strategies that
integrated technology during her participation in the ILT program.     After the end of the program, Mary not
only maintained the use of those strategies but she also developed additional strategies that leveraged the
power of technology to enhance student learning.      Even though four other teachers exhibited changes in
their knowledge, practices and beliefs during their participation in the ILT program, they were unable to
extend their learning over time on the basis of what they had learned.        Of particular importance to this
study was not only the extent to which teachers integrated and extended the features of the program two
years after its completion, but also the process by which teachers modified their knowledge, beliefs and

                                                      370
practices. A preliminary framework depicted in Figure 2, demonstrates the process by which professional
development enabled Mary to change her initial knowledge, practices and beliefs and continue grow
professionally.   As shown, participation in the ILT program fostered changes in Mary's knowledge (i.e.
mastery  of technological  skills   and technological            awareness).     New  knowledge          stimulated  changes    in
Mary's   practice.  Mary   experimented     with             integrating various  forms  of technologies          (e.g.   Internet,
multimedia etc.) into her classroom.     Experimentation with technology and reflection on newly acquired
practices allowed Mary to witness positive outcomes for both the students and herself.                          She realized that
students   became   more   motivated,    developed             a deeper    understanding    of          subject  matter,  worked
cooperatively and showed more confidence in their abilities.               She also realized that technology enabled her
to become   a more    effective teacher  while  maintaining              control of the  classroom.        These new insights
influenced Mary's beliefs with regard to the role of technology in teaching and learning.                            Changes in
beliefs led Mary to seek additional opportunities for learning that enabled her professional growth and
change and the adoption of technology as an integral part of her instruction.

      Previous attempts to describe teacher professional growth illustrated teacher change in a linear
fashion (e.g. Guskey, 1986).    Such linearity assumes that teacher change occurs as a one-shot event.                       Only
Clarke and Hollingsworth (2002) portrayed the multiple interactions that exist among the various change
elements.   Yet, they did not adequately present change as a continuous, career-long process.                            Figure 2
portrays teacher change as a continuous process.               Each full cycle exemplifies only one instance of change
(e.g. adoption of one strategy that integrates technology).              As Mary's case demonstrated, by going through
multiple   change  cycles in  the context   of professional           development     or  other         learning event,   teachers
progressively  modify   their knowledge,    practices           and beliefs.   Even  though  there        seems   to be   a linear
relation among the elements in the cycle, in reality, teachers can always go back to a previous change
element.   For instance, changes in teacher beliefs might trigger further changes in practice before the
teacher solicits new learning opportunities.   Further data analysis will compare Mary's case with findings
from other teachers to enable the refinement of the framework depicted in Figure 2.                         Findings from this
work have implications to the design of professional development programs.                              It is important that staff
development instills learning in such ways that enable teachers to continually reconsider their knowledge,
practices and beliefs.

References
Ball, D.L., & Cohen, D.K. (1999). Developing practice, developing practitioners: Toward a practice-based theory of
         professional education. In L. Darling-Hammond, & G. Sykes (Eds.), Teaching as the learning profession:
         Handbook of policy and practice. (pp.3-32). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Clarke, D., & Hollingsworth, H. (2002). Elaborating a model of teacher professional growth. Teaching and Teacher
         Education, 18(8), 947-967.
Fishman, B.J., Marx, R.W., Best, S., & Tal. R.V. (2003). Linking teacher and student learning to improve professional
         development in systemic reform. Teaching and Teacher Education, 19(6), 643-658.
Fullan, M. (1991). The new meaning of educational change. New York: Teachers College Press.
Franke, M.L., Carpenter, T.P., Levi, L., & Fennema, E. (2001). Capturing teachers' generative change: A follow-up
         study of professional development in mathematics. American Educational Research Journal, 38(3), 653-689.
Garet, M.S., Porter, A.C., Desimone, L., Birman, B.F., & Yoon, K.S. (2001). What makes professional development
         effective? Results from a national sample of teachers. American Educational Research Journal, 38(4), 915-
         945.
Guskey, T.R. (1986). Staff development and the process of teacher change. Educational Researcher, 15(5), 5-12.
Richardson, V. (1996). The role of attitudes and beliefs in learning to teach. In J. Sikula (Ed.), Handbook of research
         on teacher education (2nd ed., pp. 102-119). New York: Macmillan.
Richardson, V., Anders, P., Tidwell, D., & Lloyd, C. (1991). The relationships between teachers' beliefs and practices
         in reading comprehension instruction. American Educational Research Journal, 28(3), 559-586.
Wilson, S.M., & Berne, J. (1999). Teacher learning and the acquisition of professional knowledge: An examination of
         research  on  contemporary  professional development.            In Iran-Nejad, & P.D.         Pearson  (Eds.), Review of
         research  in  education  (Vol. 24, pp.   173-209).          Washington,    D.C.  American         Educational    Research
         Association.
Yin, R.K. (1984). Case study research. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.

Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Educational Testing Service (ETS).    The author would also like
to acknowledge the support of the ILT staff and the cooperation of the teacher described in this study. All opinions expressed are the
author's and do not necessarily reflect those of ETS or ILT.

                                                                371
