 Learning Behind the Scenes: Development of Mentors through
                      Their Participation in Design Research
                               Jun Oshima1, Ritsuko Oshima2, & Taku Ishiyama1
         1Shizuoka Univ., Information Processing Center 836 OYA Shizuoka-shi JAPAN 422-8529
                                              2Chukyo University
                       joshima@kai.ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp, roshima@kai.ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp
         Abstract:    We   report  how   our  design  group   members   as  mentors   developed    their
         pedagogical content knowledge and epistemology through their participation in design
         research practice.   In designing a pre-service teacher course curriculum for four years, we
         have   been  also concerned   with  a  hidden   curriculum    for mentors  to   develop   their
         knowledge in their community.       Based on twelve determinants of knowledge building
         community (Scardamalia, 2002), we embodied four design frameworks for our design
         group as a dynamic knowledge building community: (1) learning through participation in
         authentic problem solving, (2) learning through collaboration, (3) learning by taking
         collective cognitive responsibility, and (4) learning by explaining.   Results of analyses on
         two   students   who  succeeded     in developing    pedagogical   content   knowledge     and
         epistemology manifested that their development was based on the change in authenticity
         to participate in the practice (from preparation for future teaching work to engagement in
         the design research) and their concerns with the organizational structure of the design
         group as a community of practice.

Research Background and Purposes
         We   have    engaged  in design    research  to improve   teacher   education   program    in  Japanese
universities since 2000 (e.g., Oshima, & Oshima, 2002a, 2002b).      The main goal in our design research has
been to develop pre-service teachers' pedagogical content knowledge by introducing a new epistemological
perspective on human learning (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000).             The curriculum design for this
purpose has been developed by implementing activities that students are involved in transferring their
subject matter knowledge into pedagogical content knowledge (Shulman, 1987) through exerting their
learned epistemology.    Pre-service teachers in our designed course are involved in collaborative learning as
a practice for advancing their knowledge, learn how CSCL technologies support such a learning activity,
and plan lessons in the time for integrated studies in schools (a new curriculum introduced in 2002 by the
ministry of   Education   and  Science)  to  discuss  their pedagogical    content knowledge      based  on their
understanding of the epistemological perspective on human learning.
         Although our main aim has been at improving the course curriculum and evaluating our challenge
for further improvement, we have also been recognizing that the development of design group itself is a
crucial issue  in the design   research.  Through  our   involvement   in  the design   research, we as  a  group
develop our pedagogical knowledge and deepen understanding on design principles for facilitating student
knowledge building.      When dealing with teacher education or pre-service education, in particular, the
design research gives learners and design groups similar learning opportunities to reflect upon and develop
knowledge     related to  learning and    instruction   (Oshima,  Oshima,      Inagaki, Takenaka,    Nakayama,
Yamaguchi,    &   Murayama,    2003).    In our design   group, this issue  is  remarkably  important    because
members other than the first and the second authors are students (graduates and undergraduates) supervised
by the  first author  in  the faculty of  education.    Our   students do  not  intend  to become    educational
researchers but teachers at elementary or junior high schools, or to work at IT-based education companies.
In the first year of their involvement in the design research, they come to the design group as new comers
with a little knowledge and epistemology which we consider are better than those by students taking the
course but not sufficient.    We, therefore, consider that our design research is a learning opportunity for
them  to advance   their  pedagogical  knowledge   and   epistemology.     They start to engage in the design
research at their third year of undergraduate program then continue their involvement until their graduation.
They, therefore, participate in the design research for two years if they leave the university after completing
their undergraduate program or four years if they decide to study in the graduate program (M.A. course).
Thus,  the life cycle  of  our design community      is short and dynamic.     To keep knowledge on design
principles in our design group for continuously improving the course design, we should establish the

                                                        388
community of our design group where new comers to the cultural practice effectively learn their needed
knowledge, challenge to advance knowledge, and consider how to prevail their developed knowledge to
new comers after them (see Figure 1).  In three years (2001-2003), we, as principal investigators, have been
engaged in this hidden design research with the purpose of facilitating the development of our design
group as a dynamic knowledge building community (Bereiter, & Scardamalia, 1993; Scardamalia, 2002).
In this paper, we report what scaffolds and how we deployed in our design group for facilitating the
development of group members as knowledge builders, and what consequences we have found so far
through descriptive analyses of two successful students.

               Figure 1. Development of the design group through the design research practice.
Design Group and Its Practice
         Our design group starts to discuss how to design the course curriculum four months before (the
time when   a  new   academic year starts so  that new   laboratory members    come   to us).  Ten to twelve
members including the authors participate in research meetings for: (1) principal investigators and old
timers explain new comers about the aim of the design research and what we have done before the year, (2)
we reflect upon previous designs, results of analyses on student performance, learning activities and
interviews, and group members reports in the post meetings to consider how to improve the year's course
curriculum, and (3) we decide who would be responsible for which tasks of the course design.       Several sub
groups with old timers as group leaders engage in tasks such as network configuration in the classroom,
creation of  digital materials, consideration  of  specific instructional techniques, and  so    on.  At every
research meeting, progress by each sub group is discussed by all the group members to coordinate and
revise each other's work.  During the course is being held, group members other than the first and the
second authors work as mentors in pairs for facilitating and videotaping (for data collection) student
performance in collaborative learning.  After the class every day, we have a staff meeting to monitor how
our course curriculum has functioned with our instructional goals and revise our curriculum for the next
day if needed. We also have several post meetings based on reports by mentors to totally reflect upon our
course curriculum of the year and discuss how to improve it for the next year.
Scaffolds for Design Group as Knowledge Building Community
         For considering scaffolds for our design group to function as a knowledge building community,
we have referred to determinants of knowledge building community by Scardamalia (2002) as design
principles. We describe here what scaffolds we have implemented after briefly explaining determinants we
have based for the implementation.
Determinants of Knowledge Building Community
         Based on long-standing research by her and her colleagues (e.g., Scardamalia, Bereiter, McLean,
Swallow, & Woodruff, 1989), Scardamalia (2002) summarizes socio-cognitive conditions under which
people work in a knowledge building community.      First, in a knowledge building community, community
members are concerned with understanding based on authentic inquiries.         Problems in teacher education
program are usually far from students' real concerns with the world they will live in ("Real ideas, and
authentic   problems").  Second,  members'    ideas and  problems   are regarded  as  improvable.     Ideas are
objectified and shared as conceptual artifacts (Bereiter, 2002) so that members can engage in discourse
around them   ("Improvable    ideas").  Third, the  diversity of ideas  raised by members     is a natural and
necessary context of knowledge building.     In the knowledge building community, members themselves
take on the responsibility for managing their ideas to improve collective understanding ("Idea diversity").
Fourth, through the improvement of ideas or understanding, members create more inclusive syntheses or
super-ordinate concepts by summarizing previous ideas.      The new perspectives should have more power to
explain and conceive than do previous ones ("Rise above").     Fifth, members themselves manage how their

                                                    389
knowledge advances.    They coordinate their personal ideas with those of others and also monitor how their
collaborative efforts proceed. These tasks require them to exert cognitive strategies for collaborative
problem   solving  ("Epistemic    agency").    Sixth,  members'    contribution  to improving  their collective
knowledge in the community is the primary purpose of knowledge building.           The shift in their recognition
from `learning as the improvement of individual knowledge' to `learning as individual contributions to the
collective understanding' is crucial ("Community knowledge, collective responsibility").       Seventh, all the
individuals  present  contribute  to the    knowledge   advancement    in their  community     in various ways
("Democratizing knowledge").      Eighth, a goal for knowledge building communities is that individuals and
organizations actively working to advance their knowledge also have their advances serve to advance the
knowledge of others.   Thus there is reciprocity in knowledge work, with the outputs of one group helping
another group, and creating a whole that is greater than the sum of the parts ("Symmetric knowledge
advancement").     Ninth, students acquire a disposition to contribute to collective knowledge building. It is
not something they do at special moments, or in special classes, or during particular curriculum activities.
Rather it is integral to how they approach all knowledge problems and is extensible across contexts, grades
and working   contexts ("Pervasive   knowledge   building").   Tenth, in the knowledge building community,
members are encouraged to use resources as conceptual artifacts that are treated as objects of inquiry and
juxtaposed against their personally constructed artifacts ("Constructive uses of authoritative sources").
Eleventh, students are engaged in discourse to objectify their ideas, to share with each other, and to
improve the knowledge advancement in the classroom.        Scientific discourse is a typical form of knowledge
building discourse.  Conceptual artifacts in scientific discourse are frequently objectified as propositional
knowledge.   There are strategic discourse patterns for improving the conceptual artifacts (Bereiter, 1994b;
2002) ("Knowledge building discourse").       Finally, for knowledge advancement, appropriate monitoring is
crucial.  Members need a total view of their understanding to decide how to proceed, especially when
problems of understanding arise.   They do not wait for outside experts to evaluate them, but rather evaluate
their own progress on an ongoing basis.      This collective effort by members to reflect on their collective
knowledge    is facilitated by the  engagement     of  the leader  as a  member     of the knowledge   building
community, not the sole community member responsible for evaluating progress ("Concurrent, embedded
and transformative assessment").
Learning through Participation in Authentic Problem Solving
         The four following design frameworks are applied to embody the twelve principles in our design
group.   The first framework   is that  the design of  pre-service education  is a  really authentic context of
knowledge building for the group members who want to be teachers or work in its related area.         Problems
we have to face in our design research are not given to members by principal investigators, but those they
have been recognizing and concerned with.      With such real problems, the members are involved in problem
solving activities: designing the course curriculum, engaging in teaching as mentors, observing student
performance, and reflecting upon their course curriculum to discuss how to improve the curriculum further.
At every phase of their problem solving, the members share their ideas on the course curriculum as further
improvable.     Their  motivation   for future career   leads them  to   deep engagement    in advancing   their
knowledge.    Being in the real context of instruction as mentors makes them legitimately participate in
reflection on their designed course curriculum.    Such reflection or assessment happens at anytime in formal
or informal meetings if they recognize they need to do so.
Learning through Collaboration
         We consider collaboration as a main activity through which diverse ideas show up and members
engage   in coordinating or  rising  above   different perspectives   on the  same  problems   to produce more
powerful solutions.  We are concerned with the structure of collaboration in our design group in such a way
that it should be democratic and symmetric.    For our group collaboration to be symmetric or transactional,
we analyze the task structure in research meetings so that every single member in the group can contribute
with their level of expertise and divide the main task into several sub tasks each of which a sub group of old
timers and new comers takes charge of.      In the task structure where different sub groups are responsible for
different but interrelated sub tasks, collaboration between sub groups stimulates collaboration within sub
groups, and vice versa.  In the groupwork where people with different levels of expertise are involved, it is
difficult to maintain the democracy that every member, new comers in particular, feel free to express their
ideas and contribute to the group accomplishment.      The democracy problem is still a big issue in Japanese
culture when people with different ages collaborate with each other.      In our design group, this problem is
solved by making members recognize that they are working in a community of practice.           Because the life

                                                       390
cycle of our design community is relatively short, it is easier for every member to see the total activity
structure in the practice. Old timers (graduate students, particularly) think of how to educate new comers
whom would take responsibilities they have currently in the future, whereas new comers expect their
behaviors in the future by observing old timers through collaboration.
Learning by Taking Collective Cognitive Responsibility
         As described in the second scaffold we implemented in our groupwork, all members are required
of taking   their responsibility   to contribute   to  the group  accomplishment.    Having   such  collective
responsibility facilitates group members to exert a different type of epistemic agency from that they usually
use in their individual learning.  The goal of their work is not only to complete their own tasks, but also to
contribute to the group accomplishment.         The group   accomplishment  here is not just a compilation     of
individual accomplishments, but a superordinate structure of ideas related to each other.      For their group
accomplishment, they need to monitor what ideas others are thinking and how the others are developing the
ideas as well as how their own ideas are related to the final goal as a group.  This type of epistemic agency
leads members     to engage  in  building     knowledge in  World  3  (Popper, 1972),  or  conceptual artifacts
(Bereiter, 2002).
Learning by Explaining
         For supporting members to engage in knowledge building, we frequently give them opportunities
to explain their ideas to other members.      In our design research practice, explanatory discourse by members
is required of contributing to solutions to problems they have in the curriculum design activity and making
others sufficiently understand so that the others can go further in their work based on their understanding.
In collaborative works through the design activity, members have two types of opportunities to be involved
in explanatory discourse.    One of the opportunities is discourse within each sub group.      Since each sub
group is comprised of members with different levels of knowledge, old timers have to explain their ideas to
new comers, and new comers have to ask old timers what they do not understand.         The other opportunity is
discourse between sub groups in research meetings.         Sub groups are required of explaining their progress
and problems   to  other   groups, and    all members   put ideas on.  Principal investigators facilitate their
discourse by prompting metacognitive questions for them to reflect on what they think, paraphrasing ideas
they report so that the ideas could be more sharable and improvable, and so on.     Through their engagement
in explanatory discourse, members have frequent opportunities to reflect on and articulate their ideas.
Two Cases of Successful Development of Mentors
         Here, we describe how two mentors who have engaged in our design research for three years
developed   their  knowledge    and   evaluate    whether  and how  our  design  frameworks   facilitated their
development.      We  do not intend    to clarify  any one-to-one  correspondence   between  their  changes    in
knowledge and epistemology, and our designed frameworks because this is a design study where we
implemented various scaffolds simultaneously.         Rather, by describing deeply their behaviors in research
meetings videotaped for the purpose of the research (100 hours) and our filed notes, we attempt to report
profiles of the two mentors and their development.
Development of Pedagogical Content Knowledge by H.T.
         H.T.  had   engaged  in   our design     research from  2000 to  2002  (from  his  fourth year of  the
undergraduate program to the final year of his M.A. program).      H.T. is the only person who had engaged in
the design research from the first year of the research project and for a relatively long period of time (i.e.,
three years). He thought of being a teacher as his final career.   But, he did think that he needed experiences
as a businessman before getting into the education field since he believed that the teacher should have a
variety of working experiences.       After   his graduation of  M.A. program,   he is currently working    at a
software development company as his first career. In 2000, we did not expect design group members to
play a role of mentor but technical help desk.     Therefore, we did not have research meetings with members
frequently.   We had meetings a couple of times before the course started, and told them what we wanted
them to do, such as "Stay in the classroom just in case that students have questions of how to use computers
and the system we implement in the course. "       The members did not positively communicate with students
in the course, but waited for their questions.    They did not use their epistemological understanding to help
students be   involved in  productive   learning.   H.T.   was one of the members   in  his fourth year  of the
undergraduate program.     Based on our reflection on the practice in 2000 (e.g., Oshima, & Oshima, 2002b),
from 2001, we changed our perspective on the design group community itself as described in previous

                                                       391
sections.   H.T.     was  in the first  year   of his     M.A.     program  and   the oldest        in members.       He decided in
discussion with the first and the second authors to choose the design research as his M.A. thesis project,
and engaged    in    all the processes   of   the  design       research  practice. Involvement          in     the decision    making
process   from his    educational     perspective   (seen       in 2001).  By     referring      to "the       community  of    learners
(Brown, 1992; Brown, & Campione, 1996)," we have designed the course curriculum as project-based
(Oshima, & Oshima, 2002b).            Students in the course were divided into small groups (4 or 5 students each)
and engaged    in     collaborative    problem     solving      tasks  and  lesson    planning         projects.      Through     their
experiences as groups, we expected students to recognize that collaborative problem solving is a practice to
improve their knowledge.         During the class hours, mentors observed how groups were involved in their
collaboration and helped them reflect on their activities for thinking how to make their groupwork more
productive.   A small population of the students in the course (very small but stably existing every year) did
not have sufficient social skills to communicate with others in their groups and could not participate in
collaborative problem solving.         In 2001, one of such students came to the course instructor (the second
author) to ask her to let him study alone during the course.              Mentors including H.T. also recognized through
their observation that the student had a problem with his social skills and could not participate in the
groupwork.    In the staff meeting after the class, we were concerned with this problem, i.e., how we should
take care of students who are not good at social skills to manage their collaborative work with others.                             We
were inclined to conclude for the solution to the problem that we should care about him at the individual
level, i.e., providing more scaffolds for him to manage his collaboration problem.                       While we were likely to
convince ourselves of making such a decision, H.T. expressed his opinion as follows:
          "Our current solution would be surely one of considerable alternatives. I personally think that his request (to let
          him study alone) is reasonable for person who is not good at managing the groupwork like him.          Studying alone
          could be another style of learning. But, on the other hand, I think that we have to educate him so that he can
          manage this type of situation for his future. "

Following his utterance, our solution for the student was considered again for him to learn how to act as a
member in a community of learners.            Finally, we decided to share this issue with other students as members
in the same community and to have time for the students to reflect on their activities.                          After expressing his
problems with social skills to other members in the community, the student who claimed to study alone was
more positively engaged in collaboration at his pace.               As a scaffold for him to engage in the groupwork, we
arranged the member configuration in regrouping scheduled in the middle of the course so that he and
students with high social skills were in the same group.               After our intervention, the student had not shown
any claims to us and was found to talk with other members through problem solving in video records.
What we found as the development of H.T. in this utterance and the following discussion are as follows.
First, it was  not    predictable for   us    to hear     his opinion  like the   above.         We had identified through our
experiences with him as an undergraduate for four years that he was good at systematically managing
events but not likely to consider others' problems from the educational perspective.                                In his utterance,
however, he clearly showed his concern with the future of the claiming student.                          Secondary, his proposed
solution fitted more into our instructional goals for the course than what we had been inclined to conclude.
He was more directed to an issue of how the claiming student develops through his participation in the
community.     Thus, in the second year of his participation in our design research, he was found to be more
epistemological      and  educational    than     the     first year. Pedagogical      approach          as     a  mentor based     on
experiences (seen in 2001).       In the staff meeting during the course, a main theme in discussion by mentors
was how to approach to students being engaged in their groupworks.                     The mentors had two goals in their
intervention: (1) helping them manage their collaborative problem solving, and (2) collecting data for their
performance for the research purpose.            The mentors in pairs observed and videotaped student activities in
their groups, and interviewed with them several times for prompting their reflection on their own activities
as well as collecting the data.       The mentors usually did intervene with students even if students were deeply
engaged in their collaboration.       H.T. gave the following utterances on this issue in the staff meeting.
       H.T.: I was feeling uncomfortable when I was trying to cut in their discussion if they were concentrated on their
       conversation.
          R.O. (the second author): Do you think it was?     But, H.W. (a student whom H.T. was taking care of) was easy
                to cut in, wasn't he? Because he always looked like daydreaming all the time...
          H.T.: Yeah, he looked like..., but it was difficult to cut in discussion if he deeply engaged in it.
          R.O.: Uh...
          H.T.: I felt that he rejected me when I muscled in their discussion for the interview.

                                                                 392
Here, H.T. showed his concern with the timing for him to cut in students' discussion.            In his utterances, we
found that he monitored his intervention with the groupworks as both a mentor and a research assistant.
What he did when he thought that students were concentrated on their discussion was not to muscle in their
conversation, but rather to wait for them to cease.          His decision manifested us that he took the pedagogical
approach to student learning.         The  data collection     was   also important.   But when the data collecting
activities were found to keep students from their deep engagement in their learning, we should let them go
further without any disturbance.      This approach was not found in other mentors.         Leadership and take-over
(seen in 2002). The year of 2002 was the final year for H.T. to engage in our design research.          We (the first
and the second author) discussed with him about how his knowledge and roles could be taken over to other
members, particularly R.H. (a member who would be a group leader in 2003).                 His way of involvement in
the design research practice in his final year was found to be different from his engagement in 2002 in that
he more clearly contributed to develop our community itself as well as to improve the course curriculum.
Events that we found his engagement different from that in 2002 were seen in the staff meeting during the
course. After finishing agendas we discussed on the course curriculum and our mentoring activities on the
day, H.T. proposed another meeting for mentors only.
         "May I ask your attention again? It is already late at night [11:00pm], so I think that everybody wants to go
         home.  But can I ask you to have another meeting for mentors to share problems with supporting students?
         Why do not we report our own activities as mentors team by team?  Do you have any mistakes or questions you
         want to share with others?"

This type of engagement by H.T. was not found in 2001, and the first and the second authors took control of
meetings.  As seen in this utterance, H.T. attempted to make other mentors have frequent opportunities to
reflect on their own activities.     He was also concerned with the development of mentors as a community by
asking them to have informal meetings other than official staff meetings with the principal investigators.
The approach to establishing the community of mentors by H.T. was embodied in the following utterances
more clearly.  On the next day, he started to take control of discussion at the official meeting as well.                 Main
agenda for the official meeting was that mentors reported student performances they observed and helped
with seeing videos they recorded, and discuss whether we could go further with course curriculum we had
planned  before  starting the    course    and  how        we had   to revise it if needed.   Mentors  reported           their
observations and opinions in the group number order.               After R.H., a mentor who would be a leader next
year, reported his observation and opinions, H.T. gave the following utterance.
        H.T.: OK, now. Why don't you take this role, Gacha [nickname of R.H.]? I take the chair over to him. [H.T.
        went to backside of the room and took a seat.]
        R.H.: Yeah, right. So, the next person, please.

At this moment, H.T. for the first time asked R.H. to take the leadership in the community of mentors.
H.T. had known that R.H. recognized the role in the next year and observed his chairing behaviors very
carefully. From our interview with H.T., we found that he was looking for an opportunity to take over the
leadership to R.H. in the meetings so that others who would remain in the community could recognize R.H.
as a future leader and establish a structure of the future community.
Development of Pedagogical Content Knowledge by R.H.
         R.H. started his engagement in our design group from his third year of the undergraduate program
(the year of 2001) and currently (as of 2003) has been involved in the design research practice as a graduate
student for three years.  His goal of career is an educational consultant who collaboratively works with
teachers in planning lessons and designing computer network environments.               He wants to start his career as
a teacher at an elementary school after his graduation of M.A. program.               In 2001, he worked in pair with
H.T. as  mentors.   His   main       task was  to       videotape student  performance   in collaborative  works          and
interviews with them by H.T.          We thought that it was enough in the first year for him to legitimately
participate in the practice in a peripheral way, i.e., helping H.T. by taking a role of videotaping.                   We also
asked him to set up the computer network configuration by helping another senior undergraduate for the
purpose  of learning the  theoretical      structure      of network   configuration.   By  his legitimate peripheral
participation in the practice (Lave, & Wenger, 1990), we expected him to learn how our design research
practice went on through observation of core members like H.T.                In the second year for R.H. (the year of
2002),  we  found the development          of his       pedagogical knowledge    and  epistemology  in the following
excerpts of his utterances at the staff meetings and research meetings. Involvement in decision making
based  on  his pedagogical  knowledge         (seen     in 2002).   A  scaffold  that we embodied   in designing           the

                                                              393
classroom was regrouping, i.e., restructuring of members in groups.                This was conducted for two reasons.
The first was that students were rearranged from homogeneous (i.e., majoring in the same subjects) to
heterogeneous   groups   for    managing        various    ideas    and subject  matter      knowledge     for    the purpose   of
considering their lesson plans for the time for integrated studies.           The second reason was that we, as design
group, wanted to restructure groups so that students could be engaged in more productive social dynamics.
We had to group the students at the beginning without information on their characteristics.                           Some group
could create nice social dynamics in their collaborative problem solving, but this was not necessarily the
case.  Based on mentors' observation and videotaped records, we had a staff meeting to decide the re-
arrangement of groups.        In 2002, H.T., a leader of mentors, took a role of chairing the meeting.                       R.H.
cognitively contributed to the decision-making process by engaging in dialogue with H.T. and the course
instructor (the second        author).   The     topic    of  the   dialogue  was   how      to arrange    a     student   (named
"Watanabe") whom most mentors recognized having a leadership in a new group.
         R.H.: [He was giving his impression on Watanabe-san in her first group.]   Well, I am sill concerned with her
              leadership in her first group.   I wonder whether she would be able to give such a lot of ideas in her group
              if another person like Sato-san (taking a supporting role for Watanabe-san) is not in the group...
         R.O. (the second author): She looks so tough, does not she?
         R.H.: Yeah, she is tough.   She gave lots of ideas and opinions in the group discussion.    But those were her
              opinions and ideas.   She never attempted to wrap up those ideas with others'.
         R.O.: So, she looks like a politician. [laugh]
         R.H.: Yes.
         H.T.: So, shall we put her in the same group with Nishimura-kun (another politician-like)?
         R.H.: It may be an interesting idea...
         H.T.: I guess you [R.H.] should make a decision on this.
         R.H.: But, we should be careful of putting her in the same group with him.    She [Watanabe] is not strongly
              social like him [Nishimura].      She talked a lot within the group, but we never saw her raise her hand to
              speak in the whole class. He is much stronger than she is.
         H.T.: I do not think that we should care about it, though.
         R.H.: What I am concerned with is that Watanabe-san cannot get up again when her idea is strongly rejected by
              Nishimura-kun in a group.
         R.O.: Then, she will be frustrated...
         R.H.: Yeah, she will. [nodding]  In her current group, there are no such strong persons.    So, she can express
              herself quite nicely.
         H.T.: She will change...
         R.H.: Yes, she will. This is my concern with her...

In the above dialogue, R.H. manifested his pedagogical knowledge on the characteristics of one student he
had observed as a mentor.         He gave us his opinion based on his observation data, and his logic was very
convincing.  This type of utterances was not seen in his first year of engagement.                     His proposals were not
based on any data, but impression.        Further, through dialogue with others, R.H. incorporated others' ideas
with his original idea by translating the others' in his words (e.g., "Yeah, she is tough.                       She gave lots of
ideas and opinions in the group discussion.               But  those   were  her  opinions    and   ideas.").    Leadership    and
concern with  the   community       development         (seen in    2003).  After  graduation       of H.T.,     R.H. recognized
himself as a group leader.        In the third year of his engagement in the design research practice, R.H. was
concerned with the development of the design group as a community of practice as well as his own
development.  We found many events in which he manifested the development of his pedagogical content
knowledge based on the new epistemology.                Furthermore, his activities through the design research practice
was more focused on how smoothly the organizational structure of our design group was established and
how much responsibility he could take over to other new comers.                 One of remarkable evidence that he was
more directed to the organizational development by educating new comers was found in our conversation
with him in informal settings.       Our design group was comprised of students supervised by the first author.
Students who were involved in the design research, therefore, shared their office in which a variety of jobs
other than the design research were performed through their collaboration.                    R.H. always saw others from
his pedagogical point of view, and talked to us about what expertise would be developed in whom (e.g.,
"He is very much interested in editing video clips.                 His sense of making clips is very good."), and who
could take which roles in the design research (e.g., "She would be able to take the mentoring role with
another first-time student although this is also the first time for her.").            From our interview with him after
the third year, we found that his approach to our design group as a community of practice was based on his
experiences with H.T.         R.H.  had  seen    how     H.T.  had    been  taking his leadership       in the    group    and had
discussed about how a group of students could work as a community with him.                         R.H. was not just copying

                                                               394
the approach by H.T., but developing his own approach to the community development.                            He told us in the
interview with him:
           R.H.: H.T. always said to me, "This is my way.     So, you should be able to develop this community in your own
           way."  I really thought it was true.

Discussion
           Based   on   our   descriptions       of    two   successful  mentors     who     developed     pedagogical        content
knowledge through their participation in the design research practice, we like to discuss how our design
frameworks     affected     their   successful        changes.      As they  engaged        in the practice    repeatedly,     their
commitment to the design group was remarkably increased.                    The participation in the practice was authentic
and based on their real problems at early stage in that they could experience real teaching.                               Through
iterative participation, however, it was found that they came to be more interested in the design research
itself. They seemed to enjoy participating in the practice for the purpose of producing new findings to
revise  their curriculum      next  year,       i.e., knowledge    building.    Our  preparation    of the    authenticity    in our
design group was only a trigger by which they started exploring in the new practice and further developed
their own authenticity.     Collaboration also played an important role to pervade the knowledge building goal
in the community.       The interaction between members with different levels of awareness of the instructional
goals and the research purposes produced many opportunities to consider more deeply the meaning of their
participation in the practice.        These      opportunities      were happening    mainly     in informal      meetings    where
members    attempted     to   reflect on  their        activities  in teams  for    sub-tasks.   There     were   their collective
cognitive responsibilities behind their intentional reflection on the meaning of their participation in the
practice.  They discussed the design of course curriculum and planned their own works by dividing the
main tasks into sub-tasks so that every member knew why s/he was doing her/his task and how her/his
work was related to the main goal of the instructional design.                    Their responsibilities to contribute to the
main goal attainment facilitated them to talk to others about questions, problems, and proposals they had.
All the members were required of being involved in explanatory discourse for knowledge advancement.
We, as principal investigators, prompted them to express their ideas with reasons and how their ideas were
related to the improvement of our design research practice.                 The metacognitive prompts by us led them to
engaging in discourse by which they collaboratively improve their ideas.                        We found in the two cases of
students described, particularly, that they successfully internalized the knowledge building discourse and
applied it to their thinking process. In this paper, we reported how students participating in the design
research as mentors succeeded in developing their pedagogical content knowledge.                              We think that the
design research could be applied to pre-service teacher development or in-service teacher development like
the lesson study.      The design research practice is not only an opportunity for researchers to find design
principles, but also for practitioners to develop their pedagogical content knowledge.
References
Bereiter, C. (2002). Artifacts, canons, and the progress of pedagogy: A response to contributors. In B. Jones (Ed.), Liberal Education
           in the Knowledge Age (pp. 223-244). Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1993). Surpassing ourselves: An inquiry into the nature and implications of expertise. Chicago, IL:
           Open Court.
Bransford, J., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school. Washington, DC:
           National Research Council.
Brown,  A. L. (1992).   Design  experiments:    Theoretical  and   methodological challenges in evaluating complex  interventions  in
           classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments: On procedures,
           principles, and systems. In L. Shauble & R. Glaser(Eds.), Innovations in Learning: New Environments for Education (pp.
           289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Oshima, J., & Oshima, R. (2002a). Coordination of Asynchronous and Synchronous Communication. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall, N.
           Miyake (Eds.), CSCL2. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Oshima, J., & Oshima, R. (2002b). CSCL Design Experiments for Project-based Learning in the Pre-service Teacher Program in
           Japan. In P. Bell, &  R. Stevens     (Eds.),  The Proceedings of the International  Conference  on the Learning    Sciences.
           Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., Inagaki, S., Takenaka, M., Nakayama, H., Yamaguchi, E., Murayama, I. (2003). Teachers and Researchers as
           a Design Team: Changes in Their Relationship Through the Design Experiment Approach with a CSCL Technology.
           Education, Communication, and Information, 3(1), 105-127.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Jones (Ed.), Liberal Education in
           the Knowledge Age. Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Scardamalia,  M., Bereiter, C., McLean,  R.      S.,  Swallow, J., &  Woodruff, E.  (1989). Computer-supported    intentional learning
           environments. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 5(1), 51-68.
Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard Educational Review, 57(1), 1-122.

                                                                   395
