       Meeting Teachers in the Middle: Designing Handheld
Computer-Supported Activities to Improve Student Questioning

                 William R. Penuel, Louise Yarnall, Melissa Koch & Jeremy Roschelle
   Center for Technology in Learning, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave, Menlo Park, CA 94025
                                 Tel: 650-859-5001, Fax: 650-859-4605
            Email: [william.penuel, louise.yarnall, jeremy.roschelle, melissa.koch] @sri.com

        Abstract:   Promoting   student  questioning in     science   is integral to  inquiry-oriented
        instruction and to conceptual understanding, but it is rare in most science classrooms.
        This paper describes the development of software for handheld computers that helps
        teachers capture  and   use student  questions     in science   classrooms.    The paper  also
        analyzes teachers' use of the software to elicit prior knowledge, to engage students in
        reviewing concepts, and to structure student-led inquiry.

Student Questioning in Science Instruction and Assessment
        Inquiry science requires students to learn how to ask good questions. According to the National
Science Education Standards (National Research Council, 2000), students in grades 5-8 are expected to

        ...develop the ability to refine and refocus broad and ill-defined questions. An important
        aspect of this ability consists of students' ability to clarify questions and inquiries and
        direct them toward objects and phenomena that can be described, explained, or predicted
        by scientific investigations. Students should develop the ability to identify their questions
        with scientific ideas, concepts, and quantitative relationships that guide investigation." (p.
        163).

These question-posing abilities should also be the focus of assessment, according to the Standards; teachers
in inquiry classrooms need to assess students' ability to "generate and clarify questions" and to "evaluate
the kinds of questions scientists investigate."(pp.75-76).

        Researchers    hypothesize  that the encouragement        of student questioning   in science  can help
students to develop understanding of the nature of inquiry (Marbach-Ad & Sokolove, 2000). As students
experience the inquiry process, they are likely to learn to formulate new, more complex questions (Dori &
Herscovitz, 1999; White & Frederiksen, 2000).    They may also learn to question beliefs and evidence for
beliefs (White & Frederiksen, 2000). Students who have opportunities to pose and investigate their own
questions develop abilities to recognize what kinds of questions are amenable to scientific investigation
(Marbach-Ad & Sokolove, 2000; National Research Council, 2000).

        Student questions can also help students develop conceptual understanding, especially during
individual encounters with new information such as text reading and lectures. Question posing about
science texts helps prepare students for texts they are about to read and clarify passages that they do not
understand well  after reading  (Palincsar &  Brown,       1984). Students   who  ask  questions tend  to retain
material better than those who do not (Davey & McBride, 1986; King, 1989; Marbach-Ad & Sokolove,
2000).  In tutoring situations, student   question-asking     is  a  key activity that helps  students develop
conceptual understanding, because through questions, tutors and tutees develop explanations of phenomena
(Chi, 1996). In addition, there is some evidence that providing training to students to improve student
question-asking during text-reading and oral lectures improves students' problem solving skills and reading
comprehension  (Dori   & Herscovitz, 1999;   King, 1991;      Palincsar  & Brown,   1984).    Questioning helps
students improve their comprehension because it engages students in more metacognitive processing during
learning: researchers hypothesize that questions help students better monitor their own understanding of
material (King, 1989) and elicit help from peers and teachers (King, 1991).

                                                   404
The Incidence of Student Questions in Classroom Practice
         Despite the importance of student questions in science learning, researchers who have investigated
questioning practices in classrooms have found that students ask very few questions.        In a study of 27 high
school classrooms, Dillon found that two-thirds of all teacher "turns-at-talk" were questions to students; by
contrast, just 6 percent of student turns are questions; while teachers asked questions at a rate of two per
minute, students asked them at a rate of two per hour (Dillon, 1988).     This finding has been replicated in a
variety of studies that span fifty years of educational research (Berlyne & Frommer, 1966; Fahey, 1942;
Gall, 1970; Good, Slavings, Harel, & Emerson, 1987), leading to the observation that:
         Most pupils in the early grades have become masters at answering questions. Few students, even by
         late-graduate school, have become more than a novice at asking questions. The remedial status of
         student questioning appears to be its normative state in past, present, and future schooling. (Dillon,
         1988, p. 208).
         Several explanations for why student questioning is given such a limited role in science teaching
and learning have been offered by researchers. The role of the teacher is important to these explanations.
With respect to helping students learn the process of inquiry, teachers need to help students define, focus,
and clarify questions for investigation (National Research Council, 2000; Rosebery, Warren, & Conant,
1992). But students' initial questions about a topic tend to be unsophisticated (Graesser, McMahen, &
Johnson, 1994); on the basis of these initial questions, some teachers have been found to develop a belief
that learners are incapable of asking good questions (Dillon, 1988). At other times, teachers find that
student questions push them in directions they had not anticipated; they may feel under-prepared to provide
direction to students that would help lead students to scientific understandings of phenomena (Collins,
MacLean,   Palincsar,    &  Magnusson,      1999).  Teachers  in these    situations   may    redirect   students'
"wonderment" questions into teachers' own agendas to match better their comfort with the material being
taught (Gallas, 1995).
         To develop students' skill in using questions to support their conceptual development, a different
set of challenges arise for teachers. Teachers must learn to allocate more class time for discussion of ideas,
rather than recitation or lecture (Dillon, 1984; van Zee, Iwasyk, Kurose, Simpson, & Wild, 2001). Yet
discussions are often hard to facilitate, and facilitation skills are difficult to master; moreover, the degree to
which student questions are elicited during discussion depends at least in part on teachers' familiarity with
the science content being taught (Carlsen, 1988). In addition, many teachers are under increasing pressure
to teach to a wide range of standards, a factor that limits their willingness to adopt time-intensive inquiry
science activities that  focus on  fewer    content areas more   deeply   (Means    et al., 2000).   Professional
development providers, for their part, may not see the encouragement of student-led inquiry as central to
their mission and  goals   (Penuel et  al., 2003).  Finally, there are    few available  models     and  curricular
materials that teachers can use to guide their students toward more effective questioning, whether to help
students improve their conceptual understanding of a topic or to structure inquiry. New materials are
needed  to help students   improve    their questioning ability  and to   help teachers     support this        essential
component of science inquiry learning.      These materials, we will argue here, need to "meet teachers in the
middle" by helping address teachers' own perceived needs and their own desires for professional growth
while helping to advance their repertoire of inquiry teaching strategies.
Designing Handheld Computer-Supported Activities for Improving Student Questioning
         In the project described in this paper, SRI researchers worked collaboratively with teachers in a
school district to develop both materials and technologies that could be used to enhance the role student
questions play in science classrooms.   The goal of our project was to develop a set of activities--supported
by low-cost handheld computers--that could support student reflection and self-assessment during hands-
on science learning.    We did not set out to enhance student questioning. This goal emerged through a
process of participatory design with teachers.
         A chief assumption in our work, borrowed from participatory design, was that we needed to
develop more than just new learning technologies; we needed to engage in the design of a socio-technical
system to support enhanced student questioning (Rheinfrank, Hartman, & Wasserman, 1992). Under this
framework, the design of activities in which the software would be used would go hand-in-hand with the
design of the technology tools. We therefore worked with teachers to develop a range of strategies for
collecting, sharing, discussing, and using data from the software in ways that were consistent with research

                                                      405
on learning and assessment in order to maximize the likelihood that the software would be used to benefit
students. This paper describes the design and use of the handheld-supported activities designed by one
interdisciplinary team  of teachers,  software developers,  and  assessment researchers  on    the project  to
encourage student questioning in science.   In the next section of the paper, we describe the contexts that
shaped the team's development of requirements for the software and how the software is intended to
support  the use  of  questioning  in science  classrooms.   In the  following sections,  we     describe  the
professional development program and three different activity formats for using the software. Teachers
designed  and implemented    these activities in  classrooms across  the district.  In the final section, we
describe some of the implications of our work for enhancing the role of student questions in science
inquiry.
Designing Boomerang
Contexts That Influenced Requirements for the Software
         In this project, three teams of researchers, software developers, assessment experts, and seven
teachers worked together to develop software for handheld computers and study their use in classrooms
across a medium-sized district in South Carolina.  The goal of this three-year project was to investigate the
potential of powerful, low-cost computing devices for improving the frequency and quality of classroom
assessment in upper-elementary and middle-grades science classrooms.     When SRI researchers first arrived
in the district, we understood little about the contexts that would likely influence the design or adoption of
new handheld software for assessment, but we learned about them by engaging in a process of participatory
design and interviews with teachers. The design team for Boomerang, the software program described in
this paper, involved two elementary school teachers formed the core of the team that designed Boomerang.
The teachers were both European American, but they taught in a school where the majority of students
were African American and roughly three-quarters of their students are eligible for free or reduced price
lunches. One taught a combination fourth-fifth grade class that included both gifted and special education
students; the other taught in a fourth grade classroom with lower-performing students. Both had more than
10 years' experience in teaching, but neither was a frequent user of computers to support instruction.
Neither had ever used a handheld computer before they began their involvement with our project.
         The teachers' own background with technology and teaching assignments suggested important
constraints on the requirements for the software. The software would need to be easy for them to learn and
require little time to set up, because their time to learn new software and plan for assessment uses of the
software was limited by their busy schedules. Neither teacher reported having adequate in-school technical
support or the authority to ask for more help, so reliance on the school's network needed to be minimized.
Although accepting this constraint meant we would rely on beaming rather than classroom networks for
communication, we avoided problems caused by network down-time (see Tatar, Roschelle, Vahey, &
Penuel, 2003, for a discussion of this issue). The teachers' own goals for instruction were also important
beginning points for developing requirements for the software. When they first got involved in the project,
the teachers both wanted to design a tool that could help their students review concepts.          They were
particularly drawn to the idea of building a program that would be an electronic version of "flashcards" and
that could be used by students at the end of a unit to review definitions of concepts they had learned in
class.   Such a program would have been consistent in its function and emphasis with both teachers'
pedagogical styles and goals for science instruction, which focused primarily on developing students'
understanding  of  concepts  and   on a gradual   movement     toward  more  inquiry-based     teaching.  SRI
researchers' goals for the project and teachers' responses to those goals also contributed to the design. SRI
researchers suggested that in addition to helping the teachers ask questions of their students, they might
create a tool to support student question building. This suggestion was met with ambivalence.     The fourth-
grade teacher liked the idea in principle, but he argued that students in his lower-performing class could not
ask good questions, so using student questions for assessment purposes would not yield useful information.
Neither teacher saw an immediate need for focusing more attention on inquiry-oriented "wonderment"
questions in science. Both teachers were primarily concerned with pressures to cover content with students
they saw as needing to focus on understanding concepts.
         Students indirectly influenced the requirements for the design; it was their responses to early
prototypes of the software that convinced teachers of the value of developing a tool to support student
questioning.  Researchers   convinced   the   teachers to try,  as a prototyping    activity, to reverse   (or
"Boomerang") the teachers' notions of who asks the questions and provides the answers in a classroom.       In

                                                    406
this activity, teachers would beam to students the "answers" and then students would create questions to go
with the answers in the Palm Memo Pad software.         Then students would beam back their questions for
whole class review. The teachers likened the process of collecting student questions in response to teacher
prompts to the television game show "Jeopardy," a connection that fit a traditional notion of science
learning as fact-based but that helped both teachers see how the software could help them meet their
original goals and concerns.     After just one class with this activity, both teachers were impressed with the
student questions and the classroom discussions that happened when the student questions were displayed.
The experience revealed to the teachers just how much skill their students already had in developing
writing good questions; it helped to convince them that their students could improve the quality of their
questions.
Articulation of Key Features of the Software
       After this experience and a similar experience with the second teacher on the project, the team was
able to develop a set of requirements for Boomerang that met both the teachers' goals and addressed
researchers' concerns about the need to develop a tool that could support not just traditional instruction but
also inquiry instruction in science. The software application, now referred to as Boomerang, would need to
allow teachers to author "prompts" that students could respond to with questions of their own.                 These
prompts could be used for students to "reflect" back on what they had learned, as in the case of creating
questions that might wind up on a class test, or they could be used for students to "explore" some topic
further by identifying questions they wanted to answer about the topics covered in a specific science unit.
Teachers would need to collect student questions using the beaming feature of the handheld device and
aggregate student questions into a single list for presentation or display to the whole class.           To ensure
students could feel comfortable sharing their questions in public, the team also specified a requirement that
the list of questions be able to be displayed anonymously as well as with student names next to student
questions.  To foster student skills in generating questions, a generic "rubric" (numbers, listed 1-7) was also
incorporated, so that students or teachers could categorize the quality of a question that a student had
written. Most of the requirements developed for the software also helped support strategies that prior
research has found successful in encouraging greater use of science questioning in classrooms.                Table 1
shows one mapping of these strategies to the key features of the Boomerang software application developed
by the design team.
Table 1. Features of Boomerang Mapped to Research-Based Strategies for Encouraging Student Questions
     Boomerang Feature                    Strategy Supported                    Research Studies SupportingStrategy
       Teachers can authorprompts for studentPrompting students to ask questions(Knapczyk & Livingston, 1974)
              questions
                                   Incorporating "wait time" to open up
           Students can write       space for students to be able to ask       (Rowe, 1974; Swift & Goodling,
      questions on handheld             questions to deepen their                         1983)
                                        understanding of material

      Students or teachers can      Guiding students in thinking about              (Glover & Zimmer, 1982;
      categorize questions by       the quality and complexity of their          King, 1989, 1991; Marbach-Ad
            type or quality                   questions                           & Sokolove, 2000; Quellmalz
                                                                                       & Hoskyn, 1997).
           Questions can beaggregated in a list andpresented for discussionProviding feedback to students on thequality of their questions, to motivateimprovement(Glover & Zimmer, 1982)

Flow of a Typical Boomerang Session
       Below we describe how a typical Boomerang session in a science classroom might go.                   We have
included descriptions of teacher and student actions, along with a selection of screen shots of the user
interface.
       Step 1: Teacher Creates Lists of Students within Classrooms. Boomerang allows teachers to create
       class names and lists of students associated with a class. This function allows teachers to share the

                                                  407
        same set of handheld devices with multiple classes and students. It also helps teachers associate
        questions with particular students.
        Step 2: Teacher Decides on Prompts for Student Questions. The classroom teacher provides
        prompts for student questions. These prompts are organized into chapters and subtopics. Prompts
        could be topics to be studied, concepts, or "answers" for which students might generate questions.
        Step 3: Students Write and Categorize Questions. Using graffiti or a detachable keyboard, students
        compose questions in response to specific subtopics. Students can also categorize any question
        using a rubric devised for the purpose of the activity, which might be displayed on a board in the
        front of the room.
        Step 4: Students Share Questions by Beaming. Students then share their questions by beaming to
        peers or to a collector device that aggregates students' questions.
        Step 5: Teacher Displays Class List of Questions for Discussion. Once the questions have been
        collected on a single device, they can be re-beamed to all students, or the teacher can use a
        document camera to display the list. The list of questions can be displayed anonymously or with
        students' names.

                   Figure 2. Screens Showing Step 3, Question Editing (left), and Step 5,
                  List of Questions Anonymously (middle) and with Student Names (right)
Designing Activities with the Software to Enhance Student Questioning
Building professional development activities to support software integration
        The  next   year, we  made  Boomerang     and  the software   developed        by the other design teams
available to a total of 19 teachers in the district as part of a field trial. The insights that we gained from our
participatory design experience with the design team teachers coupled with research on best practices in
teacher professional  development  laid the   groundwork   for our   professional       development  program  to
prepare teachers   to use the software  and  develop   activities to  use       with them. Teacher   professional
development literature on technology integration underscores the importance of having teachers discuss
lesson plans, review student work, and share challenges of using technology in the classroom (Atkin, 1994;
Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 1999; Elliot, 1987; Hargreaves, 1998).       We developed three workshops, several
by-request after- school sessions (both face-to-face and teleconference), materials for study group sessions
for teachers to use to work with their peers, and models for creating assessment activities based on their
current curriculum content. In addition, we offered a semester-long course that we offered in collaboration
with the Beaufort County School District and the University of South Carolina in Columbia, and 7 teachers
enrolled. A chief task in this phase of the project was to engage teachers in the design and testing of
assessment activities that could be integrated into their teaching. In this phase, as in the design phase, we
built activities from  teachers' experience   but also provided     them        with a vision of what  might  be
accomplished with the software (Rheinfrank et al., 1992), drawing on our own understanding of research
on effective classroom assessment. To design the activities for Boomerang, we began from lessons we
learned from the participatory design work.    We knew, for example, that teachers would easily endorse
more traditional uses of questioning to probe for student understanding but would need some assistance
using our software to focus on using student questions to guide class inquiry and involving students in
critiquing the quality of their own questions. In our workshops, we asked teachers to reflect on their own
view of student questioning, provided opportunities for teachers to engage in peer interactions in formal
and informal meetings, showed teachers models of how to use the questioning software in class, and
suggested ideas for standards-aligned uses of the student questioning software. Teachers participated in
structured reflections on the importance of student questions and pedagogical approaches that they might
try to encourage student questions. The second and third workshop provided structures for reflecting on

                                                   408
student assessment work with other teachers. We also promoted informal peer reflection among teachers:
teachers joined the project as a school team or were assigned a buddy teacher and encouraged to view each
other's classes, to look at student work together, and to rely on each other as resources. To seed ideas about
how to use Boomerang effectively, we provided models of practice to teachers. At the initial workshop,
SRI and design team teachers introduced the questioning software and the other WHIRL applications by
engaging teachers in activities they could use with their students. We designed these activities around
formative assessment practices that our design teachers had found easy to adopt.    We knew, for example,
that many teachers used probes of students' prior knowledge and students' interests to begin new science
units. We modeled the use of the student questioning software in the initial workshop focused around a
process familiar to teachers, namely, gathering student questions at the beginning of a unit to elicit prior
knowledge.
         Finally, to foster better adoption, we engaged in several activities to align our work more closely
with other district initiatives. In our model activities, we drew from science kits that we knew from our
research many teachers in the district used.  For each of the activity ideas we seeded, we indicated the local
standards that the activity could help meet. All workshops were held during the district's already- planned
professional development days; we had each of the principal's support, and we minimized the extra time
required of teachers in order to participate in the professional development. Local district staff helped plan
and lead the workshop sessions and graduate course, and we developed facilitators' guides, user guides,
and curriculum integration ideas from each of the professional development opportunities that appear on
the project Web site (http://www.projectwhirl.org).
Activities Field Trial Teachers Have Developed and Tested with Boomerang
         Below we describe some of the teachers' uses of Boomerang recorded during the field trial in the
2003-04 school year. As with the design team teachers, uses of Boomerang to check students' conceptual
understanding are more prevalent than are uses of Boomerang to scaffold inquiry.
Eliciting Prior Knowledge (Teacher Assessment)
         Because we observed the fourth-fifth grade design team teacher taking time to elicit students' prior
knowledge at the beginning of units she taught, we suggested to all field trial teachers try using the tool to
support this kind of activity.   Teachers sometimes use what is commonly called a K-W-L (Know-Want-
Learn) approach, an instructional technique developed by Ogle (1986) that is designed to elicit, among
other things, what students want to know about a topic.   One teacher new to the project used Boomerang
before every unit to elicit what students know about a topic and what questions they have about it.     She
then used this information to guide the course of the unit. Another new teacher, who admitted being
initially skeptical of the value of eliciting students' questions, recently used the tool to elicit students' prior
knowledge and `wonderment' questions about Bats.      In this short unit, she had invited an expert on Bats.
The students used Boomerang to collect, refine, and organize the class questions to ask the guest speaker.
When this teacher moved on to a new unit on the human body, students wanted to use Boomerang to show
what they knew about the topic and what they wanted to know.
Engaging Students in Developing Test Questions
         One   use of Boomerang      that has become  widespread among  the     teachers is for writing test
questions.  Teachers provide students with an opportunity to use Boomerang at the end of a unit, right
before a test. The teachers hope that students will have the chance to review content by writing questions;
some teachers select the best student questions for inclusion on the test. In supporting students to develop
good test questions, teachers are also incorporating discussions of the quality of student questions as part of
their classroom discussions.     One teacher recently sent to other teachers a resource she is experimenting
with in her classroom for helping evaluate whether questions were "higher-order" questions or factual
questions.

Supporting Student Inquiry
         So far, only a few teachers in the project have used Boomerang in the course of student inquiry in
science. One is using Boomerang as part of an investigation of electricity; students are using Boomerang to
generate research questions to guide their own investigations. Another of these teachers recently used
Boomerang as part of an investigation of ecosystems using a terrarium.  She began her first lesson in the
investigation with a class discussion about two kinds of questions, "lower order thinking questions" and
"higher order thinking questions," as she put it.   She then let the students give her examples of each and

                                                    409
then wrote them on the board.      They then proceeded to discuss sample questions related directly to the
growth of seeds in the terrariums which the class had just planted.                The students developed hypotheses
about what would happen to the seeds and formulated them as research questions.                Although this teacher's
use of Boomerang was not used to plan an inquiry, she did use the tool in the context of investigations to
support students' thinking about the possible results of a classroom experiment.
Discussion
        The researcher-teacher co-design process was critical in the first phase of our work to build a
bridge between teachers' current practice and reform-oriented practice on student questioning.             At the start
of our project, the design team teachers' classrooms more closely resembled typical classrooms in the
incidence of student questions; teacher questions tended to predominate, and teachers were more interested
in a quiz program than in Boomerang. As researchers, we were reluctant to design software that supported
current practice only, but we also needed to consider that teachers might not ever use software that was
designed to support only sophisticated forms of inquiry teaching.              Had we designed the software in such a
way that it forced teachers to adopt an entirely new pedagogy unwittingly, the technology might have
ended up "oversold and underused" (Cuban, 2001). In deciding what to include as features of the software,
we sought instead to identify areas of "fertile ground" where teachers might be ready to adopt reform
practices that could enhance student questioning. Through the co-design process, we chose to introduce
more focused additions to teachers' inquiry practice and attempted to reduce the distance that teachers
would have to travel to meet our own goals for promoting effective assessment (see Blumenfeld, Fishman,
Krajcik, Marx, & Soloway, 2000).        During   our  design  process,         we  made available  to the Boomerang
teachers an existing software tool that would allow them to pose questions to students, as they normally did
on quizzes.   But we    also asked them   to try  out the idea           of having students create questions  Initially
reluctant, the teachers ultimately decided that student questions could be a valuable source of information
about what students know and can do.     They discovered several uses of Boomerang that fit well with their
existing practices, such as the K-W-L process; in addition, they revised some of their quizzing practices so
that students could    pose  questions  that they would   later          answer  on a quiz  or test. A number  of our
suggestions for enhancing the role of student questioning and for scaffolding student thinking in the
software were not well-received by the design team teachers.                We made a strategic decision to leave some
features out of the software that might have provided more scaffolds for teachers and students (e.g., to
categorize questions) and decided to make these strategies explicit in the professional development to see
whether field trial teachers might incorporate them into activities they designed for use with Boomerang.
We attempted to model assessment uses of Boomerang--such as encouraging teachers and students to
focus on how the nature and quality of their questions about a topic change over time--that had not gone
over well with the design team teachers.
        Teachers' use of Boomerang lends some initial support for the "fertile ground" software design
model.  Many of the activities map well onto teachers' existing practices, especially the K-W-L process
used by our design teachers.   On the basis of our observational study of teachers in the project, we estimate
that Boomerang is used frequently in class because it is well-aligned with teachers' current practice.          For a
smaller percentage of teachers, the forms of use we have observed are in part attributable to the kinds of
professional  development    activities and  models   of  use we            have provided.  For example, despite the
reluctance of our design team teachers to consider assessing question-quality, a number of teachers this
year have taken up this task with their students.  Even the original design team teachers have changed their
views on this matter; they now engage their own students in reflecting on their questions as a way to foster
more student self-reflection on their own learning process.
        Our study suggests that researchers and reformers need strategies to "meet teachers in the middle"
to bridge current practice to more reform-oriented practices, especially if we are interested in adoption.         It
also suggests that a key role for researchers in educational technology is to consider carefully the entire
socio-technical system, including teachers' opportunity to learn, so as to produce reforms that are both
innovative and adoptable.
References
Atkin, J. M. (1994). Teacher research to change policy. In S. Hollingsworth & H. Hockett (Eds.), Teacher research and educational
         reform (pp. 103-120). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Berlyne, D. E., & Frommer, F. D. (1966). Some determinants of the incidence and content of children's questions. Child Development,
         37, 177-189.

                                                      410
Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, B. J., Krajcik, J., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (2000). Creating usable innovations in systemic reform:
           Scaling up technology-embedded project-based science in urban schools. Educational Psychologist, 35(3), 149-164.
Carlsen, W. S. (1988). The effects of science teacher subject-matter knowledge on teacher questioning and classroom discourse.
           Unpublished doctoral thesis.
Chi, M. T. H. (1996). Constructing self-explanations and scaffolded explanations in tutoring. Applied Cognitive Psychology Special
           Issue: Reasoning Processes, 10(Spec Issue), S33-S49 Additional Info United Kingdom John Wiley & Sons http //www
           interscience wiley com/jpages/0888-4080/.
Cochran-Smith, M., & Lytle, S. L. (1999). Teacher learning in communities. In A. Urab-Nejad & C. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review of
           research in education (pp. 246-306). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Collins, K. M., MacLean, F., Palincsar, A. S., & Magnusson, S. (1999). Student discourse in an inquiry-based elementary science
           class. Focus: A Magazine for Classroom Innovators, 6(2).
Cuban, L. (2001). Oversold and underused: Computers in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Davey,  B., &    McBride,    S. (1986).  Effects  of question-generation  training  on reading   comprehension.     Journal  of Educational
           Psychology, 78, 256-262.
Dillon, J. T. (1984). Research on questioning and discussion. Educational Leadership, 42(3), 50-56.
Dillon, J. T. (1988). The remedial status of student questioning. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 20, 197-210.
Dori, Y. J., & Herscovitz, O. (1999). Question-posing capability as an alternative evaluation method: Analysis of an environmental
           case study. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36, 411-430.
Elliot, J. (1987). Educational theory, practical philosophy, and action research. British Journal of Educational Studies, 35(2), 149-169.
Fahey, G. L. (1942). The questioning activity of children. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 60, 337-357.
Gall, M. (1970). The use of questions in teaching. Review of Educational Research, 40, 707-721.
Gallas, K. (1995). Talking their way into science: Hearing children's questions and theories, responding with curricula. New York:
           Teachers College Press.
Glover, J. A., & Zimmer, J. W. (1982). Procedures to influence levels of questions asked by students. Journal of General Psychology,
           107, 267-276.
Good, T. L., Slavings, R. L., Harel, K. H., & Emerson, H. (1987). Student passivity: A study of question asking in K-12 classrooms.
           Sociology of Education, 60, 181-199.
Graesser, A. C., McMahen, C. L., & Johnson, B. K. (1994). Question asking and answering. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of
           psycholinguistics (pp. 517-538). San Diego: Academic Press.
Hargreaves, A. (Ed.). (1998). International handbook of educational change. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
King,  A. (1989).    Effects of self-questioning  training on  college  students'  comprehension  of   lectures. Contemporary   Educational
           Psychology, 14, 366-381.
King,  A. (1991).    Effects of training in strategic questioning  on   children's problem    solving performance.   Journal of Educational
           Psychology, 83(307-317).
Knapczyk,   D.   R.,  &  Livingston,    G. (1974).   The effects   of prompting    question-asking    upon on-task   behavior   and reading
           comprehension. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 7, 115-121.
Marbach-Ad, G., & Sokolove, P. G. (2000). Can undergraduate biology students learn to ask higher level questions? Journal of
           Research in Science Teaching, 37, 854-870.
Means, B., Korbak, C., Lewis, A., Michalchik, V., Penuel, W. R., Rollin, J., et al. (2000). GLOBE Year 5 evaluation. Menlo Park,
           CA: SRI International.
National Research Council. (2000). Inquiry and the National Science Education Standards. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Ogle, D. S. (1986). K-W-L group instructional strategy. In A. Palincsar, D. S. Ogle, B. F. Jones & E. G. Carr (Eds.), Teaching reading
           as thinking (Teleconference Resource Guide) (pp. 11-17). Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum
           Development.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension-monitoring activities.
           Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.
Penuel, W. R., Korbak, C., Yarnall, L., Lewis, A., Zander, M., Gong, B., et al. (2003). GLOBE Year 8 Evaluation: Understanding
           diverse implementation contexts. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Quellmalz, E., & Hoskyn, J. (1997). Classroom assessment of reasoning strategies. In G. D. Phye (Ed.), Handbook of classroom
           assessment (pp. 103-130). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Rheinfrank,   J. J., Hartman,   W.  R., &  Wasserman,    A. (1992).   Design for   usability: Crafting a strategy  for the design of a new
           generation of Xerox copiers. In P. S. Adler & T. A. Winograd (Eds.), Usability: Turning technologies into tools (pp. 15-
           40). New York: Oxford University Press.
Rosebery, A. S., Warren, B., & Conant, F. R. (1992). Appropriating scientific discourse: Findings from language minority classrooms.
           The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(1), 61-94.
Rowe, M. B. (1974). Wait time and rewards as instructional variables, their influence on language, logic, and fate control: Part one -
           wait time. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 11, 81-94.
Swift, J. N., &   Goodling,   C. T. (1983).  Interaction of wait   time feedback   and questioning    instruction on middle  school science
           teaching. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 20, 721-730.
Tatar, D., Roschelle, J., Vahey, P., & Penuel, W. R. (2003). Handhelds go to school. IEEE Computer, 36(9), 58-65.
van Zee, E. H., Iwasyk, M., Kurose, A., Simpson, D., & Wild, J. (2001). Student and teacher questioning during conversations about
           science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(2), 159-190.
White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (2000). Metacognitive facilitation: An approach to making scientific inquiry accessible to all. In J.
           Minstrell   &  E.  van  Zee   (Eds.), Teaching   in the inquiry-based   science    classroom. (pp. 331-370).  Washington,   DC:
           American Association for the Advancement of Science.

                                                                    411
