   Contextualizing Instruction in Project-Based Science: Activating
  Students' Prior Knowledge and Experiences to Support Learning
                                        Ann E. Rivet1 & Joseph S. Krajcik2
            1Teachers College Columbia University, Box 210, 525 W. 120th St., New York, NY 10027
                                     Tel: (212) 678-3384, Fax: (212) 678-8145
                                           Email: rivet@tc.columbia.edu
        2University of Michigan School of Education, Rm. 4109, 610 E. University Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                     Tel: (734) 647-0597, Fax: (734) 647-5245
                                            Email: krajcik@umich.edu

         Abstract: Contextualizing instruction in project-based science involves utilizing students' prior
         knowledge and everyday experiences as a catalyst for understanding challenging science concepts.
         This study explores the prior knowledge and experiences activated during a project-based science
         unit in two urban middle school classrooms. A selection of contextualizing lessons was videotaped
         and stimulated recall interviews were conducted with target students about their thinking during
         instruction. Interviews were coded for the level of student thinking reported during the interview,
         the associated contextualizing features, and connections to science concepts, personal experiences,
         or real world events. Findings suggest that initial contextualizing features such as sharing personal
         stories and opinions were related to student thinking more about real world events, while features
         that foster integration such as concept maps and presentations are associated with thinking about
         both personal events and science together. These findings begin to identify a classification of
         contextualizing features in terms of the types of student thinking generated during instruction,
         which can inform the design of materials and professional development to foster and support
         contextualizing instruction in science classrooms.

Introduction
         A challenge facing teachers and curriculum designers is to help students meet content standards while
making meaning of science through inquiry. It is well known that students bring a wealth of personal experiences
and prior knowledge to learning situations. Science educators need to consider ways to draw on these experiences to
promote not only better science understanding but also develop students' capacity to apply these understandings in a
variety of real world settings. Contextualizing instruction refers to the utilization of particular situations or events
that occur outside of class or are of particular interest to students to motivate and guide the presentation of science
ideas and concepts. This method of instruction has been promoted by national science education reform efforts as an
enduring theme in their proposed reforms (National Research Council, 1996) and included as an integral part of
several innovative programs  (i.e., Global Warming    (Edelson,  Gordin,  &  Pea, 1999), Kids  as Global  Scientists
(Songer, 1993)). A  proposed  benefit   of contextualizing    instruction is that it supports students' developing
understanding of science concepts by bringing their prior knowledge and experiences to the forefront to be used in
the learning situation (CTGV, 1992). However, little is known about how best to design and utilize contextualizing
instruction in classrooms to generate and build from students' prior knowledge and personal experiences as a means
to facilitate learning. In this study we explore the types of ideas and experiences activated during various aspects of
contextualized project-based science   instruction, and describe  how  this  information can  inform the design     of
contextualizing science learning environments and professional development efforts.

Characteristics of Contextualizing Instruction
         There are four key characteristics identified from the literature that are common across the various attempts
to contextualize science instruction. The first is the use of problems and situations that are meaningful to students.
Although the situations that are at the heart of contextualizing instruction are like science tasks in intention, spirit,
and problem-solving methods and thus utilize tools and thought processes that are legitimate to science, the problem
situation is one that is meaningful to students in that it has implications for them outside of school (Edelson et al.,
1999). The second characteristic is that the contextualizing problem or situation establishes a need-to-know situation
for the learning of specific scientific ideas and concepts. The problem situation motivates a reason to learn the

                                                        435
content and engage in the task of science learning, and provides a purpose for knowing science ideas and concepts
(Kolodner, Crismond, Gray, Holbrook, & Puntambekar, 1998; Krajcik, Czerniak, & Berger, 2002). This differs from
the role provided by application problems commonly used at the end of an instructional unit in that it drives the need
for understanding and thus the instruction, rather than simply as a way to integrate and apply knowledge after it has
been gained in a more abstract setting. Third is the use of some form of anchoring situation and event (CTGV, 1992;
Marx, Blumenfeld, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1997; Sherwood, Kinzer, Bransford, & Franks, 1987) to engage students
with the scientific concepts that are addressed in the problem or situation. Anchoring events provide students with a
common experience from which they can relate new information. Fourth is the engagement with the contextualizing
problem or situation over an extended period of time (CTGV, 1992; Marx et al., 1997). Extended study allows for
analysis of the problem situation from multiple perspectives.

       The Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools (LeTUS) has developed science curriculum
materials that incorporate new ideas about teaching and learning in the framework of project-based science (Krajcik,
Blumenfeld, Marx, & Soloway, 1999; Krajcik et al., 2002; Marx et al., 1997). Project-based science is an approach
to teaching and learning through inquiry that embeds the pervasive use of technologies in collaborative classroom
settings (Marx et al., 1997). Building from a foundation in theories of situated learning (Brown, Collins, & Duguid,
1989; Lave & Wenger, 1991), contextualizing instruction is one of the seven design principles for project-based
science (Singer, Marx, Krajcik, & Clay-Chambers, 2000). Specifically, the contextualizing features in project-based
science curricula are intended to embody and promote the four characteristics of contextualizing instruction in the
science classroom (Rivet & Krajcik, 2002). Design features which support contextualizing instruction in project-
based science curriculum materials include: (1) a driving question to introduce and organize the contextualizing
theme of the project, (2) an anchoring event or experience that all students share, (3) project activities linked and
woven  to the  driving question and  contextualizing theme,       (4) student    artifacts or projects related to the
contextualizing theme that are developed during the unit, and (5) a culminating event or experience that brings
closure to the project (Rivet & Krajcik, 2002). These design features are used to guide the development of the
contextualizing aspects of project-based science learning environments.

Building On Previous Experiences and Prior Knowledge
       Learning is a process of building on existing knowledge (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999). However,
in order to begin this process of learning, students' prior knowledge first needs to be activated. In this sense prior
knowledge includes not only scientific facts and relationships, but knowledge gained through personal experiences
in real-world settings and in various learning environments such as previous classroom activities. Activation of prior
knowledge and personal experiences refers to cueing the memory of these earlier experiences and concepts and
bringing these memories to the forefront to be utilized in the learning activity at hand. This process of activating
prior knowledge and personal experiences is important in two ways. First, students may bring relevant information
and experiences to the learning situation that can support the integration of new ideas. If these prior ideas and
experiences are not activated, however, opportunities for capitalizing on this support may be missed. Conversely,
students may also bring deep-rooted prior conceptions about scientific ideas and phenomena that may hinder the
development of scientific understanding. These prior conceptions cannot be addressed in instruction unless they are
first revealed by activating students' current understandings (Roschelle, 1995).

       Contextualizing instruction is proposed to activate students' prior knowledge and personal experiences by
engaging them in meaningful problems that establish a need-to-know situation for learning. By embedding learning
in problems and situations that are meaningful for students, the legitimacy and relevance of their prior knowledge is
made more transparent (Brown et al., 1989). It has also been proposed that one way to address the lack of prior
knowledge held by novice learners is to embed the learning task in familiar experiences and make connections to
meaningful real-world problems. This process helps the learner prepare conceptually for addressing the topic at hand
as well as fostering interest and relevance in the content (Land, 2000). In project-based science, instruction is
situated in settings and problems that are familiar and meaningful to middle school students. These include areas of
student interest such as bike riding, issues facing their local community such as air and water quality, and issues
affecting their personal health such as safety and communicable diseases.

       Contextualizing instruction has also been theorized to help students make sense of complex scientific ideas,
because the use of meaningful problems or situations provides students with a cognitive framework which to
connect or `anchor' knowledge (CTGV, 1992; Kozma, 1991). The cognitive framework acts as a structure upon
which abstract ideas can  be linked with prior understanding       and  fixed    in long-term  memory.  In this way,

                                                     436
contextualization  makes  the learning situation 'bushier' (Kozma,     1991) with more    available links      onto which
students can connect ideas. Learning occurs when new information is 'hooked' and embellished by previously
knowledge held in memory. Students use the ideas that they hold prior to instruction as the building blocks in an
active  process of linking, connecting, distinguishing,  organizing,    and  structuring understandings   of    scientific
phenomena. The connections made between scientific ideas and personally relevant contexts outside of school
enable students to revisit the ideas and continue to build their understanding after instruction (Linn, 2000).

        Contextualizing instruction focuses students' attention on the interrelationships between concepts and
events. This is in contrast to more   subject-specific instruction   that emphasizes  the  presentation  and      recall of
information but not necessarily the connections between them. Additionally, contextualizing instruction helps
learners to organize and integrate knowledge by engaging students with scientific ideas from multiple perspectives
while pursuing solutions to meaningful problems (Blumenfeld, Marx, Patrick, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1997). Though
engagement with concepts and ideas from different perspectives, students see how the ideas are applied in different
settings and build their own representations of concepts (Marx et al., 1997). Meaningful problem situations also
provide  learners  with a perspective  for incorporating   new     knowledge into their  exiting schema,       as well   as
opportunities to apply their knowledge (Edelson et al., 1999). Project-based science organizes instruction around
large, complex problems that provide multiple opportunities for students to link their newly formulated ideas with
both their prior knowledge and real world personal experiences, through the use of curriculum features such as the
driving question, anchoring event, and hands-on experiences with the phenomena.

        Experimental    research  has  shown  that rich  contextualization   features promote    memory        recall and
subsequent transfer of information to new settings (CTGV, 1992). However, classroom-based studies about the
influence of contextualizing instruction on the activation of students' prior knowledge and personal experiences
have not been conducted. Further evidence is needed to understand the role that contextualized instruction can play
to elicit students' prior ideas effectively as the first step toward building conceptual understandings. In this study, we
address this gap in the literature by exploring the ideas and experiences activated during contextualized project-
based instruction through the use of stimulated recall interviews.

Methods
Setting
        This study focused on two eighth grade classrooms in urban Detroit. These classrooms were part of a
district-wide reform effort in science in conjunction with the Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools
(LeTUS). LeTUS is a joint partnership with the University of Michigan, Detroit Public Schools, Northwestern
University, and Chicago Public Schools. A goal of LeTUS is to infuse the use of effective learning technologies in
Detroit and Chicago schools at a systemic level. To accomplish this goal, LeTUS utilizes using a combination of
custom developed project-based science curricula, learning technologies, and coordinated professional development
for middle school science teachers (Blumenfeld, Fishman, Krajcik, Marx, & Soloway, 2000). This is accomplished
through  a process  of  building on previous  educational   research   and  collaborating closely   with teachers     and
administrators to create sustainable reforms that address district learning outcomes (Blumenfeld et al., 2000).

        The focus classes were lead by two different teachers at two middle schools in the district. One school was
a public magnet school for science, mathematics, and technology, while the other was a neighborhood school. Both
schools had populations that were over 90% African-American with large percentages of students participating in
the free lunch program. Both teachers participating in this study were female African-Americans. Ms. Tinsley had
over 20 years of teaching experience in science, and had previously worked with LeTUS project-based units in her
science classroom. Ms. Holly had two years of teaching experience, and had enacted a LeTUS project-based unit
during the previous school year. These teachers were selected to participate based on their prior experiences working
with LeTUS project-based science units.

        From each of the two focus classrooms, six students (three boys, three girls) were selected as target
students to participate in stimulated recall interviews. The selection process occurred in two phases. First, students
from each classroom were pre-selected with the teacher's input based on their attendance, academic performance
(achieving a C grade or above in science), and being willing and open to talk with an interviewer. From the
remaining group, six students from each class were randomly chosen as target students. These target students served
as the focus for classroom observations, and participated in stimulate recall interviews periodically throughout the

                                                        437
project. One target student left Ms. Tinsley's class halfway through the project after he had been interviewed twice,
and his information was not included in the analyses.

Instructional Context
       Students took part in a ten-week unit centered on the driving question, Why Do I Need to Wear a Helmet
When I Ride My Bike? (Schneider & HICE, 2001). This question led students through an inquiry into the physics of
collisions, focused the concepts of motion, velocity, acceleration, and force. In addition, the driving question
situated the project in a context familiar and important to many students, that of riding a bicycle and falling off.
Three events anchored the project. First, students shared personal stories about bicycle accidents they have been in
or heard about. The second was a video on bike safety where a young boy talked about his accident when he was not
wearing a helmet. The third was a demonstration of an egg riding in a cart down a ramp. When it reached the
bottom, the cart hit a barrier and the egg flew and broke on the tabletop. The event created drama for the students
and provided a useful scenario to discuss the several      important   science concepts related to collisions.      This
demonstration was also the focus of the final artifact, where students created and investigated a helmet for the egg to
demonstrate their understanding of collisions. Students created an initial concept map of their understanding of a
collision at the beginning of the unit, and answered a set of four questions about their understanding of the egg and
cart demonstration. These artifacts were revisited and elaborated multiple times over the course of the project, as the
students' understanding of the science behind a collision developed.

Data Collection and Analysis
       This study focused on selected contextualizing lessons from the Helmet project. These were ones in which
the contextualizing features of the instruction played a dominant role. Such lessons included the introduction to the
project and the anchoring events; the set-up to benchmark lessons and inquiry activities that established a need-to-
know situation for student learning; the wrap-up to these lessons where students integrated what they learned with
what they already knew and related back to the contextualizing problem or situation; and the culminating event of
the project where students further integrated and applied their knowledge to address the overall contextualizing
problem through artifact development and presentations. In all, 10 contextualizing lessons (11-12 class periods)
were observed for each teacher. The videotaped observations were focused on all students during whole-class
discussions and demonstrations. During small group work, observations rotated amongst groups that included one or
more target students in the attempt to observe each target student in small group settings an equal amount of time.

       Stimulated recall interviews with target students from each classroom were conducted shortly after each
lesson (Gass & Mackey, 2000; Winne & Marx, 1982). While videotaping, particular classroom episodes that might
serve as the focus for the stimulated recall interviews were identified and recorded. The selected episodes included:
a) the teacher review of previous lessons, b) the teacher gives explanations of how ideas relate to the driving
question, c) the teacher gives directions to be thoughtful ("think about this"), d) students working on thoughtful
tasks (i.e., integration or brainstorming), or e) students sharing their thoughtful work (i.e., stories, presentations, or
discussions). Focus episodes were between 1-4 minutes long and were selected from the beginning, middle, and end
of class. A total of 8-10 minutes of tape was selected for review during each interview. Within each focus episode,
moments were identified to pause the tape and ask students what they were thinking about at the time. These
moments included: a) after teacher gives directions to be thoughtful ("think about this"), b) after the teacher reviews
or refers to the driving question, egg and cart demonstration, or video, c) after the student listens to a response from
a classmate, d) after the students gives an answer in class, e) after the student starts written work/small group
discussion, and f) if the student shows an affective response during the interview to an event on the tape (e.g.,
talking, grinning, etc.). Students were also able to stop the tape and share their thinking at any time. Two target
students were interviewed individually within an hour after each target lesson, with each target student interviewed
3-5 times over the course of the semester. Overall, a total of 43 stimulated recall interviews were conducted.

       Stimulated recall interviews were transcribed and embedded in detailed classroom descriptions at the points
during the lessons that served as the stimulus for students' comments. The interviews were then coded by segment.
An interview segment was defined as both the classroom event that served as the stimulus and the student's response
to that event. Each interview segment was first coded as to the contextualizing feature or classroom event discussed
in the stimulus portion of the classroom videotape, which included the driving question, accident stories, reasons for
not wearing a helmet, bike accident video, the egg and cart demonstration, concept maps, development of the final
egg helmets, and final presentations. Second, each interview segment was then coded for the cognitive level of

                                                         438
students' comments in terms of content-focus (thinking of science ideas or other experiences related to class), task-
focus (thinking about what was going on in class), off-focus (thinking that is off-task or not cognitively related to
class events), affect (emotional response to the episode), or not applicable (no response/can't remember). Reliability
of this coding scheme was checked by another researcher, with an agreement rate of 88%.

         In addition, comments that received a `content-focus' code were further categorized by the types of ideas
and experiences students reported thinking about in conjunction with the content at that moment during instruction.
These student comments are of particular interest in this study, because they reveal the ideas and experiences that
students brought forth        to the learning       situation    while       participating    in contextualizing  instruction.     The  three
categories related to `content-focus' comments were: a) thinking about personal experiences or real-world events
(e.g., "I was thinking about a major accident I had, I fell and cut my leg"); b) thinking about other contextualizing
features or prior classroom episodes (e.g., "When everybody's just naming what they think they should do, and I was
just mainly thinking that we should just do the driving question, why is it best for us to wear a helmet?"); and c)
thinking about specific science concepts (e.g., "I was writing that Newton's first law applies to what we were doing
because when the cart was in motion it wanted to stay in motion until the brick was there and stopped it"). The
results of coded stimulated recall interviews were then tallied across interviews for each target student and across all
target students in terms of the rating category for each interview segment and the contextualizing feature that served
as the stimulus focus for the interview segment. Percentages of the number of comments for each code as compared
to all comments were calculated. Comparisons were made first between the overall level of comments by teacher,
and then by the type of content-focus comments made in relationship to each contextualizing feature.

Findings
Overall
         The first analysis considered the percentage of students' comments that were coded as content-focus, as
compared to comments coded as task-focus or off-focus. The coded responses from each interview segment were
tallied across the interviews for each target student, and aggregated across students. The percentages of responses
for each cognitive level category as compared to all comments made during the interviews were determined. Figure
1 presents the results of this analysis, organized by teacher.

                      60

                      50

                      40

                      30

                      20

                      10

                        0
                            % Content-focus       %   Task-focus        % Off-focus            % Affect              % N/A

                                                                  Ms.  Holly    Ms.  Tinsley

                                 Figure 1. Percentage of students' comments in each category

         As can be seen from Figure 1, the most frequent rating category for the comments made by students was
`task-focus'. This indicates that for the most part, students reported thinking about what was going on in class. This
included thinking about the activity or investigation they were doing, attending to the teacher's comments or class
discussion, and considering their response to a question or event. Relatively few comments received a rating of
`affect', which indicated students reporting an emotional response to a classroom event. It is interesting to note that
across all of the student interviews, 46.3% of the episodes that were rated as `affect' involved students giving
presentations to their peers of their responses to the four questions, their concept maps, or their final egg helmet
designs. In these comments students expressed a range of emotions, from nervousness before they began, relief and
joy when they were finished, frustration or disappointment that they could have done better, to pride and confidence
when they felt they did a good job during their presentations.

                                                                       439
        About 20% of the total number of student comments were coded as `content-focus across the stimulated
recall interviews. Students' content-focus comments were further categorized by reported thinking about personal
experiences or real-world events, thinking about other contextualizing features or prior classroom episodes, and
thinking about specific science concepts. Figure 2 presents the percentage of content-focus comments in each of
these three areas made   by                target students        in terms     of     the total    number      of      coded      comments       regarding    each
contextualizing feature, organized by personal/real world connections.

                             Reasons

                   Accident stories

                        Egg Helmets

                           DQ Theme

                                Video

                          Egg & Cart

                      Concept maps

                       Presentations

                                         0         10         20         30        40         50         60         70         80         90        100

                         Science Concepts          Contextualizing features/ Classroom Events               Personal/ Real-world Connections
  Figure 2. Comparison of the percentage of `content-focus' comments in each category by contextualizing feature

        These findings begin to indicate ways in which the contextualizing aspects bring forward students' ideas
and experiences to be used in the learning situation. For example, it can be seen from figure 2 that personal accident
stories, reasons for why students did not wear bike helmets, and the final egg helmet artifact strongly elicited student
thinking of their own personal experiences and real-world examples. Similarly, it appears that the video, as well as
the driving question and              concept     maps    to      a  lesser   extent,     are    associated     with      students     thinking         about other
contextualizing features or classroom events. This analysis also indicates that while the egg and cart demonstration,
concept maps, and final presentations elicited the lowest percentages of student comments in relationship to thinking
of their personal lives or real-world examples, these were also the same features that elicited the highest percentage
of student comments in relationship to thinking about particular science concepts.

Classification of Contextualizing Features by `Content-focus' Comments
        The results of these analyses can be used to describe and classify how contextualizing features influence
the types of students' ideas generated during instruction. This classification can be used to inform the design of
future learning environments.

        Generating student thinking about personal experiences and real world examples: The contextualizing
features that were the most closely associated with students' thinking about their personal experiences and real-
world examples were the personal accident stories and discussions regarding the reasons that students do not wear
bicycle helmets. These events also generated the largest percentage of `content-focus' student comments during the
interviews. Both of these events involved students thinking about experiences related to them personally or others
their own age, which may have been the reason for this result. Similarly, the development of egg helmet designs also
was associated with students' thinking about real world examples, in particular the design and functioning of real
helmets. However, this feature generated a greater percentage of `off-focus' comments. This indicates the need to
further support student thinking about the real world examples associated with the final artifact during instruction.

        Generating student thinking about other contextualizing features and prior classroom events: Several
contextualizing features were                associated    with      student     thinking        regarding     other      curriculum          features    and prior
classroom events. The strongest association appeared to be related to the teachers' use of the video as a reminder of
earlier events during subsequent lessons. When the video was brought up, students reported thinking back to the

                                                                               440
events and demonstrations shown in the video, and class discussions about it. Although only a few `content-focus'
comments were made regarding the final presentations, this feature also appeared to be related to student thinking
about related contextualizing events. This may have been a result of the requirement by both teachers to relate the
presentations to earlier demonstrations and investigations. Student thinking in this area appeared to occur primarily
as a result of the teachers' activation of prior classroom events during instruction. Further consideration should be
given regarding additional ways to support students' thinking of related contextualizing features or prior classroom
events through the design of investigations, demonstrations, or small group activities.

         Generating student  thinking about  science concepts:      Students'  thinking  with  regards  to  the  science
concepts presented in the unit were associated with several contextualizing features, including the driving question,
the personal accident stories, the egg and cart demonstration, the concept maps, and the final presentations. For
example, as the project progressed students began to use science concepts more often and accurately to describe
their observations of the egg and  cart demonstration,  or to    elaborate  on  their   personal accident   stories. It is
interesting to note that the most comments regarding science ideas involved the integration activities that were
revisited periodically throughout the project, such as work with the concept maps, the four questions related to the
egg and cart demonstration, and the final presentations. This indicates that these features were used successfully
during instruction to bring forward students' science thinking, and points to the need for learning environments to
focus students' attention further on the use of these contextualizing features as a means to support learning.

         Generating student thinking across areas: The three contextualizing features that were associated with
student thinking in each of these areas were the use of the driving question and contextualizing theme, the egg and
cart demonstration, and the concept maps. They appeared to be the most frequently reoccurring features used
throughout the project enactment, and served as points to connect and integrate the different aspects including the
science concepts and the real world setting. The design of learning environments should incorporate and accentuate
these features further to support student thinking in these areas. It is also important to consider how the other
contextualizing aspects could be supported and utilized in a similar manner to these features in order to support
student thinking more consistently across the extended project.

Conclusions
         This study looked the types of ideas and personal experiences activated during contextualized instruction as
part of project-based science. Although this was a small sample and only focused on one curriculum unit, the
findings begin to  inform us about the  type of thinking   that     occurs in urban   classrooms    through attempts    to
contextualize science instruction and the role that particular contextualizing features have to support the activation
of students' prior ideas and develop integrated understandings. This study begins to identify specific aspects of
contextualizing instruction that appear to especially bring forward students' personal experiences, prior knowledge,
and recollection of previous classroom events to the learning situation (Edelson et al., 1999; Linn, 2000), and inform
an initial classification to describe the ideas associated with each feature and the role they should play in future
curriculum design.  For example, integration activities such     as  the design and   revision   of concept    maps  were
associated with students' frequent reports of thinking about particular science concepts and related classroom events,
indicating the utility of these multiple opportunities for students to integrate and apply science concepts. These
findings further inform project-based curriculum design and professional development efforts (Fishman, Marx,
Blumenfeld, Krajcik, & Soloway, in press) to contextualizing science instruction by providing an initial framework
to guide the selection and use of particular contextualizing features throughout extended projects in order to most
effectively support student learning of important science concepts.

         This study provides initial evidence to indicate the importance of particular contextualizing features and
their role during instruction of an extended project-based science unit. It is still unclear from this study how these
features interact across the extent of the curriculum to support student learning of science concepts and their
relationship to the contextualizing theme. It may be possible that over time students come to view the connections
between these anchoring events and particular science concepts through multiple exposures and representations of
this relationship. The analysis points to the need for further exploration of the role each aspect of contextualizing
instruction may play, both individually and in concert, to support student learning.

                                                      441
References
Blumenfeld, P. C., Fishman, B. J., Krajcik, J., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (2000). Creating usable innovations in systemic
         reform: Scaling up technology-embedded project-based science in urban schools. Educational Psychologist, 35(3),
         149-164.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., Patrick, H., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (1997). Teaching for understanding. In B. J. Biddle, T. L.
         Good   & I.  F. Goodson  (Eds.), International Handbook   of     Teachers and   Teaching    (Vol.  2, pp. 819-878).    The
         Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R., R. (Eds.). (1999). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School.
         Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32-
         42.
Cognition  and Technology   Group  at Vanderbilt. (1992). The Jasper  series  as an example      of anchored   instruction: Theory,
         program description, and assessment data. Educational Psychologist(27), 291-315.
Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning through technology and
         curriculum design. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3&4), 391-450.
Fishman, B. J., Marx, R. W., Blumenfeld, P. C., Krajcik, J. S., & Soloway, E. (in press). Creating a framework for research on
         systemic technology innovations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Gass, S. M.,  & Mackey,   A. (2000).  Stimulated Recall Methodology  in   Second Language   Research.    Mahwah,    NJ: Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Kolodner, J. L., Crismond, D., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., & Puntambekar, S. (1998). Learning by design from theory to practice. In
         Proceedings of ICLS 1998 (pp. 16-22). Atlanta, GA.
Kozma, R. B. (1991). Learning with media. Review of Educational Research, 61, 179-212.
Krajcik, J., Blumenfeld, P., Marx, R., & Soloway, E. (1999). Instructional, Curricular, and Technological Supports for Inquiry in
         Science  Classrooms.  In  J. Minstell &  E. V.  Zee (Eds.), Inquiry   into Inquiry:     Science Learning  and  Teaching.
         Washington, D.C.: American Association for the Advancement of Science Press.
Krajcik, J., Czerniak, C., & Berger, C. (2002). Teaching Science in Elementary and Middle School Classrooms: A Project-Based
         Approach (2nd ed.). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Land, S. M. (2000). Cognitive requirements for learning in open-ended learning environments. Educational Technology Research
         and Development, 48(3), 61-78.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Linn, M. C. (2000). Designing the Knowledge Integration Environment. International Journal of Science Education, 22(8), 781-
         796.
Marx, R. W., Blumenfeld, P. C., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (1997). Enacting project-based science. The Elementary School
         Journal, 97(4), 341-358.
National Research Council. (1996). National Science Education Standards. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Rivet, A. E., & Krajcik, J. S. (2002). Contextualizing instruction: Leveraging students' prior knowledge and experiences to foster
         understanding of middle school science. In P. Bell, R. Stevens & T. Satwicz (Eds.), Keeping Learning Complex: The
         Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference for the Learning Sciences (ICLS). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Roschelle, J. (1995). Learning in interactive environments: Prior knowledge     and new   experience.    In Public Institutions for
         Personal Learning: Establishing a Research Agenda: The American Association of Museums.
Schneider, R. M., & The Center for Highly Interactive Computing in Education. (2001). Why do I need to wear a helmet when I
         ride my bike? Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan School of Education.
Sherwood, R., Kinzer, C. K., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1987). Some benefits of creating macro-contexts for science
         instruction: initial findings. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 24(5), 417-435.
Singer, J., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., & Clay-Chambers, J. (2000). Constructing extended inquiry projects: Curriculum materials
         for science education reform. Educational Psychologist, 35(3), 165-178.
Songer, N. B. (1993). Learning science with a child-focused resource: A case study of kids as global scientists. In Proceedings of
         the Fifteenth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Winne, P. H., & Marx, R. W. (1982). Students' and teachers' views of thinking processes for classroom learning. The Elementary
         School Journal, 82(5), 493-518.

Acknowledgments
This study was funded in part by the National Science Foundation as part of the Center for Learning Technologies in Urban
Schools grant 0830 310 A605 and the Detroit USP letter dated 11/27/00. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. We would like to thank our colleagues at the Center for
Highly Interactive Computing in Education at the University of Michigan, as well as the teachers and students in the Detroit
Public Schools, without which this research would not have been possible.

                                                            442
