                       Student Generated Analogies in Science:
                       Analogy as Categorization Phenomenon

                                                  Leslie J Atkins
                        Physics Department and Department of Curriculum and Instruction
                             University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742-4111
                                     Tel: (301)405-3161, Fax: (301)314-9055
                                            Email: latkins@umd.edu

          Abstract: Past research on analogies has tended to focus on analogies generated by a textbook,
          teacher, or researcher that are then interpreted by a student.    Such research identifies how
          students learn from analogies--but not how students create or use their own analogies. Models
          of analogy comprehension that have been derived from this research, in particular structure-
          mapping,  cannot  be extended to  analogy  creation.  However,    features   of student-generated
          analogies show striking similarities to features of categorization, including prototypes, family-
          resemblance, and a folk-theory basis.  In this paper, I present a thread of analogies from a 5th
          grade science classroom and argue for a view of analogies as a categorization phenomenon.

Introduction
          When students are explaining their scientific ideas and predictions to others they frequently draw
analogies to explain themselves (Dunbar, 2001), where by analogy I mean a description of one phenomenon in
terms of another.  Understanding these analogies is crucial if one is to understand student reasoning in science.
There is a wealth of research on analogies, including several computational models (including Gentner, 1988;
Falkenhainer, Forbus & Gentner, 1986; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989; Glucksberg and Keysar, 1990), but the
majority  of this  research concerns the comprehension     of  analogy    and not its  creation (exceptions include
Hofstadter & Mitchell, 1994).  The creation of analogies (e.g., a student's comparison of a falling cup of water to
a toy cat swinging in a basket--see below) is a very different process from the comprehension of an existing
analogy (e.g., other students in the class interpreting that analogy). Recent reforms in science education have
called for an increased focus on student ideas. Such a shift will lead to an increase in student generated analogies
in the science classroom and necessitate a better understanding of these.

          Categorization research has emphasized the creation and structure of categories that the participants
have--how learners form categories, instead of how they understand categories presented to them.      This research
has much to offer the study of analogy creation and usage.       In section 1 I summarize current categorization
research.  In section 2 I present a thread of analogies generated spontaneously in a 5th grade science classroom
and  argue  that these analogies define and negotiate a   category.  I then   contrast this categorization model of
student-generated analogies with models of analogy comprehension (particularly Gentner's (1988) structure-
mapping) and show that these models of analogy comprehension do not account for the creation of analogies.

I. The Modern View of Categorization
          Research  on  categories has  had major  shifts in the  past 30  years, beginning     Rosch's research on
prototypes.  Here I briefly review the features and theories of categorization; below I will show that these
features are present in analogical reasoning in students. These features include prototype effects, a folk-theory
basis and multiple members.

          The classical view of categories held that there were rules of membership and if an item met these rules
then it was a member of the category (or, there are properties that define a category and all members must share
these properties). In this view categories, therefore, were seen as binary with no internal structure: an item either
was or was not a member of that category, and the research paradigm for categorization was to define the rules or
properties.  Rosch's (1973) research challenged the classical view, arguing instead that categories had graded
structure: some category members are more representative of the category than others, some items are of
indeterminate membership (is a stool a chair?), and some non-members may be still seen as "closer" to the

                                                     44
category than others.    Rosch developed a research paradigm for identifying these prototypes, attending to
features such as the following (using the category "bird" for illustration):
         1.   Direct rating. (How birdlike is this?)
         1.   Reaction time.   (Show a picture and ask: Is this a bird?)
         1.   Producing an example. (Draw a bird.)
         1.   Asymmetry of similarity. (Are ducks like robins?     Are robins like ducks?)
         1.   Asymmetry of generalization. (Robins    get the flu, do ducks?  Ducks get the flu, do robins?)
In this paradigm, a prototype will receive a high rating, show low reaction time, and resemble the example
produced.   Additionally, studies show (Rips, 1975) that people will more readily compare a non-prototype to a
prototype and will more likely generalize from the prototype to the non-prototype than vice versa.               Initial
theories on categorization in this vein argued for a category membership as degree of similarity to the category
prototype.

         Further work showed that categories are not defined solely by family resemblance to a prototype, but
have  "an  intellectual as  well as an  ecological basis"  (Neisser, 1987    p3).  Barsalou (1983) studied "ad hoc"
categories, such as "foods not to eat when on a diet."    Members of these categories had the graded structure and
typicality effects that Rosch found, but did not show family resemblance to the prototype.     Instead the categories
were goal-oriented; for example, a chocolate cake has little resemblance to peanut brittle, but abstaining from
these   satisfies the goal  of   eating as few  calories   as possible.    Murphy    and  Medin    (1985)    found that
"categorization assumes a (folk) theory on the part of the person who is engaged in that particular cognitive
process.  This theory `guides' him in selecting the relevant features and the relevant feature correlations; in other
words, noticing features and feature correlations is not an `objective' process based on similarity, but is instead
theory-dependent."     (Shen, 1992)     Lakoff (1987)  holds  that prototype  effects result  from  cognitive  models,
"which can be views as `theories' of some subject matter."     (p 45)    The "effect of these beliefs is to make some
similarities between objects decisive and other simply irrelevant."  (Neisser p 3)

         Additionally, researchers have shown (Namy and Gentner, 1999) that students' abilities to categorize
properly  are greatly   enhanced   when  multiple  members    of a  category  are  shown.    Without  presentation   of
multiple category members, young students, in particular, tend to categorize based on superficial similarities.

         If analogies are, as I claim, assertions of categorization, they should display similar properties:
      ·  they should be based on theories and/or goals
      ·  they should show the prototype effects of generalization and similarity, and
      ·  they should often appear in sets of several analogies rather than singly in as a base-target pair.
In the  following   section I will  follow a thread  of analogies  in a  5th grade  science  class that displays   these
properties.

II. Analogies in the Classroom
         The  following    passages  are taken from   a "Science   Talk"  (Gallas,  1995)  in 5th  grade classroom   in
Maryland.   The students are posed the following question (NASA, 1999): a cup full of water is inverted on a
cookie tray and the tray is rapidly pulled out from underneath the cup (see Fig. 1).       What happens to the cup-
water system?     Most students believe the water will "go everywhere" and report as much.         This belief is most
apparent when the experiment is performed and the students are surprised by the result (the cup and water fall at
the same rate, and the water does not leave the cup until they hit the ground).     This surprise is evidence that the
students expected this cup-water system to behave differently, meaning they expect this cup-water system to
belong to a class of things that spill, i.e. like most other overturned cups.  None of the students explicitly states
this.

                                                        45
                         Fig. 1: The Experiment: A tray pulled out from under a cup

However, one student predicted this correct outcome and explained her prediction with an (unsolicited) analogy.

       Teacher: ...let's see what some­ I see a lot of other hands up. Um, Miranda?
       Miranda: I predict that when it falls off it's going to stay in the cup until it gets down to the
       floor and then it'll splash.
       Teacher: So you have a prediction that when I slide it off of the tray the water is going to stay
       in the cup. Now that's very different from what they're saying.
       Miranda: 'Cause at home when I have like something in a basket and when I go like that real
       quick [student swings arm around, miming that the basket is swung overhead and quickly
       pulled down] it stays in.    So when ­ and when I pull it down like this [motions pulling basket
       straight down] like upside down on the way down it stays in until it gets to the bottom and then
       it comes out.
       Teacher: So you're using now this example of something that you've done at home where you
       have an object in a bucket-- or a basket, you said-- and what do you do? You--
       Miranda: I go like this and then I pull it down and it stays at the top until I stop and then it
       comes out.   [Motions swinging overhead and pulling down, lifts hands to show that it stays at
       the top of the basket.]
       Teacher: So you swing this ­ what's in the basket? What object is in the basket?
       Miranda: Sometimes I put like, like a little toy cat that I'm playing roller-coaster with and put
       it in there and I pull it down and it stays in the back [motions that the cat is up at the top] until I
       stop and then it comes out.

       Miranda explains her prediction about the water by spontaneously creating an analogy in which the cup
corresponds to a basket and the water corresponds to a toy cat.   This analogy, I assert, positions this cup and this
basket as belonging to a category (1). That category we can call "containers that do not spill their contents when
overturned" (2). Miranda's analogy claims that this not-obvious category exists.   The reasoning and analogies
that follow illustrate several features that have been identified in research in categorization: a folk-theory basis,
prototypes, and multiple members.

A Folk-theory Basis and Prototypes
       Categories are not just defined by resemblance to a prototype but are often structured around a folk
"theory" of the world (Murphy & Medin, 1985, Barsalou, 1985, and Lakoff, 1987).         Further clarification of
Miranda's analogy by another student illustrates this principle:

       Teacher: ...Ok now has anybody else, want, can relate to this also?      Looks like a lot of you
       can. Let's hear some of your ideas.  Let me come over to ­ thank you Alyssa.
       Alyssa:   Um.  Um what she's also talking about it's the air- it's like pushing the cat up against
       the-- the bottom of the basket which is holding it back from going out.

And Miranda agrees with this theory,

       Miranda: And it'll be the same thing with the water the air will push the water up [raises hands
       up to show the push] until it falls down and then it will go everywhere. Because when it comes
       down the air is pushing upwards [raising hands] and that keeps the water in there- because I've
       also done that in the bathtub when you've got your cup, I'll like I'll fill it with water, put my

                                                   46
         hand, and drop it the water stays in until it hits the bathtub and then it goes everywhere.
         [Mimes dropping the water.]

         What is startling in the above passage is that Miranda claims to have done something that is quite
similar to the case in question (involving cups, water, and dropping), but her initial analogy to explain her
reasoning came from a much less similar experience. Several findings from category research can be brought to
bear to understand this seeming illogicality.   First, if a generated analogy is an assertion of category membership,
one might expect the choice of analogy base (3) to be a category prototype and not a visually (or structurally)
more   similar  event.  When    listing members     of a category, the first members    that are listed are   category
prototypes.    In this case the category is "containers that do not spill their contents when overturned," and so
Miranda would be expected to choose a prototypical member of this category and not an analogy that is "closer"
to the target. Second, categories are often folk-theory based, and if the theory at play is one of air pushing then
the cat-in-basket analogy is a better exemplar, as is illustrated by other students who later in the conversation
contend that air can push a cat (because "it's just one thing") but not water.    It could be argued that air pushing
was  not Miranda's     original theory     and  may  not have  come  into  play   in her original reasoning.      Elby
(conversation) suggested perhaps Miranda was invoking a "carrying" phenomenological primitive (diSessa,
1993) (the cat stays in the basket because it is "carried along" with it) in which case the cat-in-basket is still a
better exemplar    than   the   bathtub     exemplar.    Even   when   we    (as researchers)    are unsure    of the
mechanisms/theories     that define students'     categories, we   should expect   them  to  reason  about    category
prototypes, and not other category members, because of the asymmetry of generalization and similarity: if you
determine a principle that applies to the prototype, it is easier to extend it to non-prototypes, and those non-
prototypes are easier to determine if you have determined a prototype.       This implies that the analogies students
draw should not be expected to be "near" analogies, but rather analogies to category prototypes.

Multiple Spontaneous Analogies
         Following discussion of the mechanism of air there are still questions and the class is divided on
whether or not the cup-water system will behave like the cat-in-basket system.       Students then begin to come up
with multiple spontaneous analogies as a means of negotiating the category:
         ...[When I have] a bucket full of water and I swing it around... when I throw it, the bucket of
water still stays until it hits something.
         ...at Trick-or-Treat I had like a bunch of candy and I swung it around... and none of the candy
         came out.
         ...when me and Johnny play Monopoly there's like this little hat that we play with when we
         roll the dice and like, we always put the dice in and flip it back to each other with the dice in it
         and we always catch it and it stays-- and the dice stay in.
It is both intuitive and empirically proven that knowledge of multiple category members improves students'
ability to properly categorize a novel item (Namy and Gentner, 1999).        The above listing of analogies can be
seen as "fleshing out" the category in order to better categorize the novel water-cup system.

         These passages demonstrate that features that have been identified in categorization are also apparent in
analogies that are spontaneously generated by students in a science classroom, and the research on categorization
can shed light on the ways in which students are reasoning.

III. Why Not Structure-Mapping?
         The most well known theory of how analogies are interpreted is Gentner's structure-mapping theory and
its associated computational model, the Structure Mapping Engine (Falkenhainer, Forbus & Gentner, 1986).
This theory has had success in explaining and predicting phenomena in the interpretation of analogies and it
seems only natural to apply the theory to student-generated analogies in science.      The central idea in structure-
mapping is that
         an analogy is a mapping of knowledge from one domain (the base) into another (the target),
         which conveys that a system of relations that holds among the base objects also holds among
         the target objects... In interpreting an analogy, people seek to put the objects of the base in
         one-to-one    correspondence      with the objects in the target so  as  to  obtain the  maximum
         structural match (Gentner, 1989).
Although Gentner has shown that structure-mapping accounts for analogy interpretation, it is tempting to extend
the theory to analogy creation.   While structure-mapping can account for many properties of student-generated

                                                         47
analogies, including the folk-theory basis, it cannot account for prototype effects and multiple spontaneous
analogies.

        Dunbar    (2001) has noted    a similar difference, particularly between      the analogies  that occur   in a
psychology experiment and those occurring naturally.       This distinction    he terms   "in vivo" versus  "in vitro"
analogies.  In vivo refers to analogies as they are created in a natural setting (a science lab, in the case of
Dunbar's research) and in vitro refers to analogies that are presented to a participant in the psychology lab.     His
findings suggest that there are significant differences in the nature of these two types of analogies, theorizing that
this could be due in part to in vivo analogies resulting from a memory search, while in vitro analogies require
participants to choose between different sources. His suggestion is consistent with the idea that structure-
mapping, while accurate in vitro, may not be accurate in vivo for student-generated analogies.

        There is evidence from the above transcript that structure-mapping alone cannot account for student-
generated analogies.  While individual analogies may be understood as structure-mapping, multiple spontaneous
analogies are better accounted for as a whole by categorization.   By the time a student in the cited discussion
compares a cup and water to dice in a hat, he has heard four other analogies.      His analogy indicates that he has
understood these properly.    Having    mapped  the target  (cup-water)  onto     the base (cat-basket)   then, in the
structure-mapping  model, there  is  no need for the multiple   analogies.    In the categorization story, however,
identifying multiple members of a category is beneficial in understanding the category.

        Choosing a base, in the above conversation, is more than a matter of finding a similar structure, but
choosing a category prototype.    A structure-mapping account of analogy generation cannot account for this,
while the categorization story does.

        Studies in metaphor interpretation may support this view of analogy creation.          Some studies (Bowdle
and Gentner, 1999) show that a well-known metaphor is interpreted rapidly and shows categorizational effects
while a novel metaphor does not and is structure-mapping-like in its interpretation.      (For example, interpreting:
life is like a road versus life is like a newspaper would be well-known versus novel.)     In creating an analogy the
analogy is, for its creator, well understood and may be expected to mirror the interpretation of well-known
metaphors.

IV. Summary
        The reforms that are being instated in science education call for a greater attention to student ideas and
reasoning (NRC, 1996).   Past research on analogies--including analogies in the classroom--concern themselves
with participants and   students interpreting   analogies and not generating      analogies,   reflecting a model    of
education in which students receive and interpret knowledge from the teacher, but do not contribute their own
knowledge to the instruction.    The reforms in science education demand more attention to this latter type of
analogy: what a student means when he states that x is like y.  In this paper, I have argued that when looking at
such student-generated analogies, their properties and bases, a pattern consistent with categorization emerges.
Student-generated analogies are based on folk-theories, are often generated in multiples, and refer to category
prototypes.

Endnotes
(1) Murphy and Medin (1985)      distinguish a category from a concept, saying: "We         use concepts   to refer to
    mental representations of a certain kind, and categories to refer to classes of objects in the world."       I am
    taking a similar stance, suggesting that categories may be based on concepts and these can be revealed by
    analogies.
(2) I do not mean to impute propositional structure by so naming the category--rather, I need a way of referring
    to this category. The reader should not interpret "containers that do not spill their contents" as a definition
    of the category.
(3) In an analogy statement "A is like B," A is the target and B is the base.

References
Barsalou, L.W.  (1983).  Ad hoc categories. Memory and Cognition 11(3), 211-227.

                                                     48
Barsalou, L.W. (1985).   Ideas, Central Tendency, and Frequency of Instantiation as Determinants of Graded
       Structures   in Categories.  Journal  of Experimental  Psychology:  Learning, Memory,     and Cognition,
       11(4):629--654.
Bowdle, B.F., and Gentner, D.   Metaphor comprehension: From comparison to categorization.       Proceedings of
       the Twenty-first Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 90-95.
diSessa, A. (1993). Towards an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10, 105-225
Dunbar, K. (2001). The Analogical Paradox. In D. Gentner, K. Holyoak and B. Kokinov (Eds.), The Analogical
       Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science (pp. 313-334). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K., and Gentner, D.   (1986). The structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
       Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Gallas, K.  (1995). Talking Their Way into Science: Hearing Children's Questions and Theories, Responding
       With Curricula.   New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Gentner, D. (1988). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy.  Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (1989).  The mechanisms of analogical learning.   In S. Vosniadu & A. Ortony (Eds.) Similarity and
       Analogical Reasoning.    Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Glucksberg,  S., and   Keysar,  B., (1990).    Understanding  metaphorical   comparisons:    Beyond  similarity.
       Psychological Review, 97(1), 3-18.
Hofstadter, D., and Mitchell, M. (1994).   The CopyCat project: A model of mental fluidity and analogy-making.
       In K.J. Holyoak and J.A.Barnden (Eds.), Advances in connectionist and nural computation theory, vol.
       2, Analogical Connections (p. 31-112).   Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Holyoak, K.J. and Thagard, P. (1989).     Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science 13,
       295-355.
Lakoff, G. (1987).  Women, Fire and Dangerous Things: What categories reveal about the mind.       Chicago: The
       University of Chicago Press.
Murphy, G.L., and Medin, D.L. (1985). The role of theories in conceptual coherence.  Psychological Review, 92,
       289-316.
Namy, L.L., and Gentner, D. (1999). Comparison in the development of categories.    Cognitive Development, 14,
       487-513.
NASA: National Aeronautics and Space Administration.      (1999). A Teacher's Guide with Activities in Science,
       Mathematics,         and      Technology,        Grades     5-12.       http://spacelink.nasa.gov/
       Instructional.Materials/Curriculum.Support/Physical.Science/Educator.Guides.and.Activities/Micrograv
       ity.Teacher.Guide/.index.html
Neisser, U. (1987).   Introduction: The ecological and intellectual bases of categorization. In U. Neisser (Ed.),
       Concepts and conceptual development.     New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
NRC: National Research Council.     (1998).  National Science Education Standards.  Washington, DC:    National
       Academy Press.
Rips, L.J.  (1975).  Inductive judgments    about natural categories.  Journal of Verbal  Learning   and Verbal
       Behavior, 14,   665-685.
Rosch, E. (Heider). (1973). Natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 328-350.
Shen, Y. (1992). Metaphor and categories.  Poetics Today, 13(4), 771-794.

Acknowledgments
This work was done on NSF grant ESI-9986846 in collaboration with Drs. David Hammer and Emily van Zee.
The author would like to express thanks to three anonymous reviewers, to Rachel Scherr, David Hammer, and
the graduate students of the Physics Education Research group for helpful comments on this paper.    Additional
thanks to the collaborating teacher, Mr. Bruce Booher.

                                                    49
