   Motivation to Read: Comparing Teachers' Perceptions of Students'
    Motivation with Students' Self-Reported Motivation: A Pilot Study

                                   Robert Rueda & Julie Au, Sunhee Choi
              Rm. 601, Rossier School of Education, University of Southern California, CA 90089
                                            Tel: (213) 740-2371
                            Email: rueda@usc.edu; jau@usc.edu; sunheech@usc.edu

        Abstract: This study investigated: a) the extent that teachers' perception of students' reading
        motivation differ from students' self-reported motivation; b) the extent that teacher perceptions of
        students' reading  motivation vary across     student      reading achievement levels; and  c)  the
        relationship between students' self-reported measures of reading motivation and their reading
        achievement.  Participants of this study included 22 Spanish speaking elementary students and 6
        teachers from a low-income area in downtown Los Angeles.        Results agree with previous findings
        in that teachers' perceptions and students' perceptions of motivation do differ; that teachers'
        perceptions of students' motivation are related to students' achievement level; and finally, higher
        achievers and lower achievers do have different motivation orientations.

Introduction
        While cognitive factors are normally emphasized in learning and academic achievement, research has long
acknowledged the role of motivation in mediating student outcomes. Typically defining motivation as `a state of
mind that initiates, directs, and sustains a certain activity', educational psychologists have sought ways to enhance
motivation in the belief that student performance may be improved     (Baker, Afflerback, & Reinking, 1996;  Guthrie
& Alvermann, 1999;  Guthrie & Knowles, 2001; Taylor & Adelman, 1999;). Recent studies on literacy development
show that reading motivation is a crucial factor for successful reading comprehension and literacy development
(Guthrie & Wigfield, 1997; Guthrie & Wigfield, 2000; Wigfield, 1994) and thus, deserves a more specific, in-depth
investigation. Teachers have also recognized the importance of reading motivation, considering motivating students
as one of their primary responsibilities and concerns (O'Flahavan, Gambrell, Guthrie, Stahl, & Alvermann, 1992). A
number of factors have been found to influence students' reading motivation including self-efficacy or self concept
as a reader, outcome expectation, goals, value beliefs regarding reading, and interests in topics. By assessing these
factors, teachers can be informed about how students acquire motivation to read and how they can help students to
become active and engaged readers. Given these instructional implications of motivation, it is imperative for
teachers to have the tools to assess students' reading motivation.

        Several instruments have been developed to measure students' reading motivation, most of them relying on
students' self-reported perceptions (e.g., Gambrell, Palmer, Codling, & Mazzoni, 1996; McKenna & Kear, 1990). In
actual classroom settings, however, teachers' perception has also been used as a major source for assessing students'
motivation for reading. Nevertheless, so far very few studies have been conducted on teachers' perception or beliefs
of students' motivation for reading (e.g., Sweet, Guthrie, & Ng, 1999), let alone how precisely teachers' perception
reflects students' actual levels of reading motivation. Furthermore, there is very little empirical research on teachers'
perception of minority students' reading motivation and its impact on minority student reading performance (Rueda,
MacGillivray, Monzo, & Arzubiaga, 2001). Therefore, this study aims to investigate the relationship between
teachers' perceptions about minority students' levels of reading motivation and minority students' self-reported
measure of reading motivation. It is expected that by providing educators with such knowledge, the present study
will help practitioners in the field of education to access and correctly interpret minority students' motivational
behaviors and make necessary adjustments in teaching methods as well as in curriculum.

        The primary questions of this pilot study include:
1. To what extent does teachers' perception of minority students' reading motivation differ from students' self-
   reported motivation?
2. To what extent do teacher perceptions of students' reading motivation vary across reading achievement levels?
3. How are students' self-reported measures of reading motivation related to reading achievement?

                                                       443
Teacher Perception and Belief
        According to Jussim (1989), teachers' perceptions are formed based on teachers' teaching experiences,
their relationship with students, students' previous achievement, and students' personality traits and behaviors, and
the impact of teacher perception on students has been demonstrated in much education research. For example,
several studies found that teacher perception has the power to influence students' perception of their own ability and
to create the effect of self-fulfilling prophecies (Smith, Jussim, & Eccles, 1999; Madon, Smith, Jussim, Russell,
Eccles, Palumbo,    & Walkiewicz,  2001).    Carr  and Kurtz  (1991) revealed   that teachers developed        a holistic
perspective of student achievement based upon students' metacognitive and motivational characteristics: high
achievers were perceived as highly motivated and vice versa.In another teacher perception study, Carr and Kurtz-
Costes (1994) also showed that teacher perception was biased by students' abilities: high ability students were
perceived more favorably on all measurements. More importantly and rather alarmingly, teachers' perception of
students' motivation to read has reciprocal effects on their teaching practices (Skinner & Belmont, 1993). That is,
teachers deliberately make instructional decisions to increase students' motivational levels based on their own
perception of students' motivation for reading, which raises an important question: what if a teacher's perception
does not match with students' self-perceived and reported reading motivation, rather reflecting their own perception
of students' other behaviors or achievement?    It also emphasizes the importance of accurate teacher perception of
students' motivation since it directs teachers' instructional practices and behaviors in the classroom.

Teacher Bias and Minority Students
        Just as a person's perception of others is often affected by their ethnic group membership, gender, and
social class, teacher perceptions of students are often influenced by students' gender, race, color of skin, language
ability, attractiveness, and socio-economic status (George, 1983; Huss-Keeler, 1997; Plata, Masten, & Trusty, 1999).
For instance, in a study investigating the nomination of Anglo and Hispanic students to gifted programs, Plata,
Masten, and Trusty (1999) found that teacher nominations were strongly related to ethnicity, and that Hispanic
students were much less likely to be nominated. Similarly, teacher ratings of students are also impacted by students'
race and ethnicity.  A study of teachers' ratings of 87 Anglo-American and 63 Hispanic fifth-grade students by
Masten, Plata, Wenglar, & Thedford (1999) showed that teachers rated their students based on the students' ethnic
status and acculturation  levels. Anglo-American       students were rated  higher   on  motivation       as well as   on
characteristics relating to learning, creativity, and leadership. Highly acculturated Hispanic students received higher
ratings than did low acculturated Hispanics.

Minority Students' Motivation
        It is said that the way people engage in activities is culturally defined, and motivation and the way it is
demonstrated  is also  influenced  by culture   as well  as individual   characteristics (Rueda &        Dembo,   1995).
Accordingly, motivation is a multifaceted construct, and difficult to identify, particularly in reference to culturally
diverse students. Given the role that cultural differences play in motivation, a question arises as to how teachers,
especially those coming from ethnic and socioeconomic background different from students', can effectively
determine students' motivation to read. Previous studies show that many middle class teachers do not have enough
knowledge  for working   with language  minority    students and   thus, often misinterpret  students'       attitude and
motivation (Huss-Keeler, 1997; Masten, Plata, Wenglar & Thedford, 1999). For instance, Huss-Keeler (1997) found
that teachers' unfamiliarity with students' culture and language could cause communication difficulty which in
effect results in the wrong impression that the students care less about their study. Eventually, these teachers became
unwilling to reach out struggling minority students. Given that teachers also set their expectation of students based
on their perception and teacher expectancy creates self-fulfilling prophecies in students, it is imperative for teaches
to understand culturally diverse students' behaviors and needs, and then make unbiased judgment about students.

Data Collection
        The data was collected as part of a larger project supported by the Center for the Improvement of Early
Reading Achievement (CIERA). 22 Latino students (9 female and 13 male) and their teachers (5 female and 1 male)
participated. Among the students, 10 of them were in the first grade and 12 were in the second grade at an inner-city
elementary school located in a metropolitan city in Southern California. The students predominantly were speaking
Spanish with limited English language proficiency even though all of them were born in the United States except for
one student who was born in Mexico. The participants were also from low-income families whose parents were

                                                        444
immigrants, working in garment factories. The ethnic backgrounds of the participating teachers were mixed (4
Latino and 2 White), which makes this pilot study different from other teacher perception studies.

        To measure teachers' perception of students' reading motivation, `The Teacher Perception Questionnaire
on Student Motivation to Read (3rd Edition)' was adopted from Sweet et al's study (1998). The instrument consisted
of 24 items (4 point Likert Scale), asking how teachers perceive individual students in 6 different motivational
constructs for reading: 1) Activity, 2) Autonomy, 3) Social, 4) Topic, 5) Individual, and 6) Writing. Examples of the
questionnaire from each construct include: "enjoys reading about a favorite activity"; "prefers finding his/her own
books to read"; "talks about his/her feelings related to a book or story"; "has no specialized reading interest"; "is a
voracious reading"; and "wants to write about what he/she reads". The teachers were also asked to answer to a
question about in what ways that s/he considered the child to be successful, and finally were asked to give the
student a grade ranging from A to D/F based on the student's current reading level. For students' self-reported
measure, Gambrell et al's (1996) `Motivation to Read Profile (MRP)' was used. The instrument includes a 20-item
reading survey and a conversational interview. The reading survey measures motivation to read in two subscales:
self-concept as a reader (measuring students' perceived competence in reading) and value of reading (placed on
reading tasks and  activities by students), whereas    the conversational   interview  aims to get more   personal and
qualitative perspectives of students' motivation for reading. Due to the students' limited English proficiency, the
students were read the questions both in English and Spanish by the field researchers, and answered in the language
which they felt most comfortable with.

Results and Discussion
        To  address  the research    questions  presented   above,  the  data   from  both  `The Teacher    Perception
Questionnaire on Student Motivation to Read' and `Motivation to Read Profile' were analyzed. A series of statistical
analyses were conducted to examine differences between teachers' perception of student reading motivation and
students' self-reported motivation. Each student's scores from the teachers' perception measure and the student's
self-reported measures were compared.   A Pearson correlation was carried out to examine the relationship between
teachers' and students' perceptions. Means and standard deviations were then calculated on the teachers' perception
measure (M = 68.34, SD = 10.26) and the students' self-reported measure (M = 62.36, SD = 8.37), r = -.161, p =
.484, which is not significant.  Therefore, it may be concluded that teachers' perceptions of students' motivation
level are not related to students' own perceptions.

Table 1 Means and standard deviations of percentage scores of teachers' perception and students' own perception of
reading motivation

                                No. of students     Mean    SD        r
            Teachers' score          21             68.34  10.26   -.161
            Students' score          21             62.36   8.37

        The   second question    addressed  whether    students' achievement    levels have  any   effect on teachers'
perception of students' reading motivation. Due to the fact that teachers' ratings were not independent, that is, in
some cases, the same teacher would rate more than one student, a non-parametric analysis, Wilcoxon Signed Ranks
test, was conducted (Table 2).  A main effect for achievement level was observed (Z-ratio is -2.925, sig. = .003).  In
other words, the students with higher achievement levels were perceived by their teachers to be more motivated than
those who had lower achievement levels.    Results show that students of different achievement level do vary in their
motivation orientation when     an  ANOVA     was     performed  with   the six motivation  constructs and   students'
achievement level. That is to say, higher achieving students have considerably different motivation level in the
subscales of individual, social, writing and topic.

                                                          445
Table 2 Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for Effect of achievement level on teachers' perception on students reading
motivation

                                                                  Number    Mean Rank       Z    Sig.
                   Teachers' perception < achievement level         17        12.74
                   Teachers' perception > achievement level          5         7.3       -2.925  .003
                   Teachers' perception   = achievement level        0
                   Total                                            22

          On the contrary, no main effect of achievement level was observed in the students' self-reported measures
of reading motivation (Table 3). The results of an one-way ANOVA indicate that high achieving students' self-
concept and value of reading are not significantly different from those of low achieving students, F (3, 16) = 1.363,
p = .290; F (3, 16) = 1.461, p = .260, respectively, nor are they higher on reading motivation as a whole F (3, 16) =
1.434, p = .268. This means that "A" students are not necessarily higher in self-concept or value of reading. In fact,
the results show that "F" students have a higher mean score of value of reading than "A" students. Therefore, it can
be concluded that reading proficiency, as informed by report-card grades, has no effect on reading motivation
perceived by students themselves.

Table 3 Analysis of Variance for Effect of achievement level on students' own perception of reading motivation

                                          Self-concept                           Task value
             Report card      Mean            SD          F value      mean        SD         F value
              reading
             Grades (1)
                   1         30.000          9.0000                   36.333     1.1547
                   2         22.000            -                      30.000
                   3         25.000          5.6569         1.363     28.500    6.63640       1.461
                   4         28.333          3.8079                   34.333     2.7386
                   5         32.333          5.3541                   33.500     5.4681

Conclusion
          Several conclusions may be drawn from this study regarding teachers' perception of students reading
motivation.  First of all, teachers' perception of students reading motivation is found to be different than students'
self-reported motivation. This finding is noteworthy since teachers employ techniques and activities according to
their perceptions of their students (Nolen & Nicholls, 1994).     Inaccurate perceptions are unlikely to inform teachers
of the right practices in enhancing students' motivation and achievement.    Secondly, teachers' perception of students
reading motivation is influenced by students' achievement level. This has been found to be true by several previous
studies (e.g. Sweet et al, 1998). The expectation that teachers perceive higher achievers are different in their
motivation orientation than lower achievers is confirmed. It was mentioned earlier that the teacher sample of this
study  is different  from other   studies in that it has  a mixed  ethnic background.   The fact that these teachers'
perception of their students' reading motivation level are different than those of the students' own suggest that
misperception or misinterpretation of students' behavior may not arise solely from cultural differences. Rather,
students' achievement level may play a more significant role in teachers' perceptions than ethnic differences.
Findings of this study show that even teachers from the same ethnic background perceive differently. However, the
sample is too small to test this. Future study is needed.

          Another finding is that higher achievers and lower achievers are not significantly different in their self-
concept as a reader. Rather interestingly, lower achievers perceive a higher value of reading than higher achievers.
This finding is crucial for educators because it means that low achievers are not necessarily unmotivated, nor do
they perceive themselves as lacking the ability to read.    Hence, other factors such as teaching methods must also be
considered in identifying reasons for unsatisfactory performance. This study is informative in the above mentioned
areas of interest.  However, it is also limited by the small number of participants. Moreover, during the course of
study, it was found   that there   is no  motivation  measurement    which could be used  to  measure both teachers'

                                                            446
perception as well as students', and hence two different questionnaires were employed. For future studies, it is
suggested that a larger sample of participants be recruited and a uniform instrument for both teachers and students
be used.

Endnotes
(1) Report card grade levels are translated into numerals for statistical analysis.  For example, an F in the teacher's
    original grading is translated into a 1, D = 2, C = 3, B = 4 and final A = 5.

References
Aluja-Fabreget, A., Balleste-Almacellas, J., & Torrubia-Beltri, R. (1999). Self-reported personality and school
         achievement   as predictors   of  teachers'  perceptions  of their       students. Personality   and  Individual
         Differences, 27, 743-753.
Baker, L., Afflerback, P., & Reinking, D. (1996). Developing engaged readers in school and home communities.
         Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.
Carr, M. & Kurtz, B.E. (1991). Teachers' perceptions of their students' metacognition, attributions, and self-concept.
         British Journal of Educational Psychology. 61(2), 197-206
Carr, M.  & Kurtz-Costes,   B. E.  (1994). Is being  smart  everything? The       influence  of   student achievement  on
         teachers' perceptions. British Journal of Educational Psychology. 64(2), 263-276
Gambrell, L. B., Palmer, B. M., Codling, R. M., & Mazzoni, S. A. (1996). Assessing motivation to read. The
         Reading Teacher, 215-232.
Guthrie, J.T., & Alvermann, D.E. (1999). Engaged reading: processes, practices, and policy implications. New
         York: Teachers College Press.
Guthrie, John T; Knowles, Kaeli T (2001). Promoting reading motivation.           In Literacy and motivation: Reading
         engagement  in  individuals and   groups   (pp. 159-176). Verhoeven,       Ludo    (Ed);  Snow,  Catherine  (Ed).
         Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Guthrie, J.T. &   Wigfield, A. (1997).  Reading   engagement:    Motivating     readers through    integrated instruction.
         Newark, DE: Intl. Reading Association.
Guthrie, John T; Wigfield, Allan (2000). Engagement and motivation in reading. In Handbook of reading research,
         Vol. III (pp. 403-422).   Kamil,  Michael   L.  (Ed); Mosenthal, Peter     B.  (Ed);   et al. Mahwah,  NJ,  US:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Jussim   (1989). Teacher  expectations: Self-fulfilling  prophecies,  perceptual     biases,  and  accuracy.  Journal  of
         Personality & Social Psychology. 57(3), 469-480
Madon, S., Smith, A., Jussim, L., Russell, D. W., Eccles, J., Palumbo, P., & Walkiewicz, M. (2001). Am I as you
         see me or do you see me as I am? Self-fulfilling prophecies and self-verification. Personality & Social
         Psychology Bulletin. 27(9), 1214-1224.
Masten, W. G., Plata, M., Wenglar, K., & Thedford, J. (1999). Acculturation and teacher ratings of Hispanic and
         Anglo-American students. Roeper Review, 22(1), 64-65.
McKenna, M. C., & Kear, D. J. (1990). Measuring attitude toward reading: A new tool for teachers. The Reading
         Teacher, 43, 626-639.
Miller, Samuel D. (2003). How high and low challenge tasks affect motivation and learning: Implications for
         struggling learners. Reading & Writing Quarterly: Overcoming Learning Difficulties, 19(1), 39-57.
Nolen, S.B. & Nicholls, J.G. (1994). A place to begin (again) in research on student motivation: Teacher's beliefs.
         Teaching & Teacher Education, 10, 57-69.
O'Flahavan, J., Gambrell, L. B., Guthrie, J. Stahl, S., & Alvermann, D. (1992). Poll results guide activities of
         research center: Reading Today, 10, p. 12.
Plata, M., Masten, W., & Trusty, J., (1999). Teachers' perception and nomination of fifth-grade Hispanic and Anglo
         students. Journal of Research and Development in Education, 32(2), 113-123.
Rueda, R. & Dembo, M. (1995). Motivational Processes in learning: a comparative analysis of cognitive and
         sociocultural frameworks. In M. Maehr & P. Pintrich (Eds.), Advances in Motivation and Achievement,
         Vol. 9, (pp. 255-289). Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press.
Rueda, R., MacGillivray, L., Monzo, L., & Arzubiaga, A. (2001) Engaged Reading: A Multilevel Approach to
         Considering   Sociocultural  Factors   with  Diverse   Le.a(rRneprsort No. CIERA-1-012).      Ann    Arbor, MI:
         Center for the Improvement of Early Reading Achievement (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No.
         ED459428)

                                                         447
Skinner, E.A. & Belmont, M.J. (1993). Motivation in the classroom: Reciprocal effects of teacher behavior and
         student engagement across the school year. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85, 571-581.
Smith, A. E., Jussim, L., & Eccles, J. (1999). Do self-fulfilling prophecies accumulate, dissipate, or remain stable
         over time? Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 77(3), 548-565.
Taylor, L. & Adelman, H. S. (1999). Reading & Writing Quarterly: Overcoming Learning Difficulties, 15(4), 255-
         276
Wigfield, A.  (1994). Expectancy-value    theory of   achievement    motivation:   A developmental          perspective.
         Educational Psychology Review, 6(1), 48-78.
Winsler, A,  & Carlton, M. P. (2003).   Observations   of children's task activities andinsteorcaicatlions in relation to
         teacher perceptions in a child-centered preschool: Are we leaving too much to chance? Early Education &
         Development, 14(2), 155-178.

                                                      448
