                    Using `Rules of Thumb' Practices to Enhance
            Conceptual Understanding and Scientific Reasoning in
                             Project-based Inquiry Classrooms

                                      Michael T. Ryan & Janet L. Kolodner
       Learning By Design, Georgia Institute of Technology, 801 Atlantic, 276 CRB, Atlanta, GA. 30332
                                     Tel: 404-894-1987, Fax: 404-894-5041
                                 Email: mryan@cc.gatech.edu, jlk@cc.gatech.edu

       Abstract: With foundations in scientific argumentation/discourse literature and transfer literature,
       this study describes the potential of a new ritualized and repeated classroom activity, the Rules of
       Thumb practice, in developing the conceptual understanding, scientific reasoning, and transfer
       ability  of  physical science students  in project-based    inquiry classrooms (e.g., Learning   By
       Design). Teachers employ an experimental Rules of Thumb practice with more or less fidelity to
       develop student science talk (defined as the skill or act of communicating and explaining, both in
       written and/or verbal form, the science concepts and principles within a context in an abstract,
       generalized form) using scaffolded, iterative instructional practices. Comparison and experimental
       classrooms completed two post-treatment writing assessments, which were coded and analyzed.
       This paper presents the results of that analysis and reports that the Rules of Thumb practice may
       have an effect in developing conceptual understanding, scientific reasoning, and transfer ability
       and    that teacher implementation  of the Rules     of Thumb  practice does indeed   affect student
       outcomes.

Introduction
       Researchers and educators in the science education community have developed curricula, methods, and
practices to improve science literacy, focusing on conceptual understanding, scientific reasoning, and transfer. The
need for improvement in these areas has been highlighted by a variety of assessments of U.S. science education
(e.g., NCES, 2001). One way researchers and teachers have addressed these needs is through the development of
project-based inquiry units (NRC, 1996). There have been significant successes reported from these endeavors, but
one area that remains difficult is helping learners make connections between the phenomena they are experiencing
and the scientific principles that explain them (Roth, 1997). Indeed, this has been a difficulty we have encountered
in our Learning by Design (LBD) classrooms (Kolodner et. al., 2003).

       But    how   might  one make  that happen  in a project-based    inquiry setting ­ one  where   learners are
investigating phenomena and their effects in order to achieve some challenge? Jimenez-Aleixandre & Rodriguez
(2000) conducted research in an inquiry and problem-based, high-school genetics class where teachers created an
environment in which students were encouraged to socially defend their positions with data and science concept
principles. This research found that this method created students who: 1) engaged in scientific argument; 2) asked
for each other to explain their arguments; and 3) developed warrants, i.e.- reasons based in principles that make the
explicit connection between data and a conclusion or claim. While a teacher, the first author of this paper discovered
a way to do this in his classes by enhancing a public Rules of Thumb practice that focused on explanation and
iteration of explanations. This seemed to be a success, so we decided to investigate its effects in a more formal way.

       LBD's founding principles and learning models (problem-based learning, project-based inquiry, and case-
based reasoning) contribute to the founding of this study (Kolodner, et. al., 2003). Evaluations of LBD show that
students improve their conceptual understanding of scientific concepts, their scientific reasoning, and collaboration
behaviors. The best practices, however, for helping students develop scientific reasoning, content understanding, and
promoting transfer were not quite clear. This paper reports on an investigation of the effects of enacting one LBD
classroom practice (the Rules of Thumb practice (RT)) in three different ways ­ LBD's original way, a new way that
focused upon the development of science talk (defined by this author as the skill or act of communicating and
explaining science concepts and principles governing a context in an abstract, generalized form), and something in
between. The new RT practice, when implemented with high fidelity, promotes greater use of science content to
explain experimental results and justify project decisions. It focuses on moving students from discussions about the

                                                       449
specifics of their project experiences to more abstract and generalized articulation of science concepts that explain
them.   Data shows that this results in greater proclivity by students to recognize the appropriateness of engaging in
science talk, to do so with more depth, and to use science content knowledge and scientific reasoning skills in a new
situation. Our research was done in three Atlanta-area middle schools.

         The abstraction of science concepts, ideas, principles, and norms of practice is an important goal of science
education (NRC, 1996). The transfer literature, however, tells us this is difficult to achieve because the appropriate
recognition and use of knowledge outside of the context in which it is learned is rare (Bransford, et.al., 1999). The
new RT practice was engineered with this in mind. The new protocol might serve as a model for classroom practice
that develops student abstraction of science concepts and scientific reasoning skill.

Background         - LBD's "Original" Rules of Thumb
         Learning   by Design  (LBD)   is a project-based inquiry      curriculum      approach designed to  improve
performance in science literacy at the middle school level for all students. In LBD curriculum units, student groups
design and develop a design artifact (an actual object or model) that achieves the design challenge. In Vehicles in
Motion (VIM), a unit covering forces and motion, students build, experiment with, and redesign a model car and its
propulsion mechanisms. Students either design or re-engineer the artifact to improve its performance, allowing them
to meet a challenge put forth by the curriculum unit and their teacher. LBD students, in groups, experiment with
features of the design artifact to learn about their effects on the performance. The information gained from these
experiments informs and drives design decisions and future versions of the artifact. Experimenting with the artifact's
features or aspects (i.e., scientific variables) provides students the opportunity to experience first-hand the science
concepts governing the performance or purpose of the design artifact. Furthermore, this opens the door for teachers
to connect the science concepts to design decisions learners must make to meet the challenge.

         Central to LBD's methodology is the use of repeated public practices (Kolodner, Gray, & Fasse, 2002)
where teachers and students engage in discourse to scaffold development of science content understanding, science
inquiry skills, collaboration skills, and scientific reasoning (Kolodner, et al., 2003). The RT practice follows a round
of experiments conducted by the student groups formed in the class. Following experiments, a Rules of Thumb
session is held in which each student group presents a recommendation for future designs (i.e., their Rule of Thumb)
based on their experimental data. Those chosen by the class as justified by experimental results are recorded on a
poster. During later RT sessions, after students have attempted to apply those rules of thumb, the class returns to the
RT poster and discusses the merits and meanings of all the current and prior RTs suggested. Students need the
results of all experiments done by groups in the class, and hence an understanding of the full set of RTs to succeed at
their challenge.

         This practice and the public record it produces served as vehicles for converging on and recording useful
design information and to remind students of what they should take into account in further designing.       But early
implementations    produced RTs   that were  not scientifically rigorous.       Often,   students were making  good
observations and recommendations, but they didn't go deeper than a surface design suggestion or beyond fabrication
techniques (e.g., "use tape to secure bearings to the car because it can be removed and reapplied more easily than
glue") or feature settings (e.g., "keep the wheels positioned far away from the chassis so that they do not rub on the
chassis"). Their RTs were never decontextualized, and students rarely explained the effects of the variable using
science content. To promote and scaffold this skill, the first author (LBD teacher, 1999-2000) formulated an RT
template:

         "When      (describe  the   action,   design,  or   choice         you  are      working   within),
         use/connect/build/employ/measure (list your suggestion or method) because (list or supply the
         science principle or concept here that backs up your suggestion)."

The introduction of this template produced substantial changes to the types of RTs observed.       RTs changed from
statements such as: "Use straw bearings because they allow the car to travel farther than any of the other bearings"
to "When choosing a bearing for the coaster car, use the straw bearings because the straw has very low friction and
will not cause the car to slow down as much as the other bearings because other bearings change the net force a
lot".

                                                     450
The "New" Rules of Thumb Protocol
       The ubiquitous theme of the new RT practice is overt scaffolding of opportunities for students to (1)
develop their science talk faculty and (2) argue and justify decisions, publicly, with science concepts learned during
VIM. The goal of the practice is to have students, in a RT session, create RTs that focus not only on the design idea
or solution itself, but also on the science governing the success of the idea or solution. In addition, the RTs,
including their scientific explanations, are iteratively revisited and revised as the class moves through the unit.    The
practice has several important characteristics: (i) it expects and fosters student engagement in science talk and
science argumentation/reasoning; (ii) it creates opportunities for students to engage in science talk and science
argumentation/reasoning, both in  written    and  verbal  formats;   (iii) it targets student-centered, versus teacher-
centered, science talk and science argumentation/reasoning; (iv) it emphasizes use of scaffolding tools to develop
science talk and science argumentation/reasoning, and (v) it encourages and rewards peer critiquing and Socratic
discussion of students' science talk and science reasoning.

            The predicted  outcome       of the  new  RT    practice was    that students  would demonstrate    greater
proficiency in science talk, scientific reasoning, and transfer. Specifically, they would (i) use science concepts and
principles learned during the unit to explain, justify, and reason decisions, problems, and solutions at a higher rate;
(ii) articulate these science concepts and principles in a more abstract, generalized voice or manner; demonstrating
greater conceptual understanding and greater tendency to reason scientifically; and (iii) demonstrate higher quality
transfer of content knowledge and reasoning skills and at a higher rate.

       To articulate the requisite scaffolding (Holbrook & Kolodner, 2002), the LBD team designed a special
worksheet, entitled My Rules  of Thumb      (Figure 1) to help students     record and  develop RTs according    to    the
identified protocol. Teachers help the students create a public RTs list from the rules that different groups suggest.

                              Figure 1 ­ My Rules of Thumb Design Diary sheet.

       The new practice dictates iterative refinement to edit or eliminate poor RTs. The My Rules of Thumb sheet
is a dynamic record of rules that develop over time with experience, and it is revisited during other LBD activities.
This allows students to practice with and engage in science talk and discourse more often. Table 1 emphasizes the
importance of RTs by highlighting (in italics) when they are used in LBD's Vehicles in Motion curriculum sequence.

Method
Research design
The nature of the curriculum, the time constraints placed on teachers by their school districts, and the similarities
between the cohorts (Kolodner, et.al., 2003) dictated a quasi-experimental, static group comparison design (Salkind,
1997). Four 8th-grade teachers who were implementing VIM in metro Atlanta suburban schools participated in this
study. The cohorts involved were of a similar demographic, and each teacher implemented the unit at approximately
the same time during the 2000-2001 academic year. The two teachers in the experimental group (T1and T2) were to
implement the new RT protocol, and two comparison teachers (T3 and T4) were to implement the old one. The
teachers trained in their respective protocols during a summer workshop and prior to the unit's implementation.
However, T4 fell ill and dropped out of the implementation, and the two experimental teachers each implemented
the new practice protocol differently. Thus, we were left with three groups to compare.

                                                         451
Table 1: Annotated LBD/VIM Annotated Sequence with New Rules of Thumb Practice Elements

   1. Challenge Introduction, Build, & Mess About: Problems specifications, constraints, and criteria identified. Build basic
   version of the artifact. Examine and Mess-About with the basic design; students share observations.
   2.Whiteboard the Challenge: Class reviews observations, constructs a Whiteboard to organize ideas and variables to test.
   3. Design Experiments: Students identify specific variables to test, plan experiments.
   4. Conduct Experiments: Students create and conduct experiments to test variables identified.
   5. Poster Session: Students conduct a Poster Session to present their experiment(s) to the class.
   6. Rules of Thumb Presentation: Presenting group generates a RT regarding their variable to help students plan future
   designs. RTs are recorded and discussed. Students record RTs on the My Rules of Thumb sheet, knowing that it may be
   edited later. Teacher models science talk.
   7. Science Concept Instruction: The class's attention focuses on the science issue at hand. The teacher emphasizes and
   models science talk: Rephrasing students answers and asking students to rephrase answers using the science vocabulary.
   Teacher emphasizes heavily the relationship between the abstract science principles and the examples students have
   generated, referring to the challenge or problem often in explanations.
   8. Conduct More Experiments, Poster Sessions, Rules of Thumb Session (Cycling steps 3-7): Before starting the next
   round of experiments, students review the RTs to identify and rewrite any misstatements or misconceptions based on
   their recent research. Students once again discuss and deliberate over RTs as a class. This time the class is more prepared
   to fill in the Why the Rule Works column because of their exploration of the science concepts. Teachers help students
   reword justification or explanation (rephrasing as a question) to model the use of abstract decontextualized language. The
   teacher models science talk both in discussion and when writing RTs. As steps 3-7 are repeated, a Rules of Thumb
   Session occurs, and the My Rules of Thumb sheet is edited every time.
   9. Plan Final Design, Pin-Up Session: When the class completes the experimenting phase, student groups review RTs,
   review experimental results, and consult with other groups to plan final design of artifact. Each group creates a Pin-Up: a
   sort of blueprint of their final design idea. The class convenes to share Pin-Ups.
   10. Build & Test, Gallery Walks: Groups build and test their final design. Data is collected and Gallery Walks occur.
   During redesign, students may verify RTs or sometimes, they may discover flaws in their RTs. Once again, the teacher
   uses guided questioning and discussion (perhaps even more demos, science concept research, homework assignments) in
   an attempt to have students develop more valid RTs and better articulate science concepts within a context as evidenced
   by their RTs. This step highlights the priority and encouragement of an iterative development of science. Again, the
   teacher models science talk both in discussion and when writing RTs.
   11. Final Presentation: Students present their final artifact and attempt the challenge(s).
   12. Review Challenge, Whiteboard: The class reviews the limitation of the artifact type, in general, and identifies what is
   further required to complete the challenges more successfully which leads into the next module. Teacher and students
   review the Rules of Thumb, identifying those that seemed to have the most influence on successful designs, i.e. ­ those
   that met the challenge.

Instruments
       The post-tests were assignments that were part of the curriculum unit. In the first assignment (A1), each
student wrote a Product History, a detailed explanation of the evolution of his/her model vehicle. These papers
discuss problems encountered, design changes, experiments on design features, and explanations of design choices,
both successful and unsuccessful. As students describe the features, problems, and aspects of their vehicles, there is
a tremendous opportunity for students to relate the science they have learned, especially since the assignment
explicitly asks   for them    to do  so.      In the second post-test       assignment         (A2), students create and    write
recommendations for a team of scientists who are planning to design and build a vehicle to explore Antarctica.               The
assignment details the conditions the vehicle must endure, and students are asked to comment on several areas of the
vehicle in their recommendation.    Again, students can identify the concepts at work, explaining how and why those
concepts govern the feature discussed.

       Quasi-experimental, static group comparison design (Salkind, 1997) lacks a pretest.                    A pretest was not
possible for this study.   It was very difficult to create pretest assessments similar to the end of unit assessments        that
could target the existing knowledge and abilities measured in this study.              Additionally, because of constraints on
teacher-instruction time and other aspects of implementing LBD that year, the teachers were unwilling to participate
in pretest activities or have students do work that was in excess of that already in the unit.                Finally, it was the
teachers' wish that students complete only written assignments already existing in the LBD unit (i.e. ­ Product
History and Antarctica Car Recommendation) for our study.       All of these factors, in aggregate, eliminated the option
of a pretest.

                                                            452
Predictions
         The written assignments offered students the opportunity to explain and justify design problems, features,
solutions, experiments, or ideas based upon their project experience. A1 offered a view of each student's ability to
engage   in science talk, demonstrating      propensity   and  prowess  in their  conceptual understanding,  scientific
reasoning, and ability to apply what they had learned within the context it was learned in. Use of science content and
science talk skills with this assignment could be considered evidence of near-transfer. A2 offered more of a far-
transfer opportunity to apply science content knowledge to a new, unfamiliar situation while still offering students
the opportunity to explain and justify with science talk.

Results
Teacher Practices
         If we place the variations of the RT practice on a continuum of treatment fidelity, T1's implementation can
be defined as `high-fidelity'. T1 not only adhered to the prescribed treatment, but she often enhanced and exceeded
the requirements of the experimental treatment. T2 deviated from the prescribed experimental treatment, but not so
much that her implementation was void of elements of the new RT practice. T2 evolved into a quasi-experimental
teacher, a  comparison  teacher   to   both T1  and T3.   T2's fidelity might  best  be characterized, in terms of  this
continuum, as low-fidelity. T3, the comparison teacher, implemented the old RT practice where students develop
and revisit RTs together but do not use them to connect science concepts and design challenge activities explicitly or
to develop science talk fluency.

   ·     T1 (high-fidelity new-protocol group) frequently modeled science talk, engaged students in speaking and
         writing science talk, and had students edit their science talk during peer-feedback situations.        T1 also
         expected students to engage in science talk on a regular basis during other parts of the project-based
         sequence of activities.
   ·     T2 (lower-fidelity new-protocol group) provided students fewer opportunities than prescribed to develop
         science talk skills. When rules of thumb were discussed, the moments were usually teacher-centered in
         nature. Students had discussions about the science, trying to link their RTs to the science; however, they
         never recorded these justifications and explanations in a deep manner on their My Rules of Thumb sheets.
         Furthermore, T2 employed the strategies and methods during only some of the points in the sequence as
         instructed during training.
   ·     T3  (old-protocol group)      implemented  the   comparison    treatment as anticipated.  Even when  students
         afforded  her the opportunity,     T3  did not   provide the   scaffolding  and iterative development   of the
         connections that the research literature suggests is necessary.   Rather, T3 recorded the suggested RTs and
         then allowed  students     to decide, individually,  whether   each was  important  enough  to consider when
         designing their artifacts.

A full commentary and review, including classroom transcripts, of the practices and variations of the teachers are
available in Ryan (2003).

Coded Student Assignments
         Because the data are non-parametric, chi-square analyses, where expected frequencies are compared to
observed  frequencies, was    most   appropriate (Shavelson,   1981).   Null-hypotheses  were that  there would  be  no
predictable relationship between teacher treatment and category classification distributions. A new coding scheme
assessed the  written  assignments     to determine student   use of science  principles in  explanation.  The student
assignments were coded and reliability was established.

         Each time a student discussed a feature or problem in the assignment, the feature or problem was labeled as
an Event. Each Event in each assignment was coded across three critical categories: Justification, Form, and Depth.
The results for each coding category are shown in Tables 2 ­ 10, which provide the rates of occurrence for each
teacher in each coding category and the chi-square analyses of the outcomes.

Justification
         This category classifies Events according to whether or not the student chose to explicitly justify or explain
the Event with a science concept.

                                                           453
Table 2 ­ Justification Results for Events Coded in A1, Percentage of Occurrence
                                                       T1-High Fidelity    T2- Low Fidelity       T3-Old Practice
                    Not justified via science concept        20%                   54%                 76%
                        Justified via science concept        80%                   46%                 24%
       The chi-square analysis does support the rejection of the null-hypothesis for: T1 v. T3, with c2(1, N = 1332) = 300.1,
       p<0.001, T2 v. T3, with c2(1, N = 1332) = 29.4, p<0.001, T1 v. T2, with c2(1, N = 1332) = 97.4, p<0.001

Table 3 ­ Justification Results for Events Coded in A2, Percentage of Occurrence
                                                       T1-High Fidelity    T2- Low Fidelity       T3-Old Practice
                    Not justified via science concept        4%                    7%                  50%
                        Justified via science concept        96%                   93%                 50%
       The chi-square analysis does support the rejection of the null-hypothesis for: T1 v. T3, with c2(1, N = 233) = 52.1.1,
       p<0.001, T2 v. T3, with c2(1, N = 233) = 21.1, p<0.001

Table 4 ­Examples:    T1 and T2 students tended to provide science-based Events more often than T3 students.
T1  "The car had straws for bearings and CDs for wheels.  These were chosen because they reduce friction with the floor as the
    car is rolled."
T2  "The wheels we chose were CDs because they were light and created a low amount of friction on the floor."
T3  "The wheels we chose were CDs.  They were large and worked well on our coaster car."

Form
       Each Event that was categorized as justified by a science concept was coded for Form. Form codes whether
the Event cites only the science term (e.g., friction) or if it also discusses the principle behind the term (e.g., a force
created on the surfaces of two objects in contact).

Table 5 ­ Form Results for Events Coded in A1, Percentage of Occurrence
                                                       T1-High Fidelity    T2- Low Fidelity       T3-Old Practice
           Citing only science term, no principle            61%                   80%                 85%
                            Citing science principle         39%                   20%                 15%
       The chi-square analysis does support the rejection of the null-hypothesis for: T1 v. T3, with c2(1, N = 769) = 13.7,
       p<0.001, T1 v. T2, with c2(1, N = 769) = 9.4, p<0.005

Table 6 ­ Form Results for Events Coded in A2, Percentage of Occurrence
                                                       T1-High Fidelity    T2- Low Fidelity       T3-Old Practice
           Citing only science term, no principle            61%                   80%                 85%
                            Citing science principle         40%                   22%                 17%
       The chi-square analysis does support the rejection of the null-hypothesis for: T1 v. T3, with c2(1, N = 172) = 6.5,
       p<0.025, T1 v. T2, with c2(1, N = 172) = 3.9, p<0.05

Table 7 ­ Examples: T1 students often cited science concepts explaining the principle behind it.
T1  "We started off using one [balloon] engine with a single balloon attached. Then we started to attach more engines because,
    as Newton stated in his second law, the more net force on the car, the more acceleration it will have because the extra
    engines do not weigh that much at all. More engines gave us more overall force and speed."
T2  "We created [with more balloon engines] more net force and made the car go faster."
T3  "We added a third engine because of Newton's 2nd law."

Depth
       Each Event that was coded as having been justified via science concept was coded for Depth. Depth signals
whether the science concept in the Event is portrayed in an abstract, generalized format or in terms of the context of
the feature or problem.

Table 8 ­ Form Results for Events Coded in A1, Percentage of Occurrence
                                                       T1-High Fidelity    T2- Low Fidelity       T3-Old Practice
                    Contextual reference of science          82%                   98%                 95%
                        Abstract reference of science        18%                   2%                  5%
       The chi-square analysis does support the rejection of the null-hypothesis for: T1 v. T3, with c2(2, N = 769) = 34.3,
       p<0.001, T1 v. T2, with c2(2, N = 769) = 18.4, p<0.001

                                                             454
Table 9 ­ Form Results for Events Coded in A2, Percentage of Occurrence
                                                      T1-High Fidelity       T2- Low Fidelity     T3-Old Practice
                   Contextual reference of science           89%                   100%                100%
                       Abstract reference of science         11%                   0%                   0%
       The chi-square analysis cannot be completed because the expected frequency for any comparisons < 5, with df > 2.

Table 10 ­Examples: T1 and T2 students tended to provide science-based Events more often than T3 students.
T1  "In our balloon car we also tripled and double layered the balloons. We did this because the air coming out would have
    more force on it because there was greater tension. Therefore, according to Newton's 3rd law, each of these object
    experience equal and opposite forces. The push on all the air molecules would be the same size force on the balloon in the
    opposite direction the air goes."
T2  "We double layered our balloon engines because to create a bigger force back on the balloon (3rd Law) and make the car go
    farther."
T3  "We layered our balloons and this provided more force for our car"

Discussion
         As   the National Science     Education   Standards  indicate,    inquiry methodology   and   curriculum       promote
quality science education (NRC, 1996). There are, however, many aspects to inquiry-based learning. One aspect is
the engagement of students in scientific argumentation and scientific discourse. Research on involving students in
this type of behavior suggests positive effects (e.g. ­ Driver, et. al., 2000).    Argumentation, as a practice, is essential
in science communities as a way to assess and evaluate the work of scientists. Participation in student-centered
constructive discourse and argumentation about science findings and principles improves conceptual understanding
and encourages reasoning from science.
         The new RT practice targets science talk ­communicating and explaining science concepts and principles
governing a context in an abstract, generalized form. Students often cannot use the abstract, generalized language of
the science domains easily to discuss, explain, justify, or reason real and hypothetical events (Roth, 1997). LBD
units includes a variety of public activity structures designed to help teachers and students engage in science talk
(Kolodner, Gray & Fasse, 2002). Closely related to the idea of student engagement in scientific argumentation is the
lack of student experience in using science talk to communicate ideas. Students need guidance, scaffolding, practice
and reflection to develop this skill (Roth, 2001; Driver, et. al., 2000). Furthermore, written expression of science
conceptual understanding posses even more challenges than verbal expressions (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987). This
research informed   the design  of    our  more scientifically-enhanced     RT  practice.  Adding this ritualized way of
engaging in   such science talk, we thought, would promote more and higher-quality science talk in LBD classrooms.
Students learning in the high-fidelity enactment engaged in scientific discourse and argumentation (1) often, (2) as
an explicit act to develop understanding and socially construct knowledge, and (3) to practice reasoning as scientists
would. Previous research predicted that classrooms focusing on these concepts would be impacted in the way T1's
and, in a more limited way, T2's classes were (Jimenez-Aleixandre & Rodriguez, 2000). Experimental students
confirmed these studies, by demonstrating firmer conceptual understanding and a tendency to reason scientifically
on A1. High-fidelity students are offered more opportunities and practice for speaking and writing science talk. As a
result, these students are comfortable expressing science in a sophisticated way, as Roth (1997, 2001) and Chi, et. al.
(1991) suggest. The results might indicate that scaffolded, iterative writing of RTs promotes higher science talk
faculty, which, perhaps, impacts conceptual understanding and reasoning.
         The results also may suggest impacts on transfer. In terms of scientific reasoning, T1 and T2 students
scored similarly on A2, the more-far transfer assignment. These students chose to justify design decisions citing
science concepts at very high rates, 96% (T1) and 93% (T2), compared to T3's 50% rate. These students seem to
recognize the importance of doing so, and perhaps they look to identify science concepts in new contexts more often
and more easily than do the comparison students ­ a sign of increased situational transfer (Bereiter, 1995). These T1
and T2 results demonstrate a propensity to reason with science in a way that parallels their actions and behaviors for
RT development during VIM. Results also suggest T1's students tend to develop explanations and justifications that
not only identify relevant concepts, but also include deeper, abstract explanations of it's the connections between
those concepts    and features of     the designed artifact. The new      practice focused on   this skill, and T1-students
recognize and employ it outside of the RT contexts where they were expected to use it (i.e. ­ during RT sessions or
experiment presentations).  It is possible that T1's focus on science talk development during times other than the RT
sessions influenced student outcomes, and study isolating science talk occasions may be pertinent. Research on

                                                             455
transfer also discusses that if and when transfer occurs, it requires a long time and many experiences (Bransford, et.
al., 1999). Learners need multiple experiences to start making more general connections. Here, all of the LBD
students spent 10-12 weeks learning about force and motion and investigating aspects of these concepts from
multiple angles.    Aside from the RT practice, they engaged in the same sequences of activities. Our results show that
the number of experiences and time spent engaging with a concept, by themselves, are no guarantee of development
of deep understanding.       The students who engaged in the experimental RT practice methodically developed their
understandings and expressions of science concepts, formulating their own explanations and representations.                                 Their
more consistent      ability  to    use    those  concepts    in new situations      was  a   result     of    multiple   public   and    private
interactions with the concepts and the iterative development of generalized understanding of the concepts.
          It is important in this final discussion to acknowledge the amount of scaffolding, training, and tools
provided to the experimental teachers. Newton, et al., (1999) and Geddis (1991), suggest that teachers are ill-
prepared to handle student/peer centered discourse and argument, and they need guidance and time to develop these
skills. Our experience and research, here, supports these claims. Teachers, themselves, need structure, coaching, and
practice to develop student understanding and reasoning via science talk and discourse. Perhaps creating a more
generalized but consistently used RT methodology for teaching science to would well serve project-based inquiry
teaching and research. The methods presented here are a step in that direction, but more input and development is
needed. Ultimately, the motivation for giving abstract, general responses rooted in science is difficult to assess
without more comprehensive measures. Perhaps, there could be another Rules of Thumb study where students have
other opportunities, beyond the written assignments, to reveal their understanding and motivations. The use of
student interviews and performance assessment activities might offer researchers the ability to make more confident
claims regarding Rules of Thumb practice.
References
Bereiter, C (1995).  A  Dispositional    View  of Transfer. In McKeough,  A.,  Lupart,  J.L., Martini,     A.,  Teaching for    Transfer: Fostering
           Generalization in Learning. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pg. 21-34.
Bereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M. (1987). An attainable version of high literacy: Approaches to teaching higher-order skills in reading and writing.
           Curriculum Inquiry, 17 (1), 9-30.
Branford, J. D., Brown, A. L., Cocking, R. R., eds. (1999), How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School. Washington D.C.: National
           Academy Press.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P. & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-Explanations: How students study and use examples in learning
           to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms. Journal of Science Education, 84,
           287-312.
Geddis, A. N. (1991). Improving the quality of science classroom discourse on controversial issues, Science Education, 75 (2), 169-183.
Holbrook,  J. &   Kolodner, J.L.   (2000).  Scaffolding the Development  of an  Inquiry-Based        (Science) Classroom. In    Proceedings  of the
           International Conference of the Learning Sciences 2000 (ICLS) , pp.221-227. Last retrieved February 17, 2004 from Web site:
           http://www.cc.gatech.edu/projects/lbd/htmlpubs/scaffolddevelop.html
Jimenez-Aleixandre, M. P. & Rodriguez, A. B. (2000).    "Doing the Lesson" or "Doing the Science": Argument in high school genetics.        Science
           Education, 84 (6), 757-792.
Kolodner, J.L., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., Puntembakar, S. (2003). Putting a Student-Centered Learning by DesignTM
           Curriculum into Practice: Lessons learned. Journal of the Learning Sciences, Vol.12 No.4.
Kolodner, J.L., Gray, J. and Fasse, B. (2002).Promoting Transfer through Case-Based Reasoning: Rituals and Practices in Learning by DesignTM
           Classrooms. Cognitive Science Quarterly, Vol.
National Center for Educational Statistics, NCES (2001) National Average Science Scale Score Results, Grades 4, 8, and 12: 1996 and 2000.
           Last retrieved April, 10, 2003 from Web site: http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/science/results/natscalescore.asp
National Research Council (1996). National Science Education Standards. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.          Choose one or at most
           two of the National ... no room for more here
Newton, P., Driver, R., Osborne, J. (1999). The place of argumentation in the pedagogy of school science, International Journal of Science
           Education, 21 (5), 553-576.    choose fewer of the argumentation references; put e.g., before what you choose in the text (e.g., Driver,
           ....)
Roth, W­M. (1997). Why may students fail to learn from demonstrations? A social practice perspective on learning physics. Journal of Research
           in Science Teaching, 34 (5), 509-533.
Roth, W­M.. (2001). Students' talk about rotational motion within and across contexts, and implications for future learning. International Journal
           of Science Education, 23 (2), 151-179. can you choose one or the other?
Ryan, M. T. (2003) Using a new design rules practice and science talk development to enhance conceptual understanding, scientific reasoning,
           and transfer in Learning By DesignTM classrooms.    Unpublished master's thesis, University of Kansas, Lawrence. Available at Web
           site:
           http://www.cc.gatech.edu/projects/lbd/pubdate.html#2003
Salkind, Neil J. (1997). Exploring Researcher, 3rd edition. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
Shavelson, R. J. (1981). Statistical reasoning for the behavioral sciences. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Acknowledgements
Special thanks to Dr. Elizabeth Charles at Learning by DesignTM, Dr. Jim Ellis of the University of Kansas, and the participating teachers for their
contributions to this study and report.

                                                                    456
