                       Epistemic Frames and Islands of Expertise:
                              Learning from Infusion Experiences

                                             David Williamson Shaffer
                       Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
                                Educational Sciences Room 1065, Madison, WI 53706
                                        Tel: 608/265-4602, Fax: 608/262-0843
                                           Email: dws@education.wisc.edu

         Abstract: Building on the theory of islands of expertise developed by Crowley and Jacobs (2002),
         in this paper I develop the concept of epistemic frames as a mechanism through which infusion
         environments   can   help students use experiences   in  one  context to help them   deal with new
         situations. I describe  epistemic  frames as the    ways of  knowing,  of  deciding  what  is worth
         knowing, and of adding to the collective body of knowledge and understanding of a community of
         practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991). I use data from two design experiments to extend the concept of
         islands of expertise, showing how the ability of students to incorporate epistemic frames into their
         identities  suggests a mechanism   through which     infusion experiences  and other  rich  learning
         contexts may support activity in novel situations.

Design Experiments as Infusion Experiences
         We conduct design experiments in the learning sciences to help understand the complex processes of
learning in context,   with the goal of reforming  education   through  the development    of better tools, activities,
curricula and models for learning (Brown, 1992; Design-Based Research Collective, 2003). Along the way to this
larger goal a much smaller group of students and/or teachers participate in a more isolated learning experience: the
design experiment itself. Design experiments thus function for participants as infusion experiences in their school
curriculum or in the broader curricula of their social, emotional, and intellectual development--powerful but often
relatively isolated experiences with new topics and new ways of thinking and learning.

         One striking aspect of design experiments--though one that is typically discussed anecdotally--is the
effect that effective infusion experiences can have for participants beyond the scope of the intervention itself. I
remember vividly one young woman, whom I'll call Natalie, who was a participant in Escher's World, a design
experiment in which middle school students came to a summer program and learned about geometry by working as
graphic artists to prepare a museum exhibit of digital designs (Shaffer, 2002). I was talking with Natalie late in the
fall, several months after the conclusion of the experiment as part of the follow-up interviews for the project.
Natalie's work on a variety of assessment instruments showed that changes in her understanding of the "content" of
the workshop--transformational geometry and graphic design--had persisted over time. More striking, though, was
how much more confident Natalie seemed in the fall than she had over the summer. I asked her about a new pager
she was wearing proudly, and she replied that her parents had bought it for her because she was "getting all A's in
all my subjects."

         I knew from pre-interviews that Natalie had not been an A student the previous year, so I asked what had
changed in her schoolwork. She said the difference was that now "I raise my hand at every single question... Last
year, I [was] like, `No, please don't call on me!' Now my teacher doesn't want to call on me any more." She went
on to describe in some detail how her attitude had changed in each of her classes because of her participation in the
experiment.

         Natalie's story, while more dramatic than some, is not an uncommon result of participation in design
experiments and other infusion activities. There are any number of reasons to be wary about reading too much into
comments such as Natalie's. But they do suggest that effective infusion activities can impact students beyond the
limited  content  and  context  of the experience  itself.  Infusion experiences  such  as Escher's  World    seem to
accomplish, in a very general but very important sense, the elusive educational goal of producing worthwhile effects

                                                       473
that carry over from one context to another--in Natalie's case, from a summer program on mathematics and digital
art to her performance in school more generally.

        In this paper I propose a framework for thinking about how infusion experiences accomplish this important
goal. Building on the theory of islands of expertise developed by Crowley and Jacobs (2002), I suggest the concept
of epistemic frames as a mechanism through which infusion environments can help students use experiences in one
context to help them deal with new situations. In the sections that follow, I first use excerpts from my conversation
with Natalie to describe and extend Crowley and Jacobs's idea of islands of expertise. I then discuss the theoretical
underpinnings of the concept of epistemic frames, which builds on the work of Lave and Wenger (1991), Broudy
(1977), Perkins (1992), Schwartz and Sherin (2002), and on my own work on pedagogical praxis (Shaffer, in press-
a). I then  use  data from     the Pandora   Project (Shaffer,  in press-b)--another   design experiment/infusion
experience--to examine the existence of epistemic frames. Although at this stage evidence regarding epistemic
frames is preliminary rather than conclusive, I end the paper by discussing some of the potential implications of the
concept for the development of learning environments, and for our understanding of learning more generally.

Islands of Expertise
        Crowley and Jacobs (2002, p. 333) define an island of expertise as "any topic in which children happen to
become interested and in which they develop relatively deep and rich knowledge." These areas of connected interest
and understanding, they suggest, create "abstract and general themes" that become the basis of further learning, both
within and around the original topic area, and potentially in domains further afield (p. 334). They provide several
examples of such islands, including a boy who develops relatively deep content knowledge and a "sophisticated
conversational space" (p. 335) about trains and related topics after he is given a Thomas the Tank Engine book: the
boy likes the book and ask to read it over and over; his parents buy him a Thomas the Tank Engine toy, and rent
Thomas the Tank Engine videos for the boy to watch; the boy dresses as Thomas for Halloween; the family takes a
trip to a local train museum where the boy gets a t-shirt with a picture of "Big Boy," a gigantic steam locomotive;
they check out more advanced library books on trains; the boy and his mother talk about steam from a kettle as
being "just like a train."

        Crowley and Jacobs focus on how the islands of expertise in museums and other informal settings are
constructed using explanatoids: short fragments of explanatory talk, typically between parent and child. Islands of
expertise, they argue, develop as the culmination of a long series of collaborative interactions that are opportunistic
and relatively unremarkable when viewed individually, but which collectively create a powerful linkage between
understanding and interest. Crowley and Jacobs do not explicitly discuss the role of identity in this process, but it is
implicit in their account--for example when the boy dresses up as Thomas or wears a t-shirt with a picture of a
locomotive.

        I have discussed elsewhere some of the mechanisms through which Natalie and the other participants in
Escher's World developed understanding about mathematics and design (Shaffer, 1997, 2002, in press-a). In the
more structured setting of a design experiment and summer program, linkages between interest and understanding
were  similarly created    through  a series of  collaborative interactions with peers  and experts. However,    the
interactions were fewer in number and organized more explicitly--and thus were characterized by fewer interactions
that were more deliberate and less opportunistic than in Crowley and Jacob's examples.

        Here I am more interested in using Natalie's example as a window into some of the ways in which this
island of expertise in mathematics and design, once developed, became a vehicle for learning in other areas, and for
Natalie's further development of interest and expertise in math and art. As Natalie and I spoke, she provided a
number of examples of how her work in the Escher's World summer program had become part of her school
experience more generally:

        Natalie: I look at my [art] teacher's artwork . . . and she says, "What's your opinion, Natalie?"
        And I go, "You should put in more [indistinguishable] symmetry in this, and the balance out." She
        was pretty amazed. Now she's working more artworks.... Some of my classmates, they don't [say
        much more than:] "Wow, it's a picture. It's colorful." But I tell my friends, "When you look at it
        carefully, it seems interesting." I tell them all these words I learned, like the [mirror lines] and
        patterns.

                                                        474
       Interviewer: How do they respond?

       N: "Whoa, Natalie, where did you learn all this...?" Now I'm teaching them art. They really want
       to learn stuff about art. I think that because of this program I'm getting all A's in all my subjects.

       I: How come?

       N: I don't know. I seriously don't. Maybe things I remembered, or the way I'm talking to teachers
       about all this. I don't know. It's a weird feeling.... In music class, we brought up art, because they
       say that music is art. And from this program, they think art is math. So I brought up the symmetry,
       and the music is symmetry and balancing. They told me after school, "Now I have a different way
       of looking at music...." We're doing a lot of artwork in Spanish.... And my classmates, they're
       not really good at art, but I'm the teacher's helper, because I speak Spanish too. And I tell
       everybody, "But look at this. Just imagine like this, and how it balances out, and the colors...."
       [In] Science. The math. I'm learning percents and degrees, angles. We're supposed to be learning
       in math. That's helped me understand better. Because I was usually shaky in that part, and now
       I'm pretty stable at that.

       I: [Do you feel differently] about presenting your work in public, showing it to other people,
       talking about it?

       N: That's easy. Dad has a video camera. I used to be not photogenic, and now it's like, "Hi, don't
       forget me." And students, they'll take pictures of me. I'm like, "Don't forget me in the picture."
       And presenting, I had critics. So that's a big thing.... Now I'm loud-spoken in public speaking,
       and pronouncing every single word, with no stumbles. Last year I was like, "Uhhh." [Makes a
       shivering sound.]

       Natalie's examples suggest at least four mutually-reinforcing effects that the island of expertise in math and
art had on her subsequent school experiences:

       1.  Specific elements of domain knowledge in mathematics and art developed in Escher's World helped
           Natalie work in these subjects. In math class, she felt more confident "learning percents and degrees
           [and] angles." Similarly, she is teaching her friends about art, showing them how "when you look at
           [art] carefully, it seems interesting."

       2.  This domain knowledge was closely associated with a particular way of seeing the world. A persistent
           theme in Natalie's description of her experiences in school following the workshop is on the close
           reading of works of art: on how attention to details of form and composition give her insight and help
           construct her as an expert in the eyes of peers and teachers. She described with pride the response of
           her friends ("Whoa, Natalie, where did you learn all this?"), and that her art teacher "was pretty
           amazed" at how much she knows about design principles.

       3.  This way of seeing helped construct Natalie as an expert to her peers, her teachers, and to herself,
           which gave her points of entry into new domains. She described having "a different way of looking at
           music" by using ideas about symmetry. In Spanish class, her recognized expertise and interest in art
           gave her a role as "teacher's helper" as the class discussed artwork as part of the curriculum.

       4.  Finally, interest and expertise supported the transfer of more general practices from the workshop to
           the school setting. An important element of design is public discussion of work in progress. Natalie's
           experiences in the workshop--supported by her understanding of mathematics and art and by her new
           identity as an expert in these areas--helped her become an active participant in all her classes.

       I do not have data about how deep or long-lasting these effects were--although the pattern had apparently
been going on for several months and, according to Natalie, had been effective in raising her grades considerably.
What is more important here is recognizing that the island of expertise Natalie developed appears to have been a

                                                        475
combination of content knowledge and interest in a topic, as Crowley and Jacobs described, but also the explicit
development of an identity of expertise and the association of that expertise with particular practices. Moreover, this
nexus of content, interest, identity, and particular practices were developed together around a particular way of
knowing--or perhaps more aptly in Natalie's case, a particular way of seeing: of knowing where to start looking at
new situations. As she approached her schoolwork in a variety of subjects the island of expertise she developed
around mathematics and design helped give her something that she wanted to say, helped give her a way to talk
about it, and in the process helped give her an identity as someone who had something worth saying. Natalie's island
of expertise was thus organized, I argue, around a coherent epistemic frame.

Epistemic Frames
        Lave and Wenger (1991) describe a community of practice as a group of individuals who share a repertoire
of knowledge  about   and  ways of addressing  similar (often shared)   problems   and     purposes. In  the process  of
participating in the practices of such communities, individuals develop ways of thinking and reframe their identities
and interests in relation to the community. That is, students who work as designers of mathematical art incorporate
new ways of thinking and working into their sense of self, coming to think of themselves, at least in part, as
designers--and, in particular, as designers interested in and literate about mathematics.

        Pedagogical praxis (Shaffer, in press-a) extends the idea of communities of practice by suggesting that
different communities of practice (for example, different professions) have different epistemic frames: different
ways of knowing, of deciding what is worth knowing, and of adding to the collective body of knowledge and
understanding of the  community.   Broudy    (1977) argues that the oft-discussed    concepts    of  knowing    that and
knowing how--of declarative and procedural knowledge--are incomplete without the capacity of "knowing with,"
which he describes as providing "a context within which a particular situation is perceived, interpreted, and judged"
(p. 12). Epistemic frames are the ways of knowing with associated with particular communities of practice. These
frames have a basis in content knowledge, interest, identity, and associated practices, but epistemic frames are more
than merely collections of facts, interests, affiliations, and activities. Extending Broudy's terminology, epistemic
frames are a form of knowing with that comprise, for a particular community, knowing where to begin looking and
asking questions, knowing what constitutes appropriate evidence to consider or information to assess, knowing how
to go about gathering that evidence, and knowing when to draw a conclusion and/or move on to a different issue.
Following Brown and Campione (1996), I have argued elsewhere (Shaffer, 2003, in press-a) that such ways of
knowing form a coherent core around which effective practices are organized.

        This concept of epistemic frames is related to but distinct from the sense in which other theorists have used
the concept of epistemology. An epistemic frame is a broader concept, for example, than Perkins' (1992) epistemic
understanding or Schwartz and Sherin's (2002) and Collins and Ferguson's (1993) epistemic structures. Perkins
defines epistemic understanding as "knowledge and know-how concerning justification and explanation in the
subject matter" (p. 85).  As such, it  is co-extant with--but   distinguished   from--knowledge       of  facts, routine
procedures, problem-solving strategies, and inquiry skills. Schwartz and Sherin, building on work by Collins and
Ferguson,  describe epistemic structures  as a combination  of  epistemic    forms (abstract   forms  of  knowledge   or
schemata  appropriate to a discipline) and epistemic  games (rules  for manipulation       of these forms).  In contrast,
epistemic frames include methods for justification and explanation and forms of representation, but orchestrated
with strategies for identifying questions, gathering information, and evaluating results. Epistemic understanding and
epistemic structures form the core of disciplines or subjects such as mathematics or history. Epistemic frames are the
organizing principle  for  practices.  Geometers,   economists, statisticians,   and      engineers (all of  whom    use
mathematics) have distinct epistemic frames that incorporate different epistemic understandings and structures from
the domain of mathematics.

        Developing expertise thus implies developing expertise of some particular kind, from some particular
perspective, relative to the ways of knowing of some community of practice. An island of expertise is local to a
particular topic--perhaps a domain of inquiry, but at first more likely some piece of a domain that a student finds
particularly compelling. But building such an island necessitates developing an epistemic frame, which has the
potential to be applied to other contexts. In the next sections of the paper, I present data from a design experiment in
which students developed islands of expertise in the science and ethics of xenotransplantation (the transplantation of
organs from one species to another) by engaging in the practices of professional mediators. The data from that study

                                                       476
suggests that as a result they came to think about issues of ethics and technology more generally using the epistemic
frame of mediation.

Islands    of Expertise        and       the    Generality        of Epistemic       Frames    in     the Pandora
Project
         In the Pandora Project, high school students learned human immunobiology and biomedical ethics through
computer-supported   negotiation      modeled   on exercises   developed by  the  Harvard Program on    Negotiation for
training professional mediators (Susskind & Corburn, 2000). An important core of the epistemology of negotiation
is that stakeholders in a dispute have legitimate conflicting interests, and the goal of negotiation is to reconcile those
interests in an equitable manner given the constraints of the situation. The focus is on the parties involved in a
problem, understanding their needs, and analyzing how proposed solutions impact their legitimate interests. In the
project, students acted as lead       negotiators  for parties in a  dispute concerning a  fictitious company  seeking
governmental approval to begin experiments with the controversial biomedical procedure (xenotransplantation) to
introduce organs from pigs into human patients as treatment for late-stage organ disease.

Methods
         A study  was   conducted       with fourteen   17- and   18-year-olds at an independent  school   in suburban
Massachusetts. Students participated in a two-week school-based curriculum. After a 3-class-period (150 minute)
introduction, students spent 2 class periods (100 minutes) researching their positions in teams in preparation for a 3-
class-period (150 minute) structured negotiation simulation.

         The training of professional mediators and negotiators involves simulated negotiations in which learners
take on the roles of the stakeholders in fictitious disputes. In the simulated negotiation for xenotransplantation,
stakeholders were   X-Gen   (the       biotechnology   company    who  had   developed  the procedure),   the National
Government, the World Health Organization, the Animal Rights Coalition (a non-governmental organization), and
the Patient Rights' Organization (a second NGO). The developers of a simulated negotiation identify the key issues
in the dispute, and for each issue specify a set of possible outcomes. In the case of xenotransplantation, the issues
were: Length of quarantine and post-operative monitoring for patients, Terms under which a moratorium would be
declared on the use of the procedure, Decisions about the ethical treatment of animals used in the procedure,
Compensation to developing nations for increased public health risks, and Funding for medical alternatives to the
procedure. A confidential point score is assigned to each option for each stakeholder, representing the value of that
outcome for the stakeholder. These utility points for each outcome vary from stakeholder to stakeholder. For
example, the biotechnology company might receive 100 points if there is no quarantine and the patient may drop out
of monitoring obligations at any time (which was Issue 1, Option a in the xenotransplantation simulation), because
that will increase access to the procedure. The Animal Rights Coalition, which wants to make the procedure as
expensive and difficult as possible, might get -50 points for the same outcome. Thus each stakeholder gets their
highest score in utility points for a different set of outcomes to the issues in dispute. The negotiation takes place as
the stakeholders trade options across the issues in dispute, trying to find a set of options that will satisfy the needs of
all of the participants at the table.

         Following a general introduction to the issues of xenotransplantation and the framework of the simulated
negotiation, students were assigned roles in groups of three. They spent two class periods conducting research on
their stakeholders'  positions        regarding xenotransplantation,  and    background   information  about  genetics,
epidemiology, and cell biology needed to assess potential problems raised by xenotransplantation. Based on this
research, each stakeholder group prioritized the issues in the dispute as well as the options for each issue in the
dispute from the point of view of its stakeholder's interests. Utility points for each role were computed using an
algorithm that incorporated these prioritized lists. Students were then divided into groups of five, with each student
representing a stakeholder in one of three separate negotiations.

Data Collection and Analysis
         Data was collected in pre-and post-interviews conducted with eleven of the students who participated in the
negotiation. (For logistical reasons, only 11 of the 14 students were able to complete both pre and post interviews.)
Interviews asked students to discuss their views on biotechnology in general and xenotransplantation in particular
and to complete concept maps about xenotransplantation. Students also responded to four scenarios presenting moral
dilemmas raised by xenotransplantation in other contexts: problems of cost/benefit analysis, differential risk/reward

                                                            477
tradeoffs between developed and developing nations, individual and societal rights, and animal welfare. Two forms
of each scenario were developed. Forms were randomized between pre and post interview for each student, and
scenarios were given to students in a random order. Interviews were transcribed and broken into excerpts, defined as
complete answers to interview questions with any additional follow-up questions directly related to the initial
inquiry. Concept maps were coded by number of nodes and arrows used.

Results
        I have described the results of the Pandora Project in more detail elsewhere (Shaffer, in press-a, in press-b).
Here I argue more briefly that in the process of conducting a simulated negotiation: (a) students developed an island
of expertise including understanding of and interest in xenotransplantation (and more generally in the ethical
implications of technology), and (b) this island of expertise led to the development of an epistemic frame of
mediation and dispute resolution, which students used to analyze moral dilemmas in other contexts.

Understanding of and Interest in Xenotransplantation
        In the process of the simulated negotiation, students developed a better understanding of both the process of
xenotransplantation and its social, economic, and personal consequences. Concept maps drawn by students showed
significant change between pre- and post-interviews. Maps both had more nodes and more links in post-interviews.
(Mean nodes pre=9.6, post=10.6; p<.05. Mean links pre=12.8, post=18.5; p<.01. See also Figure 5.)

                                                                                                                                                               Money

           Quarantine                                                          Liability                                 Quarantine                                                            Liability

                          Patients                                AnimalRights                                                            Patients                                AnimalRights

                                                                                                                 Patients'Rights                                                                          Doctors

                        Government                                Biotechcompanies                                                      Government                                Biotechcompanies

           Subsidies                                                           Breeding                                    Subsidiesconditions                                                 Breedingconditions

                                                                                                                                                               WHO

                        Figure 5: One student's concept maps from pre-interview (left) and post-interview (right)
                                   show a significant change in complexity of thinking about xenotransplantation.

        Overall, 91% of the students (10/11) reported that they had changed their opinion about xenotransplantation
over the course of the unit. The same proportion reported that they understood xenotransplantation better, and 55%
(6/11) said           that they       now   understood                     a range          of perspectives                 on       the  questions         raised        by xenotransplantation.
Moreover, 82% of the students (9/11) said they were interested in learning more about xenotransplantation and/or
issues of ethics and technology more generally. As one student put it: "I think I definitely want to follow up on
everything that we've done. Because it's really interesting. And it's really so powerful and so permanent in the
science world that I think it would be a shame to just drop it."

        Evidence                    that this interest and                   understanding          was                    related     to          identity development                     was           weaker,     but
interviews with students suggested that the structured negotiation (particularly the system of utility points) pushed
students to take on the role of one of the stakeholders in the simulated dispute. As one student explained: "The
points... forced me to think like a government official.... I had to, you know, adopt a stance that was government-
like, and I had to defend it and find reasons for it. To try and defend myself, I had to take on Connor Andrews [the
fictitious government negotiator] and think, like: `What will we do? What would he say?'"

Development of the Epistemic Frame of Mediation and Dispute Resolution
        As described above, students responded in pre- and post-interviews to four scenarios presenting moral
dilemmas raised by xenotransplantation in other contexts. For example, they were asked to respond to two versions
of the following scenario:

        FieldFarms, an international grain supply company, has developed a new form of wheat that is far

                                                                                                  478
        less expensive that traditional forms of wheat. However, the grain is sterile, meaning that farmers
        cannot store seeds from one harvest to use the next year; they have to continually buy seeds from
        the company. The United Nations Food and Famine Commission is concerned that farmers in
        developing countries will be tempted by the lower price for the grain, but then become dependant
        on these grain supplies, and be required to pay whatever price FieldFarms demands for its grain.
        What conditions, if any, should be imposed on the use of this new form of wheat?

        Before the negotiation about xenotransplantation, one student responded:

        [I]f Field Farms made it, they have the right to sell it however they want to.... [T]he farmers
        should be made aware that they might have to pay higher prices, but I think they have to take that
        risk... of knowing that they might in the future have to pay higher prices for it because they could
        always buy it from somewhere else if Field Farms raised their prices too much. So, I don't think
        that they should require Field Farms to have any certain price because I think supply and demand
        will take care of that in a way in these foreign markets.

        Two weeks later, after the negotiation, the same student responded to a similar scenario:

        Field Farms has a right to sell it at what price they want to, but because it's a monopoly on the
        thing, I think in the developed world... whatever the market demands, that's what they'll sell it
        for.... But I think in the developing world... much like AIDS drugs, I think... they should lower
        the prices a little bit. You know, make sure it's fair. Because obviously developing countries are a
        lot more dependant on agriculture than we are, and I think it's sort of holding them hostage if
        every year you can just jack up the price on the grain.

        Answers to moral dilemmas such as these showed that participation in the simulated negotiation helped
these students think about ethical dilemmas using the epistemic frame of professional negotiation and dispute
resolution. In particular,   students began to analyze  disputes    in terms of legitimate conflicting    interests     of
stakeholders, focusing on understanding the needs of the parties affected by a problem. Before the simulated
negotiation curriculum, extensive and analytical responses involved looking for more information (R2=0.46, p<0.05)
and/or proposing a means      to get more information about the    problem (R2=0.85, p<0.01). After   the negotiation
experience, extensive and analytical answers were still associated with the need for additional information (R2=0.51,
p<0.05), but such responses also showed (as in the example above) both analogical reasoning (R2=0.82, p<0.01)
based on students' islands of expertise in xenotransplantation (the case of AIDS was explicitly discussed as part of
the curriculum), and consideration of a range of viewpoints from groups of people affected by the proposed
technology (R2=0.61, p<0.01).

Discussion
        Crowley and Jacobs (2002) suggest that islands of expertise based on understanding of and interest in a
specific topic create "abstract and general themes" that students are able to use in other contexts. Here I add that
islands of expertise include development of identity and adoption of practices associated with the ways of knowing
of a particular community. That is, I argue that islands of expertise are organized around coherent epistemic frames,
and that these frames--these ways of looking at the world associated with different communities of practice--are
the "abstract and general themes" that students use to leverage experience in an island of expertise in new situations.

        To return for a moment to Crowley and Jacob's examples, the boy who developed an island of expertise
about trains did so, they argue, through a particular set of practices--namely, the exchange of explanatoids. Just as
participation in graphic design activities helped Natalie develop key elements of the epistemic frame of a graphic
designer in looking at works of art, and participation in a simulated negotiation helped students in the Pandora
Project develop key elements of the epistemic frame of mediation and dispute resolution, so visits to museums and
libraries to learn about trains seem to have helped the boy develop what we might describe as an epistemic frame of
a lay-scientist and collector, train enthusiast, or hobbyist. Epistemic frames are the proverbial "hats" or "glasses" we
don as we take on a variety of identities or perspectives in dealing with different situations. Once students learn to
think like designers, or mediators, or train enthusiasts, they can (and do) use the ways of knowing embedded in these
practices in other contexts.

                                                       479
         Epistemic frames thus include, but are a broader concept than, epistemic understanding, epistemic forms,
and epistemic games. Although the data presented here is not rich enough to support a strong claim, it suggests that
an epistemic frame may be more akin to Foucault's (1972) well-known concept of episteme. The episteme of an era,
for Foucault, is the relationship between discoursive practices (patterns of discourse or forms of interaction) and
structures of knowledge (which for Foucault are always intertwined with the organization of power). Episteme exists
at the level of the culture, across domains of knowledge and forms of practice. Epistemic frames may represent a
similarly tight linkage between practices and ways of knowing, but at the level of the local cultures developed by
individual communities of practice.
         The data in this relatively short paper are clearly illustrative rather than conclusive. Nonetheless, they do
suggest that islands of expertise and epistemic frames may be useful ways to think about the potentially broad
effects of isolated learning experiences such as design experiments and other infusion activities. Moreover, the
ability of students to incorporate epistemic frames into their identities (or portfolio of potential identities) suggests a
mechanism through which sufficiently rich experiences may support activity in novel situations.
References
Broudy, H. (1977). Types of knowledge and purposes of education. In R. C. Anderson, R. J. Spiro & W. E.
         Montague (Eds.), Schooling and the acquisition of knowledge (pp. 1-17). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Brown,   A.  L. (1992).  Design  experiments:  Theoretical  and methodological    challenges    in  creating complex
         interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments:
         On procedures, principles and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning: New
         environments for education (pp. 289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
Collins, A., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic Forms and Games. Educational Psychologist, 28(1), 25-42.
Crowley, K., & Jacobs, M. (2002). Islands of expertise and the development of family scientific literacy. In G.
         Leinhardt, K. Crowley & K. Knutson (Eds.), Learning conversations in museums. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
         Erlbaum.
Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educational inquiry.
         Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archeology of knowledge (A. M. Sheridan Smith, Trans.). New York: Harper Colophon.
Lave, J., &   Wenger,  E. (1991).   Situated learning: Legitimate   peripheral participation. Cambridge,     England:
         Cambridge University Press.
Perkins, D. (1992). Smart Schools. New York: Free Press.
Schwartz, J., & Sherin, B. (2002). Describing science content: Bridging the gap between content and process. In P.
         Bell, R. Stevens & T. Satwicz (Eds.), Keeping learning complex: Proceedings of the fifth international
         conference of the learning sciences (pp. 421-428). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Shaffer,  D. W.  (1997).  Learning   mathematics  through   design: The  anatomy   of Escher's     World.  Journal  of
         Mathematical Behavior, 16(2), 95-112.
Shaffer,  D. W.  (2002). Design,  collaboration, and   computation: The  design  studio as a    model  for computer-
         supported collaboration in mathematics. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall & N. Miyake (Eds.), Computer support
         for collaborative learning 2 (pp. 197-222). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Shaffer, D. W. (2003). Portrait of the Oxford design studio: An ethnography of design pedagogy (WCER Working
         Paper No. 2003-11). Madison: University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Shaffer, D. W. (in press-a). Pedagogical praxis: The professions as models for post-industrial education. Teachers
         College Record.
Shaffer,  D. W.  (in press-b). When   computer-supported   collaboration means   computer-supported     competition:
         Professional mediation as a model for collaborative learning. Journal of Interactive Learning Research.
Susskind, L. E., & Corburn, J. (2000). Using simulations to teach negotiation: Pedagogical theory and practice. In
         M. Wheeler (Ed.), Teaching negotiation: Ideas and innovations (pp. 285-310). Cambridge, MA: PON
         Books.
Acknowledgments
Funding for the studies described here was provided by the Foundation for Ethics and Technology, and the LEGO
Corporation. Work on this paper was supported by the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation and the Spencer
Foundation. I would also like to thank the students and faculty who contributed to Escher's World and the Pandora
Project, as well as the members of the Epistemologies of Practice research group and my friend and colleague Rich
Halverson.

                                                        480
