                                                   SCALE:
 Supporting Community Awareness, Learning, and Evolvement in an
                           Organizational Learning Environment
                          Amy Soller1, Renata Guizzardi3, Alessandra Molani2 & Anna Perini1

        1ITC-IRST                               2University of Trento                       3University of Twente
   Via Sommarive 18              Dept of Information and Communication Technology            7500 AE Enschede
38050 Povo, Trento Italy            Via Sommarive 18, 38050 Povo, Trento Italy                  The Netherlands
   +39 0461 314 358                               +39 0461 314 359                              +31 53 489 3786
        soller@itc.it                            molani@dit.unitn.it                        souza@cs.utwente.nl

         Abstract:    The SCALE    objective is to develop a toolbox   of intelligent solutions designed to
         enhance  the    current state-of-the-art  distributed organizational  learning    and  knowledge
         management     technology. This  toolbox  will attempt to   mediate and facilitate the  sharing of
         knowledge between peers, and promote community awareness, learning, and evolvement. In this
         paper, we describe the first two intelligent tools that we have begun to develop toward this effort.
         The first is a social network based visualization tool, intended to raise users' awareness of existing
         communities of practice, and the second is a socially aware recommendation agent.

Introduction
         As an organization develops, its knowledge and expertise becomes increasingly distributed. While this
process promotes the growth of specialized knowledge communities, it also makes discovering relevant knowledge
from relevant communities more difficult, and understanding the specialized nature and functions of the newly
discovered knowledge even more challenging (Hoadley & Pea, 2002). When knowledge is shared effectively across
a large distributed organization with pools of specialized expertise, the organization may experience improved
learning and development, and increased productivity and growth (Brown & Duguid, 1991; Soller & Lesgold, in
press). The SCALE      research project aims to  develop tools for supporting  knowledge    sharing and  community
awareness in distributed knowledge organizations. In this paper, we describe two intelligent SCALE tools that are
currently being developed to enhance the KEEx peer-to-peer organizational learning environment (Bonifacio, Cruel,
Mameli, & Nori, 2002): a social network based visualization tool, and a socially aware recommendation agent.

         Organizational learning environments electronically aid employees in the discovery, sharing, learning, and
application of knowledge (Ayala, 2001). These systems support the natural processes within an organization that
promote  knowledge     exchange  and construction.  Researchers   that study  organizational learning  explain     that
organizations naturally share knowledge by forming small groups based on similar interests, personal affinity, and
trust. These groups are termed Communities of Practice (CoPs) (Brown & Duguid, 1991; Lave & Wenger, 1991)
because they function within the organization as cohesive communities that share a common sense of purpose and
interest. CoPs facilitate the sharing and creation of new knowledge, and are therefore important to the stability and
growth of an organization. Members of CoPs are motivated to discover, join, and create new CoPs because of their
interest, desire to learn, and inherent information seeking behaviors. In an organizational learning environment, the
knowledge that users might discover was created, used, and transformed by a CoP, and hence derives its meaning in
part from its roots in that community. This means that when learners seek and share knowledge, they are also
sharing social and cultural references that carry different meanings in different social communities (Mantovani,
1996). The knowledge sharing process is hence intertwined with the processes that form the fundamental social
practices of CoPs such that when users share and create new knowledge in a distributed learning environment, they
naturally contribute toward the evolution of the communities grounding that knowledge (Scardamalia & Bereiter,
1994). The role of the computer environment, then, is to support, mediate, and guide these processes of knowledge
seeking and sharing, and community learning and evolvement (Jermann, Soller, & Muehlenbrock, 2001).

         The SCALE initiative centers around supporting the learning, development, and growth of communities of
practice. In particular, we are developing a toolbox of solutions, grounded in real business process analyses,

                                                        489
designed to enhance the current state-of-the-art organizational learning technology. This toolbox will attempt to
mediate the exchange of knowledge between learners by (a) helping users become aware of each other and their
communities, (b) promoting interaction, knowledge sharing, and unintentional, organizational learning, and (c)
facilitating the evolution of community practices.

         In this paper, we briefly present an example analysis of an actual organizational learning case driving our
development of new technological solutions. We then describe the first two tools that we have begun to develop to
address the issues uncovered in our organizational analyses. The first is IVisTo, an intelligent social network based
visualization tool, intended to raise users' awareness of existing CoPs and available knowledge sources. IVisTo
displays a weighted combination of social networks, showing the learner and his peers, and their relation to the
existing knowledge communities and artifacts. The second tool is a distributed team of socially aware intelligent
recommendation agents that might, for example, put the learner in contact with an online expert or instructor from a
strategically selected community of practice. We first briefly describe our open-ended organizational learning
environment, and then our business analysis method, and socially-aware technological solutions under development.

An Open-Ended Distributed Organizational Learning Environment
         The  SCALE    initiative  builds upon  a  foundation of traditional  knowledge   management    technology    to
develop a uniquely distributed peer-to-peer environment for supporting organizational learning practices. Our
environment is self-sustaining, and operates without centralized servers or databases. The distributed nature of this
peer-to-peer  solution is intended  to reflect  the naturally distributed nature   of  knowledge   and expertise in an
organization. Peer-to-peer technology supports the horizontal relationship between people, seeing them as both
learners and  designers   of knowledge.   Each   learner (or  peer) controls  his own   personal knowledge   ontology
containing artifacts (e.g. documents, videos, web pages), and can decide to exchange knowledge with other peers
based on, for example, their common interests, roles, expertise, or trust. Because employees in an organization
interact similarly to peers in a peer-to-peer network, naturally grouping themselves in communities, the distributed
peer-to-peer knowledge platform seems to be a natural choice for supporting the creation and sharing of knowledge.

         The KEEx (Knowledge Enhancement and Exchange) open-ended peer-to-peer organizational learning
environment (Bonifacio et al., 2002) (Figure 6) serves as the foundation for the intelligent mediation tools described
in the following sections. KEEx allows users to share and search for artifacts, without requiring them to agree on a
common representation language or ontology. Each user "publishes" his knowledge in the form of a concept
hierarchy, or context, containing   relevant artifacts. Then, when    a learner seeks  information, he  simply   runs a
keyword or context query, prompting the system to search the other learners' contexts available on the network and
their associated artifacts, and return a list of users, contexts, and discovered knowledge items. The system uses a
sophisticated context  matching    algorithm  to  match  the  query's   focus with the  available, published  contexts
(Bouquet, Serafini, & Zanobini, 2003). The learning environment is open-ended in the sense that it does not include
a curriculum or set of predetermined exercises; instead it is designed for workers to use in their everyday learning
and work activities. In the following section, we describe an actual business case derived from the data we collected
during the deployment of this system in our client company. We then describe our research efforts to enhance the
KEEx environment with socially aware plug-in software components for facilitating the awareness, exchange and
creation of knowledge within and across Communities of Practice (CoPs).

User and Community Modeling
         Although a    distributed peer-to-peer  system  might reflect  the   natural environment  in  which members
interact and share knowledge, it also maintains the distributed nature of the knowledge that would otherwise help to
explicitly identify relevant knowledge and communities of practice. The expertise in a distributed organization exists
sparsely in the (internally understood and shared) members' understanding of each other's knowledge, and in the
(hidden) behavioral and cognitive similarities among individual users. A distributed environment, therefore, must
make special provisions to help uncover and make salient some of these hidden characteristics so that learners might
become aware of the existing organizational knowledge and its corresponding CoPs. In this section, we describe our
efforts towards identifying, quantifying, and modeling these "hidden" learner characteristics ­ those that make the
difference between retrieving relevant knowledge from key communities of practice, and retrieving long lists of
documents resulting from keyword matches.

                                                          490
                   Information Related
                     to the User's                                  The User's
                    Selected Focus(Local & Remote                  Context and
                  documents, Content experts)                     Selected Focus

                   The Other
                    Users
                Available on
                the Network              The Query
                                       Results Window

          The Keyword-                                                     Information
        Based Query Area                                                    About the
                                                                           Selected File

   Figure 6. The KEEx Interface, showing the documents in the user's selected focus (top left), the user's context and
        selected focus (top right), the user's query (bottom left window), and the query results (bottom right).

Identifying Key User Model Variables through Intentional Analysis
        The learner characteristics that shape a community of practice will tend to change slightly, depending on
each organizational situation. For example, a newcomer to an organization, who needs to learn the fundamentals of
the project to which he has just been assigned, might be interested in characteristics such as his peers' willingness to
help and trustworthiness. A middle manager however, learning how to select team members for an interdisciplinary
project, might be more interested in factors such as role, and teamwork or collaboration history. In the first stage of
the project, we performed an i* intentional analysis in an actual company (Molani, Perini, Yu, & Bresciani, 2003).
The i* methodology is designed to elicit the technological requirements for supporting organizational learning
practices by modeling the relations between actors, goals, tasks, and resources. We used the methodology to identify
the critical factors that influence the network of relationships between individuals, teams, and their learning tasks,
allowing us to identify a set of critical user model variables. Figure 7 illustrates the i* analysis that was performed
for our case in which a newcomer has just joined a workgroup. The Middle Manager (shown as the circle in the
upper left corner) plays the role of the supervisor for the project to which the Newcomer has just been assigned. She
is responsible for guiding the Newcomer   in  learning the key concepts of the project by providing him            with
references (e.g. books, URLs), and relevant expert personnel. The Newcomer's role is to determine which actions
will help him learn these concepts quickly and efficiently. The actors' goals, subgoals, and resources (for achieving
these goals) are represented within the large shaded actor balloons. For instance, the Newcomer balloon shows that
he has the general goal of working well in the new workgroup (depicted as a cloud, or "softgoal" in i* notation),
which means that he must learn about the project to which he has been assigned (seek information goal). This goal is
refined into three subgoals: asking an expert, consulting literature, and talking to colleagues. The first two were
actual suggestions from the Middle Manager, while the third was the action taken by the Newcomer. This was not
surprising, because in the company we analyzed, knowledge is commonly shared, and knowledge sharing often
occurs through informal interaction between peers or members of a CoP. One reason why the Newcomer may have
chosen to talk to his peer instead of contacting the expert who was suggested by his supervisor, may have been that

                                                     491
the Newcomer   had a softgoal of avoiding being  prematurely   judged. This is also not    surprising,  because the
Newcomer, having just started work in the organization, wanted to maintain a good image.

        In the analysis framework, we say  that the softgoal, avoiding  being  prematurely    judged,    contributes
positively toward the goal talking to colleague, but negatively toward the goal asking an expert. This is because,
from the Newcomer's point of view, the Colleague is someone who has the resource, time (depicted as a square),
and is willing to collaborate (depicted as the resource, good collaborative level, and the goal, being helpful). The
Colleague also has a similar knowledge base (level of expertise), and may be able to speak a similar language as the
Newcomer while sharing his knowledge and organizational experience. The Expert's bubble shows that, although he
is highly competent (high level of expertise), he has more power and evaluative potential than the Colleague (power
role resource). In designing user models to support such organizational practices, these are the factors that appear to
impact the Newcomer's decision making process the most.

         Figure 7. Intentional Analysis based on the i* framework, analyzing the Newcomer's perspective

User Modeling in KEEx
        The analysis described in the previous section uncovered several key characteristics influencing the sharing
and learning of knowledge across an organization, during practices in which newcomers join workgroups. These
characteristics, defined as resources in the i* analysis, were used to develop our user model variables (see Table 3).
Then, two techniques were designed to elicit the initial values for the identified variables. The first involves training
the organizational learning system (KEEx) to observe and model the users' behavior, and the second involves
explicitly asking the users their opinions through questionnaires and interviews. In the first case, the system infers
the information, while in the second case the information is elicited from the user. In the next section we will see
how the SCALE software tools will enable KEEx to intelligently update the learner models by observing his
activities and interaction with peers (Gaudioso & Boticario, 2003; Vassileva, McCalla, & Greer, 2003).

        Because we are working within the framework of a peer-to-peer system, we need to respect the privacy of
learners. Each user should be able to decide which information, in his own user model, he would like to keep
private. For example, users may choose not to share all of the information about whom they do and do not trust. The
information in each user's model that he chooses not to share will only be visible in his personal "perspective-
based" model of the online community, and will be missing from other users' assessment of the knowledge available

                                                     492
in the environment. As in (Vassileva et al., 2003), we address privacy issues by assigning a personal assistant agent
to each learner in the peer-to-peer network. This agent interacts with its user to understand his preferences, and
negotiates what user model information to disclose to other agents during the knowledge sharing process.

Table 3. The Intentional Analysis resources identified and corresponding User Model variables

               Intentional Analysis Resource            User Model Variable
               Good collaborative level                 Trust, History of Collaboration
               Power role                               Organizational Role
               Time                                     Availability
               Same level of expertise                  Level of Expertise, Problem Solving Strategy
               High level of expertise                  Level of Expertise

Intelligent Tools for Supporting Communities of Practice
The IVisTo Interactive Visualization Tool
        The user models described in the previous section are designed so that a distributed organizational learning
system can help users develop their virtual identity online, while increasing their awareness of existing communities
of practice, facilitating their access  to knowledge   in different communities,      and supporting the creation   and
evolution of new communities of practice. In working toward the first two goals, we have begun to transform the
user models  into dynamic    social network   oriented visualizations  of users' behavior.   These   visualizations are
designed to raise users' awareness of the types of knowledge communities that exist in the distributed network.
Visualizations that reflect users'  behaviors  have been   shown    to increase their   awareness of these behaviors,
influencing their emotional attitudes, and enhancing collaboration, reflection, and motivation (Gutwin, Stark, &
Greenberg, 1995; Jermann, Soller, & Muehlenbrock, 2001; Reimann, 2003). For example, the Comtella peer-to-peer
system (Bretzke & Vassileva, 2003) enables users to visualize their significance in the community though a dynamic
night sky background that displays each user as a star. The size and brightness of the stars denote the number of
relationships or resources the users hold, respectively, and groups of peers with similar interests are represented as
galaxies. Similarly, our social network based visualizations are designed to increase users' awareness of how their
behavior relates their peers' behavior, as defined by our business practice analysis.

        The IVisTo tool, shown in Figure 8, presents a novel way to visually rank the relevance of a learner's query
results, taking into consideration both the social community-oriented information, and the more traditional and
accessible lexical and semantic similarity information provided by the query-response engine. IVisTo displays a
weighted combination of social networks, where each social network addresses a different user model variable, and
the weights are given by the learner's social and semantic preferences. The bottom half of the interface contains a
set of slider bars representing the social variables in the user model (e.g. Role, Trust), and the lexical and semantic
attributes given by the KEEx lexical and context matching algorithms. Using these slider bars, the user can indicate
the importance, or weight, of each variable. Behind the scenes, the system, generates a social network for each of the
user model variables, and then computes one single network by calculating a weighted sum of the individual
networks. For example, Sally's visualizations show her as an object in the center of the screen, and her peers as
objects in the periphery, while the length of the links between her and her peers suggests their degree of similarity
according to each user model variable. In the case of "Trust", the length of the links would suggest the degree to
which Sally trusts (or would trust, based on the system's assessment) each of her peers. In the case of "Role" or
"Expertise", the length of the links suggests the degree to which Sally holds a similar role or level of expertise as
each of her peers. In this way, IVisTo provides each learner across an organization with a personalized set of
visualizations from his perspective, weighted according to his interests. In the case of the Newcomer (from the
example described previously), factors such as whether or not a peer is trusted, available, and willing to collaborate
may be important, whereas the Content Expert may be more interested in obtaining knowledge having a high degree
of lexical and semantic accuracy. The folder icons attached to the user nodes show the information available from
each user; clicking on a folder icon enables a user to download a knowledge item directly from the provider.

        As the learner carries on her day-to-day learning and collaborative work, the lengths of the links in IVisTo
are re-calculated as the elicited and inferred information in her user model is updated. For instance, if Sally
downloads a knowledge item (e.g. document or video) from Harry, adds it to her personal knowledge ontology, and
accesses it more than once during the course of the day, the system would increase her user model values for

                                                          493
collaboration and expertise similarity with regard to Harry. These types of activities help the system intelligently
infer and visualize different types of knowledge sharing communities (e.g. communities of trust, or communities
using similar problem solving strategies), and identify potential future members and items of interest. We are
applying the Advogato trust metric (http://www.advogato.org/trust-metric.html) for dynamically propagating the
values of our user model variables through our social networks. Over the next six months, we plan to conduct a
formative evaluation in our client organization to assess these social networks' ability to raise users' awareness of
the social factors that define their CoPs, and facilitate their access to relevant artifacts and communities of practice.

                                                                                        Initiates Chat
                                                                                           Session

                   Figure 8. The IVisTo Visualization Tool(1) and KARe Recommender Agent
KARe: A Knowledgeable Agent for Recommendations
        The KARe    multi-agent system   (Figure  8)  is being designed, within the peer-to-peer           knowledge
management framework, to recommend both documents that match the user's knowledge and information needs,
and relevant peers or communities that the user might query for information and knowledge (Guizzardi, Aroyo, &
Wagner, 2003). KARe generates recommendations by reasoning over the values stored in the user models (such as
the user's organizational role, problem solving strategy, level of trust, and availability), while considering the user's
personal knowledge ontology in KEEx, and current query. As in the I-Help system, (Vassileva et al., 2003), KARe
guarantees the users' privacy by ensuring access to only information that is authorized by the user. The KARe
privacy system is modeled  using   a multiagent  approach,  comprising Personal  Peer Assistant           Agents, and
cooperating Broker Agents. Each user has exactly one Peer Assistant, stored on the user's machine, in accordance
with the distributed peer-to-peer approach. The Peer Assistant is responsible for maintaining the user model, and
performing  rule-based inferencing   operations (e.g. Linton,  Goodman,  Gaimari, Zarrella,            & Ross, 2003).
Recommendations are generated by reasoning over the values stored in the user models (e.g. organizational role,
problem solving strategy, and availability), while considering the user's privacy settings, personal knowledge
ontology in KEEx, and current query. These potential recommendations are then send to the Broker Agents.

        The multiple, cooperative KARe Broker agents are responsible for contacting suitable peers to answer
knowledge requests, and recognizing patterns in users' models that might suggest the formation of communities of
practice. Each Broker agent will provide a different type of community service, for example collecting the available
user model information, analyzing interaction patterns, or assessing users' knowledge needs (Guizzardi, Aroyo, &
Wagner, 2003; Linton et al., 2003). The Broker agents are intended to facilitate the natural processes of knowledge
sharing across communities by providing users with referrals to other users holding relevant knowledge and residing
in similar communities (Gaudioso & Boticario, 2003; Vassileva et al., 2003). We expect such services to be

                                                      494
especially useful for newcomers who do not yet have an established network of peers or an understanding of the
knowledge and expertise that exists in the distributed environment.

The Integration Model
        The SCALE integration model (Figure 9), defines the interactions between the KEEx environment, the
IVisTo visualization tool, and the KARe multi-agent system. The results of a user's query in KEEx, including the
lexical and ontological similarity data, are sent to the SCALE environment as an XML file. This file is then parsed
by the User Model Engine (XML and UM Update arrows), combined with the available social and behavioral
knowledge, and sent to both IVisTo and KARe. The User Model Engine plays a critical role in the integration model
because it is responsible for guaranteeing the consistency of the user model information while both IVisTo and
KARe update the user model based on interactions with the user.(2)

                                      Figure 9. The SCALE Integration Model
        Many of the technologies that comprise the SCALE environment have been applied independently in other
contexts. For example, the aLF environment (Gaudioso & Boticario, 2003) performs user modeling to evaluate the
users' level of activity, analyze their forum postings, and recommend sub-groups within existing communities. The
system also provides navigation support to tailor the course content and recommend information sources. The
success of Vassileva et al.'s I-HELP system (2003) provided the research motivation for the development of the
KARe multi-agent system. I-HELP's personal and broker agents recommend content experts and artifacts to users,
based on the   characteristics of users  distributed throughout the   system.  Ogata, Matsuura,  and Yano's (2000)
Knowledge Awareness Map is similar to IVisTo, in that it depicts a specialized social network based on the
"knowledge pieces" held by each participant, and graphically shows users who else is discussing or manipulating
their knowledge pieces. In this case, the distance between users and knowledge elements on the map indicates the
degree to which users have similar knowledge. The SCALE approach is distinct from other approaches (with the
exception of Bretzke & Vassileva, 2003) in that the environment is entirely distributed in nature, without any central
databases or servers. It is designed to help users identify relevant communities of practice by not only modeling the
learners' knowledge and behaviors, but also discovering similarities in their personal knowledge ontologies, which
may  differ in structure and   language, and  constructing user-controlled    dynamic  social network visualizations
(IVisTo) built upon the foundation of real organizational practice.

Summary and Future Work
        In this paper, we presented an example i* intentional analysis designed to identify the critical factors that
influence knowledge sharing and learning across an organization, especially during practices in which newcomers
join workgroups. These factors were realized as user model variables, and provided the foundation for the SCALE
IVisTo interactive visualization tool, and KARe multi-agent recommendation system. These two tools are designed
to promote community awareness, social interaction, knowledge sharing, and learning within the KEEx open-ended
peer-to-peer organizational learning environment. The KEEx environment presents the results of the user's query as
an ordered  list, ranked by the   accuracy of the keyword   query    results and contextual match. The IVisTo tool
enhances this interface by providing the learner with an interactive social network that displays his query results in
terms of social and behavioral factors, promoting the awareness of online knowledge communities. KARe further
enhances this environment by suggesting community building actions to encourage the creation of new knowledge.

        In the future, we plan to replace the XML-based user model with a description logic-based model (e.g.
OWL) that affords more advanced reasoning capabilities. We also intend to continue to evaluate the business
practices within our two target organizations so that we might better understand which user model variables play

                                                        495
major roles in their learning activities. Our developed system will be deployed within these organizations so that we
might evaluate the SCALE system's ability to facilitate the learning process in which newcomers join workgroups,
and in the future, other key organizational learning practices. This phase should result in a feedback loop, suggesting
the foci of the next Intentional Analysis phase, and the refinement of the user models.

Endnotes
(1) The IVisTo prototype was developed using Touchgraph LLM [Available: http://www.touchgraph.com].
(2) IVisTo (under development at ITC-IRST, Italy) and KARe (under development at the University of Twente, the
    Netherlands) are designed to also function as separate plug-in components.
References
Ayala, G. (2001). Intelligent agents supporting the social construction of knowledge in a learning environment. In Q.
         Chen (Ed.) Human Computer Interaction: Issues and Challenges (pp. 44-63). Idea Group Publishing.
Bonifacio, M.,  Cruel, R., Mameli,    G., Nori,    M. (2002) A  peer-to-peer architecture  for distributed knowledge
         management.   Proceedings    of the 3rd International  Symposium on   Multi-Agent   Systems, Large  Complex
         Systems, and E-Businesses (MALCEB'2002).
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (1991). Organizational learning and communities of practice: Toward a unified view of
         working, learning, and innovation, Organization Science, 2(1), 40-57.
Bouquet, P., Serafini, L., & Zanobini, S. (2003). Semantic coordination: A new approach and an application.
         Proceedings of the 2nd International Semantic Web Conference, Sanibel Island, FL, 130-145.
Bretzke, H., &  Vassileva, J.  (2003).   Motivating   cooperation on peer to peer  networks.   Proceedings  of the   9th
         International Conference on User Modeling, Johnstown, PA, 218-227.
Gaudioso E., & Boticario, J. (2003). Towards web-based adaptive learning communities. Proceedings of Artificial
         Intelligence in Education 2003, Sydney, Australia, 237-244
Guizzardi, R., Aroyo, L., & Wagner, G. (2003). Agent-oriented knowledge management in learning environments:
         A peer-to-peer helpdesk case study. AAAI Spring Symposium on Agent Mediated Knowledge Management.
Gutwin, C., Stark, G., & Greenberg, S. (1995). Support for Workspace Awareness in Educational Groupware.
         Proceedings of CSCL'95, Bloomington, IN, 147-156.
Hoadley, C., & Pea, R. (2002). Finding the ties that bind: Tools in support of a knowledge-building community. In
         K. A. Renninger & W. Shumar (Eds.), Building Virtual Communities: Learning and Change in Cyberspace
         (pp. 321-354). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Jermann, P., Soller, A., & Muehlenbrock, M. (2001). From mirroring to guiding: A review of state of the art
         technology  for supporting   collaborative   learning. Proceedings  of  the First  European  Conference     on
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 324-331.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge University Press.
Linton, F. Goodman, B., Gaimari, R., Zarella, J., & Ross, H. (2003). Student modeling for an intelligent agent in a
         collaborative learning environment. Proceedings of User Modeling 2003, Johnstown, PA, 342-351.
Mantovani,   G. (1996).   Social  context    in  HCI:  A  new   framework    for mental    models, cooperation,  and
         communication. Cognitive Science, 20, 237-269.
Molani, A., Perini, A., Yu, E., Bresciani, P. (2003) Analyzing the requirements for knowledge management using
         intentional analysis. Proceedings      of the AAAI   Spring  Symposium    on    Agent Mediated    Knowledge
         Management, Stanford University, California, USA.
Ogata, H., Matsuura, K., & Yano, Y. (2000). Active knowledge awareness map: Visualizing learners activities in a
         web based CSCL environment. Proceedings of the International Workshop on New Technologies for
         Collaborative Learning (NTCL 2000), Awaji, Japan, 89-98.
Reimann, P. (2003). How to support groups in learning: More than problem solving. Invited keynote, Supplementary
         Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, 3-16.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Soller, A., & Lesgold, A. (in press). Modeling the process of knowledge sharing. In U. Hoppe, M. Ikeda, & H.
         Ogata (Eds.) New Technologies for Collaborative Learning. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Vassileva J., McCalla G., Greer J. (2003). Multi-agent multi-user modeling. User Modeling and User-Adapted
         Interaction, 13(1), 179-210.
Acknowledgments
Very special thanks to the members of the SCALE team, Matteo Bonifacio, Lora Aroyo, Peter Mika, and Paolo
Massa, for their collaboration and suggestions, and also to Julita Vassileva for her comments and continual support.

                                                         496
