              Plumbing the Foundations of Knowledge Building:
                                       A Special Symposium

                                                       Presenters:
                                                      Carl Bereiter
                                                OISE/University of Toronto
                                  Tel: 416-923-6641, ext. 2567, Fax: 416-926-2713
                                       Email: carl_bereiter@oise.utoronto.ca

                                                  Timothy Koschmann
                                         Department of Medical Education
                                   Southern Illinois University School of Medicine
                                       Tel: 217-545-6843, Fax: 217-545-0120
                                         Email: tkoschmann@siumed.edu

                                                       Moderator:
                                                     Eamonn Kelly
                                              Graduate School of Education
                                                George Mason University
                                                   Tel: 703-993-2019
                                                Email: akelly1@gmu.edu

         The term "knowledge building" has come into fairly widespread use in both the knowledge management
literature and education (~45,000 Google references at this writing).    If we take as a starting point for discussion
that something very like knowledge building does occur, at least in the sciences, if not in education, the question
arises, what are the basic blocks from which this building is done?        More technically, what is the ontological
status of ideas/knowledge objects/conceptual artifacts and how do they come to be? Carl Bereiter (Bereiter, 2002;
Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1989, 2003) has argued that we need to rethink our most cherished notions of learning,
education, and, more fundamentally, of knowledge itself as we enter the "knowledge age."        He has proposed a
number of key concepts--"knowledge building," "intentional learning," "progressive discourse"--as constitutive
of a new way of thinking about learning and education.      Many of these concepts have been embraced by workers
in the learning sciences community and have been employed in the design and rationalization of instructional
innovations.

         In Education and Mind in the Knowledge Age, Bereiter (2002) made a distinction between knowledge
building and learning; the former of which he associates with "creating a knowledge object" (p. 68) and the latter
with "knowing and helping others to know" (p. 68).         Writing more technically, Bereiter describes knowledge
objects as conceptual artifacts, of which he writes, "[They] are human constructions like other artifacts, except
they are immaterial and; instead of serving purposes such as cutting, lifting, and inscribing, they serve purposes
such as explaining and predicting" (p. 58).      The notion of conceptual artifacts he attributes to the philosopher of
science, Karl Popper. Popper (1972) described three kinds of reality: the material world, the mental world, and
world of ideas.  He labeled these as World 1, World 2, and World 3.         Conceptual artifacts belong to World 3.
Bereiter (2002), following     Popper, listed    the following things  a scientist S, might do with a knowledge
object/conceptual artifact p:
         S tries to understand p.
         S tries to think of alternatives to p.
         S tries to think of criticisms of p.
         S proposes an experimental test for p.
         S tries to axiomatize p.

                                                         5
         S tries to derive p from q.
         S proposes a new problem x arising out of p.
         S proposes a new solution for the problem x arising out of p.
         S criticizes his latest solution of problem x arising out of p.
         (pp. 473-474 based on pp. 140-141 in Popper [1972]).
Bereiter makes three observations with regard to this list: (1) all of the items appear to be actions, (2) the object of
the action in each case does not exist in the material world (Popper's World 1), and (3) in all cases the object is
the "same."   These observations are offered as evidence for p's existence as a real thing.         The object p as it is
presented here would appear to be very much like what a logician would refer to as a proposition, but Bereiter
would like to extend the category of real conceptual objects to include: defined concepts, designs, histories,
literary interpretations, problem formulations, and any other cultural objects "that we want to treat as knowledge"
(p. 76). All share the attributes of "discussibility, modifiability, and autonomy" (p. 482).

         Koschmann has suggested that some useful ideas for understanding learning in settings of collaboration
could be found in the works of the American Pragmatist philosopher, John Dewey. For example, he (2001) argued
that Dewey's notion of transactional inquiry offered an alternative metaphor for thinking about learning, one that
overcomes the limitations of viewing it as a purely cognitive or purely social matter. Further, he (2002) has
argued that meaning-making practices should be a focus of interest in educational research and that Dewey
offered some clues as to how we might go about studying such practices.

         Dewey's theory of knowledge would seem to run counter to Popper's.               He developed what in current
terms would be labeled as a "situated" view of knowledge production.         Central to his theory of knowledge (and to
other aspects of his philosophy as well) is his notion of inquiry. Dewey (1991/1938) defined inquiry as, "the
controlled   or directed   transformation of  an   indeterminate  situation    into   one  that is so determinate   in its
constituent distinctions and relations as to convert the elements of the original situation into a unified whole" (p.
108). In   situations that  have grown   problematic,  inquiry is undertaken       into the problematic    aspects of  the
situation. The nature of the problem is not given, but is rather produced through the process of inquiry.              In
restoring the situation to a determinate state, a funding of new meanings occurs and these meanings constitute
new forms of "knowing" which can be productively employed in new situations (contra critics such as Anderson,
Reder,  &   Simon   [1996]).   Inquiry is for Dewey    an "outdoor     fact,"  not  a mental    process or psychological
phenomenon (Burke, 1994).     In Dewey's terms it has "existensial consequences."

         As Hickman (1992) wrote, "for Dewey properly controlled inquiry exhibits the most general traits of all
other types of productive skill and its artifact, knowing, exhibits the most general traits of all other successful
artifacts" (p. 19). In this way, it could be said that Dewey treated knowing as a form of artifact, but we must be
clear about  what  he  meant  by a   "knowing."    In Knowing   and      the Known,   Dewey     and Bentley   (1991/1949)
defined  a  knowing   as  a kind of  behavioral event and  argued   it   is studiable as  such.  Since a knowing is, by
definition, a kind  of   behaving, there must   be a knower for   a knowing      to exist.  Dewey and Bentley further
postulated that knowings are always part of a two-part pair, consisting of a knowing and the known. They
specified that "the two are twin aspects of common fact" (p. 52).

         Bereiter (following on Popper) has contended that knowledge objects (Popper's term) or conceptual
artifacts (Bereiter's) do exist and have a special form of reality separate from material and mental stuff.           The
question is then, if conceptual artifacts are real in this special sense (sequestered in their own world), how are they
created and how do we come to know them?             Similar questions must be applied to Dewey's formulation of
knowledge,    however.     Can there  be  knowns   without knowers?         The  fundamental    question   is what is  the
ontological  status   of ideas/concepts/knowledge    objects/knowns?        This will be   the  problem  taken  up in  the
symposium.

References
Anderson, J., Reder, L., & Simon, H. (1996).    Situated learning and education.      Educational Researcher, 25(4), 5-
         11.

                                                        6
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1989).    Intentional learning as a goal of instruction.  In L.B. Resnick (Ed.),
          Knowing, learning and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 361­392).       Hillsdale, NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia,   M.  (2003).   Learning to  work creatively with knowledge.    In E. De Corte, L.
          Verschaffle, N. Entwhistle, & J. van Merriënboer (Eds.), Unravelling basic components and dimensions
          of powerful learning environments. (Advances in Learning and InstructionSeries). Oxford, UK: Elsevier
          Science.
Burke, T. (1994).  Dewey's new logic: A reply to Russell. Chicago: U. of Chicago Press.
Dewey, J. (1991/1938).   Logic: The theory of inquiry.    In J. A. Boydston (Ed.), John Dewey: The Later Works,
          1925­1953, Vol. 12.  Carbondale, IL: SIU Press.  [Originally published as Dewey, J. (1938). Logic: The
          Theory of Inquiry. New York: Henry Holt & Co.].
Dewey, J. & Bentley, A. (1991/1949).   Knowing and the known.     In J. A. Boydston (Ed.), John Dewey:  The later
          works, 1949­1952, Vol. 16.  Carbondale, IL: SIU Press.   [Originally published as Dewey, J. & Bentley,
          A. (1949). Knowing and the known.  Boston: Beacon Press].
Hickman, L. (1992).   John Dewey's pragmatic technology.   Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Koschmann, T. (2001).    A third metaphor for learning: Toward a Deweyan form of transactional inquiry.     In S.
          Carver & D. Klahr (Eds.), Cognition and instruction: 25 years of progress (pp. 439-454). Mahwah, NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Koschmann, T. (2002, January).    Dewey's contribution to the foundations of CSCL research [Keynote address].
          CSCL 2002, Boulder, CO.    [Avail.  in G. Stahl  (Ed.), Computer support for    collaborative learning:
          Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 17-22).   Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates].
Popper, K. (1972). Objective knowledge: An evolutionary approach.   Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.

                                                      7
