        Can Students Collaboratively Use Hypermedia to Learn about
Science? The Dynamics of Self- and Other-regulatory Processes in the
                                                    Classroom
                               Roger Azevedo, Fielding I. Winters, & Daniel C. Moos
              University of Maryland, Dept. of Human Development, Cognition & Technology Lab
                                3304 Benjamin Building, College Park, MD, 20742
                                       Tel: 301-405-2799, Fax: 301-405-2891
                                          Email: ra109@umail.umd.edu

         Abstract: This classroom study examined the role of low-achieving students' self-regulated
         learning (SRL) behaviors and their teacher's scaffolding of SRL while using a Web-based
         water quality simulation environment to learn about ecological systems. Forty-nine 11th and
         12th grade   students learned about ecology      and the  effects of land use   on water   quality by
         collaboratively  using  the RiverWebSM     water    quality simulation  (WQS)   during   a two-week
         curriculum on environmental science. The students' emerging understanding was assessed
         using pretest and posttest scores. Students' self-regulatory behaviors and teacher's scaffolding
         of SRL were assessed through an analysis of their discourse during several collaborative
         problem-solving episodes. Findings indicate that students learned significantly more about
         ecology after working collaboratively with the WQS. However, these learning gains were quite
         small and were related to the self-regulatory behaviors observed by the dyads and teacher's
         scaffolding and instruction. Analyses of video data indicate that a large amount of time was
         spent by the dyads and teacher in using only a few strategies, while very little time was spent
         on planning, monitoring, and handling task difficulties and demands. Further analysis revealed
         that both the dyads and teachers were using low-level strategies (e.g., following procedural
         tasks, evaluating the content, searching, and selecting informational sources in the WQS) to
         learn about the topic. Our results provide a valuable initial characterization of the complexity
         of self-  and  co-regulated  learning   in a complex,    dynamic,   technology-enhanced,     student-
         centered science classroom. We will discuss how the results will be used to inform the design
         of computers as MetaCognitive tools designed to foster students' learning of conceptually
         challenging science topics.

Introduction
         Educational    researchers  have successfully       used student-centered  methods      to enhance   students'
understanding  of  science   with computer-based      learning environments    (CBLEs)    (e.g., Azevedo,   Verona, &
Cromley,  2001;    Biswas,  Schwartz,  Bransford,     &   CTGV,    2001;   Clark &  Linn,   2003;   Hickey,  Kindfield,
Horowitz, & Chirstie, 2003; Kozma, Chin, Russell, & Marx, 2000; Fishman, Marx, Blumenfeld, Krajcik, &
Soloway, 2004; Lajoie & Azevedo, 2000; Reiser et al., 2001; Slotta & Linn, 2000; Suthers & Hundhausen, 2003;
White, Shimoda, & Frederiksen, 2000; Vye et al., 1998). These studies, however, also provide evidence that
students have difficulties regulating certain aspects of their learning when they use CBLEs to learn about
complex and challenging science topics such as the circulatory system, Newtonian physics, and genetics (e.g.,
Jacobson & Archididou, 2000). More specifically, research shows that students have difficulties regulating
several  aspects   of their learning,  including    their cognitive   resources  (e.g., activating  prior knowledge),
motivation and affect (e.g., task value, self-efficacy, interest in the topic), behavior (e.g., engaging in help-
seeking behavior), and the instructional context (e.g., negotiating task structure and dealing with dynamically
changing structure of the instructional context).

         Therefore, it is critical that we understand how students working collaboratively regulate their own
learning as   well as  how  teachers  facilitate  students'  SRL   by  using  different scaffolding  and  instructional
approaches in student-centered, technology-rich science classrooms. We have therefore adopted and extended
existing models of SRL (see Boekaerts, Pintrich, & Zeidner, 2000; Zimmerman & Schunk, 2001) and have used
them as a lens to examine the complex interactions between students' self-regulatory behavior and teachers'

                                                          50
scaffolding of their students' SRL when using CBLEs collaboratively in the science classroom for extended
periods of time.

         By adopting SRL, we make certain theoretically-based assumptions about learning (Pintrich, 2000;
Zimmerman, 2001). Active learners who efficiently manage their own learning in many different ways are
termed self-regulated learners (Boekaerts et al., 2000; Paris & Paris, 2001; Winne, 2001; Winne & Perry, 2000;
Zimmerman,    2001;  Zimmerman    &  Schunk, 2001). Students are self-regulating to the degree that   they are
cognitively, motivationally, and behaviorally active participants in their learning process (Zimmerman, 1986).
These students generate the thoughts, feelings, and actions necessary to attain their learning goals. Self-regulated
learning is an active, constructive process whereby learners set goals for their learning and then attempt to plan,
monitor, regulate, and control their cognition, motivation, behavior, and context (Pintrich, 2000; Zimmerman,
2001). Models of SRL describe a recursive cycle of cognitive activities central to learning and knowledge
construction activities (e.g., Pintrich, 2000; Schunk, 2001; Winne, 2001; Zimmerman, 2001). The empirical
literature in educational psychology, classroom learning, academic achievement (e.g., Corno & Randi, 1999;
Pintrich & Zusho, 2002; Newman, 2002; Perry, 2002; Zimmerman, 2001), and in the learning sciences (e.g.,
Azevedo, Cromley & Seibert, in press; Chi et al., 1994; Jacobson & Archidodou, 2000; Shapiro & Niederhauser,
2004) indicate that students have difficulties in regulating their learning of complex and challenging topics with
computer-based learning environments (CBLEs). However, the question of whether academically low-achieving
students, who have failed several science classes in high school, can regulate their learning of conceptually
challenging science topics such as the effects of land use on water quality in a student-centered technology-
enhanced science classroom, remains uninvestigated (e.g., Azevedo, Cromley, Winters, Xu, & Iny, 2003). Our
study contributes to the vast body of literature on fostering students' learning of conceptually challenging science
topics with CBLEs in student-centered classrooms (e.g., Jackson et al., 2000; White et al., 2000; Vye et al.,
1998). We address the question of whether academically low-achieving students, who have failed several science
classes in high school, can regulate their learning of conceptually challenging science topics such as the effects
of land use on water quality in a student-centered technology-enhanced science classroom. Our study contributes
to a large body of literature on fostering students' learning of conceptually challenging science topics with
CBLEs in student-centered classrooms. It examines low-achieving students' SRL and the teacher's scaffolding of
students' SRL in a classroom setting, and converges product data (i.e., learning gains) and process data (e.g., time
and frequency of use of several SRL variables used by students working collaboratively, as well as teacher
scaffolding and instructional moves). This classroom study was conducted to investigate the following research
questions: (a) Can low-achieving high school students effectively use a water-quality simulation (1) (WQS)
collaboratively to learn about water quality indicators and land use? (b) Do students and teacher spend the same
amount of time using various regulatory behaviors to facilitate students' conceptual understanding? and (c) Do
students and  teacher differ in the  frequency use of these self-regulatory behaviors  to facilitate students'
conceptual understanding?

Method
Participants
         Forty-nine 11th and 12th grade high school students (22 girls and 27 boys) from a general science class
volunteered to participate in this study. Ages ranged from 16 to 18 years. The students came from diverse
socioeconomic and racial backgrounds. Forty-nine percent (n = 24) were African American, 41% (n = 20) were
Hispanic, 6% (n = 3) were Caucasian, and 4% (n = 2) were Asian. All of these students were placed in an
environmental science class after failing several required science classes in high school. The students had limited
exposure to environmental science, and therefore low prior knowledge about it. In addition, we observed that
students lacked general learning skills (e.g., comprehension monitoring), as well as specific science-related skills
(e.g., how to round numbers). Data were collected during April and May, 2003, one month prior to the end of the
school year.

Research Design
         We used a one-group pretest-posttest design (49 students). Video and audio data were collected while
the students worked in groups of two using the RiverWeb Water Quality Simulator (WQS) to learn about
ecological systems.  We   collected the data on dyads of students from two   of  four classes taught  by   two
environmental science teachers.

                                                   51
The RiverWeb SM Water Quality Simulation (WQS) Environment
        The   WQS    is a  Web-based   environment   (http://mvhs1.mbhs.edu/riverweb/index.html)      developed  at
Maryland Virtual High School and linked to the RiverWebSM Program originating from the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA). Targeted at the grades 8-12 science and math curriculum, the WQS
depicts the effects of various land uses on water quality in an archetypal watershed. Students access WQS
monitoring stations to explore how different land uses, i.e., a pristine forest, agricultural, lumbering forest,
residential area,  commercial/industrial  area, wetlands,  and   urban area,  affect   water quality. Each water
monitoring station allows students to test for physical and chemical characteristics of the tributary (termed
indicators), such as total flow and nitrogen concentration. By limiting each sub-watershed to one land use, the
effect of that land use on can be seen on the quality of the water that students "test" within its boundaries. The
cumulative effect of the combined land use determines the water quality shown by the indicator values found at a
common     river outflow. After the user  logs in, a map  of the  archetypal  watershed   appears. Water  quality
monitoring stations located throughout the watershed are depicted on the map. The user may click on the map to
investigate any sub-watershed using the WQS graph window. After clicking on a station, the student is presented
with a default graph that displays the variation of nitrogen over time in the top window and precipitation over
time in the bottom window. However, other indicators may be selected; for example, the student could compare
different indicators at the same station such as water temperature and toxins (as shown in Figure 1), could
compare    nitrogen concentration   between two  stations (e.g., residential area  vs. wetlands). In  addition, by
reducing the range of days for each graph the student can zoom in on a particular time period and investigate
daily or seasonal variations. A tour, which may be selected at login, uses frames to combine the WQS with
instructions leading the user through most of the simulator's capabilities. Students can examine time series
reports and scatterplots; using the time series graphs, students are able to see the impact of seasonal changes on
certain indicators. Using the scatterplots, students are able to discover correlations between variables, such as the
relationship between water temperature and dissolved oxygen. The goal is to foster student understanding of the
complex relationships among the many land uses, indicators, and water quality in the watershed. To gain this
understanding,   students are first given instruction in  graph   interpretation. They  then  answer  open-ended
questions using the WQS which demand explanations of concepts and relationships, and finally they construct
concept maps.

Data Sources and Measures
        Several data sources were used to obtain an in-depth understanding of students' emerging understanding
of science phenomena while using the WQS. A total of 6.12 hours of video and audio data were collected on four
dyads in each of the two science classes during all on-line science inquiry sessions with WQS. This allowed for
an in-depth analysis of students' behavior as well as teacher instruction and scaffolding while students engaged
in collaborative science inquiry activities with the WQS. The students' emerging understanding and ability to
regulate their learning was assessed through an analysis of student and student-teacher interactions during these
activities. In addition to the video and audio data from student pairs, we also collected students' pretests and
posttests.  The paper-and-pencil materials consisted of a pretest and a posttest, which were constructed by a
consulting science teacher. The pretest and posttest, which were identical, included seven complex questions
which required students to: (1) demonstrate understanding of runoff with relation to different water quality
indicators and sources and effects of different indicators, (2) describe and hypothesize daily and seasonal
variations depicted on several line diagrams, (3) determine relationships between different indicators at different
land use areas using scatter plots, and (4) construct a concept map illustrating the relationships between water
quality indicators and land use. The range of total possible points for each test was 0­62. The questions were
designed to give the student an opportunity to demonstrate his or her understanding of the various issues related
to water quality. Question 1 was designed to determine if the students understood whether pollutants found at the
mouth of a river come from runoff from land uses areas upstream (range 0 ­ 5). Question 2 was designed to
assess whether students understood the importance of trees as a stream buffer, particularly in developed areas
(range 0 ­ 6). Question 3 was designed to assess whether students understood how land use can cause an increase
in runoff and, subsequently, more sediments and toxins in the water (range 0 ­ 6). Question 4 was designed to
assess whether students understood that there is seasonal variation in these variables and why that might be
(range 0 ­ 6). Question 5 was designed to assess two concepts; each scored separately, and measured whether
students understood that the scale on the y-axis of any graph must be included in the interpretation of the graph,
and that land usage affects nitrogen concentration (range 0 ­ 9). Question 6 also had two parts scored separately
and was designed to assess whether students understood that the scale on the x-axis of any graph must also be
included in the interpretation of the graph and that both precipitation and land use affect runoff (range 0 ­ 8). In

                                                     52
question 7, students had to draw a concept map to show that they understood how various factors affect water
quality (range 0 ­22). Questions 1, 2, and 3 were constructed-response questions. Questions 4 and 5 combined
time series graph interpretation and constructed response. Question 6 was a scatter plot graph interpretation
question, and question 7 asked the students to draw and label a concept map.

Procedure
        For this study, students in the environmental science course spent two weeks using the WQS. For most
of the students, this was their first experience learning about water quality. On the first day of week one, the
students took a pretest to assess their understanding of water-quality indicators and land use. They were then
introduced to the concept of water quality and engaged in mini-labs such as testing water for nitrogen or
identifying the directionality and strength of relationships between graphed water-quality indicators. During the
end of week one, the students were given a tour of the WQS and taught how to use the various tools to analyze
data. During week two, the students participated in three "jigsaw" activities using the WQS: In Jigsaw 1, students
used a time-series graph to compare and contrast two variables, then they compared the indicators in their land
use area to those in the pristine forest. In Jigsaw 2, students used the WQS to learn about two assigned indicators
in each land use area. In Jigsaw 3, students used scatter plots in the WQS to analyze the relationships of all the
different indicators for their specific land use area. The groups then composed concept maps showing the links
between the different indicators for each area and presented their maps to the whole class. During the final class
period of week two, the teachers administered the posttest to all students. Performance data, in the form of
pretests and posttests, were collected for all 49 students. Process data, in the form of videotapes and audiotapes,
were collected on two separate occasions over the two-week period from a sample of eight dyads from two
classes. One consulting teacher acted as a complete participant during the data collection period. She is an
experienced environmental science teacher who introduced the science activities to all of the students and
provided scaffolding to individual student pairs during activities. The regular classroom teacher and the second
author, a former science teacher, also provided scaffolding to students during their activities. The first author and
several other graduate assistants acted as complete        observers rather than participants in the classrooms,
remaining on the sidelines to take notes, manage taping equipment, and interacting minimally with the students
and teachers during class periods. Taping was done for whole class periods during which the teachers moved in
and out of interaction with individual groups as they tackled the tasks in the jigsaw assignments. Therefore, data
were gathered on groups of students who worked both with and without teacher assistance.

Coding and Scoring
        In this section we describe the scoring of the students' answers to the pretests and posttests, the coding
scheme for student and teacher SRL behaviors, and inter-rater agreement measures.

Students' Answers to Pretest and Posttest Questions
        The second author and the consulting teacher constructed a rubric for scoring the students' responses to
the pretest and posttest questions by initially scoring a subset (30%) of all the pretests and posttests. The rubric
was refined and the two teachers scored all 98 tests individually using the revised rubric. Questions 1, 2, 3, and 7
were each given a single score; question 5 had two parts so it was given two scores; and questions 4 and 6 each
had two parts so the two questions were given four scores each. This yielded 14 separate scores for each
student's pretest and posttest, which were combined to calculate the each student's overall (questions 1-7 on the
pretest and posttest) score out of 62 for each test.

Students' and Teachers' Regulatory Verbalizations and Behavior
        The 6.12 hours (367 minutes) of audio and video tape recordings from 14 episodes provided the raw
data for the analysis of students' self-regulatory behavior and teachers' scaffolding of SRL. Azevedo, Cromley,
& Seibert's (in press) original model of SRL was modified and used for analyzing the students' and teachers'
regulatory behaviors and adapted to fit the use the WQS in the classroom. Their model is based on several recent
models of SRL (Pintrich, 2000; Winne, 2001; Winne & Hadwin, 1998; Zimmerman, 2001). It includes key
elements of these models (i.e., Winne's [2001] and Pintrich's [2000] formulation of self-regulation as a four-
phase process) and extends these key elements to capture the major phases of self-regulation in a complex
technology-rich student-centered science classroom. The classes, descriptions and examples of the planning,
monitoring, strategy use, and task difficulty and demands variables used for coding the learners' and teacher's
regulatory behavior are described in the Appendix. The classes are: (a) planning and goal setting, activation of
perceptions and knowledge of the task and context, and the self in relationship to the task; (b) monitoring

                                                        53
processes that represent metacognitive awareness of different aspects of the self, task, and context; (c) efforts to
control and regulate different aspects of the self, task, and context; and, (d) various kinds of reactions and
reflections on the self and the task and/or context. The model also includes behavior of the teacher when she
provided scaffolding of and instruction in SRL-related behaviors in order to enhance students' understanding.
Teacher-scaffolding     refers to any   teacher­initiated move   that has the intention of facilitating       students'
understanding through various self-regulatory behaviors. Teacher-instruction refers to any teacher­initiated
move that has the intention of specifically directing students' SRL. For this study and context, this model was
adapted to include verbal as well as non-verbal behaviors specific to the tasks students engaged in while learning
with the WQS. As such, video data as well as audio data were used to provide evidence of teacher and student
SRL behaviors.

Inter-rater Agreement
       Each teacher scored each student's questions on the pretest and posttest (i.e., 7 questions with a total of
14 scores x 49 students x 2 tests = 1372 individual scores). Each teacher was instructed to independently code all
1372 scores on the pretests and posttests using a scoring rubric developed by both science teachers. Then inter-
rater agreement was established for the scoring of the learners' pretest and posttest answers by comparing the
individual coding of the high   school  teacher and the   second author.  There was agreement  on 66          out of 66
randomly selected pretests and posttests, yielding an inter-rater agreement of 100%. For SRL behavior variables
and time, inter-rater agreement was established on 289 out of 305 coded segments (27% of codes), yielding inter-
rater agreement of 95%. Inconsistencies were resolved through discussion between the experimenters.

Results

Question 1
       Can    low-achieving    high   school students     effectively use  a  water-quality simulation         (WQS)
collaboratively to learn about water quality indicators and land use? We examined the shift in students' learning
(from pretest to posttest) by using a paired samples t-test. There was a significant difference between the
students' mean pretest score and their mean posttest score [t (48) =  -7.03, p < .001]. However, while there was a
significant shift in the test scores, the students' mean score was low on both the pretest (M = 12.1%, SD = 4.5)
and the posttest (M = 19.1%, SD = 6.0).

Question 2
       Do students and teacher spend the same amount of time using various regulatory behaviors to facilitate
students' conceptual understanding? We examined whether the relatively small (yet significant) learning gains
from pretest to posttest were due to differences in the amount of time that both students and teachers spent
regulating students' learning with the WQS across each of the four SRL variables (planning, monitoring, strategy
use, and handling task difficulties, and demands). A MANOVA was conducted to determine whether students,
teacher scaffolding, and teacher instruction differed in the amount of time spent on each of these SRL variables
(see Figure 2). There was a significant difference in the mean time that learners spent regulating their own
learning and the amount of time the teacher spent on externally regulating the students by using scaffolding and
direct instruction (F [3, 117] = 19.32, p < .05). Overall, students spent significantly more time regulating the own
learning than the teacher spent on regulating students' learning either by instructing or scaffolding. There were
also significant differences in the amount of time students and teacher spent using different strategies to regulate
students' learning. There were no differences in the amount of time spent between planning, monitoring, and
handling task difficulties and demands. Multiple pairwise comparison tests found significant differences between
the time spent by students and teachers on scaffolding and instruction for four SRL variables. Learners spent
significantly more time using strategies to regulate their learning (F [2,39] = 10.96, p < .05) than the teacher did
in providing direct instruction on the use of strategies, which was significantly more than the time she spent on
scaffolding students' use of effective strategies (M = 294.4 sec, SD = 236.3; M = 143.0 sec, SD = 78.0; M = 39.0
sec, SD = 35.9, respectively). The teacher spent significantly more time instructing students how to plan their
learning (F [2,39] = 10.26, p < .05) that she did scaffolding their planning or that students spent planning their
own learning (M = 36.0 sec, SD = 5.5; M = 12.7 sec, SD = 5.5; M = 1.8 sec, SD = 5.5, respectively). However,
learners and teachers tended to spend the same amount of time regulating their own and her students' monitoring
activities (F [2,39] = 0.20, p > .05), and handling task difficulties and demands (F [2,39] = 3.14, p > .05).

                                                    54
Question 3
        Do students and teacher differ in the frequency use of these self-regulatory behaviors to facilitate
students' conceptual understanding?  Third, we examined  how         learners and teachers regulated the students'
learning of the ecology system using the WQS by calculating how often teacher instruction, teacher scaffolding,
and/or student behavior reflected a variable relating to one of the four main SRL categories. We examined
whether the frequency of use of each of the variables relating to the four main SRL categories of planning,
monitoring, strategy use, and task difficulty were used significantly differently in teacher instruction, teacher
scaffolding, and student behavior. A total of 1143 segments were coded based on 6.12 hours (367 minutes) of
video from the four dyads in each of the two classes. Chi-square analyses revealed a significant difference
between the frequency of these variables used between students, teacher scaffolding, and teacher instruction [c2
(6, 1143) = 145.16, p < .001] (see Table 1). Due to the overall significance, we probed further to examine what
specific SRL behaviors the students engaged in and teachers instructed or scaffolded while learning with the
WQS. In this section, we present a detailed account of each of the specific SRL variables used by students and
teachers to regulate the students' learning of ecology with the WQS.

Planning
        Chi-square analyses demonstrated that students and teachers engaged in very few behaviors associated
with category of planning, accounting for only 4% of all the codes. Under planning, students and teachers were
coded for behaviors related to planning (P), activating prior knowledge (PKA), stating goals (G), or recycling a
goal in working memory (RG). Students displayed no behavior associated with prior-knowledge activation or
stating goals. Indeed, student moves were only associated with 1% (2) of codes in this category, due to a few
instances of planning (less than 1%) and a few recycling of goals in working memory (less than 1%). Teachers
provided little in the way of instruction to students for planning, only 3% of total codes, and virtually no
scaffolding of these SRL behaviors, less than 1% of total codes. The majority of teacher moves in this category
were to instruct students on their goals (2%). Teachers did not often activate students' prior knowledge (less than
1%) and there were only a few instances of teacher instruction of student planning (1%).

Monitoring
        Chi-square analyses  demonstrated that students and teachers       also   engaged  in very few   behaviors
associated with category of monitoring, accounting for 11% of all the codes. Under monitoring, students and
teachers were coded for behaviors related to expressing a judgment of Learning (JOL), partner questioning (PQ),
monitoring their progress toward goals (MPTG), teacher questioning (TQ), and expressing a feeling of knowing
(FOK). Student moves associated with monitoring were responsible for 7%; but the majority of student moves in
this category were partner questioning (2%)  and teacher questioning          (4%). There  were few  instances  of
judgments of learning (1%), feelings of knowing (less than 1%), and monitoring progress towards goals (less
than 1%). Teacher instruction and scaffolding of monitoring accounted for 4%, with teachers helping students
monitor their progress towards goals (2% each for TI and TS). Teachers did not scaffold or instruct students with
respect to questioning, judgments of learning or feelings of knowing.

Strategies
        Chi-square analyses demonstrated that students and teachers engaged in many behaviors associated with
category of strategies, accounting for 78% of all the codes. Under strategies, students and teachers were coded
for behaviors related to following directions (FD ­ students only), giving procedural directions (Pro - teachers
only), content evaluation (CE), searching the environment (S), and selecting a new informational source (SNIS).
Student moves associated with strategies were responsible for 63% of total codes. The majority of student moves
in this category were following directions (32%). Students also engaged in selecting new information sources
(18%), searching (8%), and evaluating content (6%). These observations were expected, as the jigsaw tasks
required these behaviors for completion. Teacher scaffolding of strategies accounted for 4% of moves, including
helping students evaluate content (2%) and  understand  procedures       (1%).  Teacher  instruction of  strategies
accounted for 11% of moves, including using procedures which accounted for 10% of all moves, and instruction
on content evaluation accounted for 1% of all moves. Teachers provided no other strategy help or instructions.

Task Difficulty and Demands
        Chi-square analyses demonstrated that students and teachers engaged in very few behaviors associated
with category of task difficulty and demands, accounting for only 7% of all the codes. Under task difficulty and
demands, students and teachers were coded for behaviors related to time and effort planning (TEP), and help-

                                                 55
seeking behavior (HSB). Student moves associated with monitoring was responsible for 5% of total codes. The
majority of student moves in this category were help-seeking behavior (5%), usually concerning procedural
questions. Students engaged in virtually no time and effort planning (less than 1%). Teacher scaffolding and
instruction of task difficulty and demands (less than 1% and 2%, respectively) was spent helping students plan
their time and effort.

Discussion
        Our results show that low-achieving students tend to benefit little from web-based hypermedia learning
environments designed to foster their learning of challenging science topics. Despite the performance data
showing significant results, the process data including the time and frequency of students' SRL and teacher's
scaffolding and instructional moves use disproportionate amount of time and number of SRL moves during
learning. The process data provide evidence that students' poor performance on the pretest-posttest shift is due to
their failure to deploy key SRL processes and mechanisms which may have led to significant shifts in conceptual
understanding. In addition, the same data show that the teacher rarely deployed scaffolding and instructional
moves aimed at fostering students' self-regulated learning of ecology.

        With regard to the first research question, the results of this study showed that students learned more
about the effects of land use during the two-week period in which they used the WQS collaboratively in the
ecology class. Despite the statistically significant results on their scores from pretest to posttest, the shift in
scores is rather small (7%) and there is ample room for increases in their learning of ecology since the mean for
their posttest was relatively small (19%). We can conclude that while these web-based hypermedia learning
environments can potentially foster students' learning, not all students have the self-regulating skills necessary to
learn from these rich environments. Our results indicate that providing low-achieving students the opportunity to
learn with CBLEs will lead to inferior shifts in learning. This finding is consistent with the majority of studies on
non-linear, random access hypermedia environments with flexible access and a high degree of learner control
(e.g., Azevedo, Cromley, & Seibert, in press; Azevedo, Guthrie, & Seibert, in press; Jacobson & Archodidou,
2000).  With regard to the second and third research question, our extensive process data indicated that students
and teacher differed in the amount of time and the frequency use of self-regulatory behaviors during learning
with the WQS. Students tended to spend more time on and use more self-regulatory skills followed by teacher
instructional moves and then teacher scaffolding. Also, students and teachers used strategies as a predominant
SRL variable during learning with the WQS. The second most often used SRL variable by students and teachers
was monitoring. The quantity (i.e., amount and frequency of SRL variables) and quality of the strategy and
monitoring processes used by students may reveal the reason why students gained so little knowledge of ecology
with the WQS. The verbal protocols provide process data to indicate that they used these SRL processes, and the
chi-square analyses      together with the product data show                that the     use of these processes led to significant
increases in their understanding of the science topic. Students regulated their learning by using mostly ineffective
strategies and metacognitive monitoring and did very little planning. In contrast, teacher's instructional and
scaffolding moves involved using strategies to facilitate students' learning. These findings highlight the value of
converging product and trace data--i.e., while the statistical analyses revealed significant differences in the time
and frequency data, the explanation lies in the analysis of the quality of each of these SRL moves used by both
students and teachers. For example, despite spending a significant amount of time regulating their learning and
spending a disproportionate amount of time using these strategies the process data reveals that one possibility
students learn little with the WQS may be because they were using low-level strategies such as following
directions and searching the WQS without a specify goal. Furthermore, the relative amount of time spent by the
teacher's instructing and scaffolding were relatively fewer than students' moves and the quality of those moves
can also be considered low-level.

Endnotes
(1)  The original designers and developers of the Riverweb WQS labeled it as a simulation-based environment, however, we consider it to
     be a web-based hypermedia learning environment since is provides students access to multiple representations of scientific information
     in multiple formats including text, and diagrams, graphics in a non-linear fashion.
(2)  In percentages cited are of total moves made by students and teachers.

References
Azevedo, R. (2002). Beyond intelligent tutoring systems: Computers as MetaCognitive tools to enhance learning? Instructional Science,
          30(1), 31-45.

                                                      56
Azevedo, R., Cromley, J.G., & Seibert, D. (in press). Does adaptive scaffolding facilitate students' ability to regulate their learning with
          hypermedia, Contemporary Educational Psychology.
Azevedo, R. Cromley, J.G., Winters, F.I., Xu, L., & Iny, D. (2003). Is strategy instruction effective in facilitating students' ability to regulate
          their learning with hypermedia? In U. Hoppe, F. Verdejo, & J. Kay (Eds.), Artificial Intelligence in Education: Shaping the future
          of learning through intelligent technologies (pp. 193-200). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Azevedo, R., Guthrie, J.T., & Seibert, D. (in press). The role of self-regulated learning in fostering students' conceptual understanding of
          complex systems with hypermedia, Journal of Educational Computing Research.
Azevedo, R., Verona, M.E., & Cromley, J.G. (2001). Fostering students' collaborative problem solving with RiverWeb. In J.D. Moore, C.L.
          Redfield, & W.L. Johnson (Eds.), Artificial intelligence in education: AI-ED in the wired and wireless future (pp. 166-175).
          Amsterdam: IOS press.
Biswas G., Schwartz, D., Bransford, J., & CTGV. (2001). Technology support for complex problem solving: From SAD environments to AI.
          In K. Forbus & P. Feltovich (Eds.) Smart machines in education. Cambridge Press, MA: MIT Press.
Boekaerts, M., Pintrich, P., & Zeidner, M. (2000), Handbook of self-regulation. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Chi, M. T.H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.-H., & LaVancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive Science,
          18, 439-477.
Corno, L., & Randi, J., (1999). A design theory for classroom instruction in self-regulated learning? In C Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-
          design theories and models (Vol. II): A new paradigm of instructional theory (pp. 293-318). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fishman, B., Marx, R., Blumenfeld, P., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2004). Creating a framework for research on systemic technology
          innovations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 43-76.
Hickey,  D., Kindfield,  A., Horwitz, P., &  Christie, M.      (2003). Integrating curriculum,   instruction, assessment,  and evaluation  in a
          technology-supported genetics learning environment. American Educational Research Journal, 40(2), 495-538.
Jackson, S., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2000). MODEL-IT: A design retrospective. In M. Jacobson, & R. Kozma (Eds.), Innovations in science
          and mathematics education: Advanced designs for technologies of learning (pp. 77-116). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jacobson, M., & Archodidou, A. (2000). The design of hypermedia tools for learning: Fostering conceptual change and transfer of complex
          scientific knowledge. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(2), 149-199.
Kozma, R., Chin, E., Russell, J., & Marx, N. (2000). The roles of representations and tools in the chemistry laboratory and their implications
          for chemistry learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(2), 105-144.
Lajoie, S.P., & Azevedo, R. (2000). Cognitive tools for medical informatics. In S.P. Lajoie (Ed.), Computers as cognitive tools II: No more
          walls: Theory change, paradigm shifts and their influence on the use of computers for instructional purposes (pp. 247-271).
          Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Newman, R. (2002). What do I need to do to succeed...When I don't understand what I'm doing!?: Developmental influences on students'
          adaptive  help seeking. In  A. Wigfield & J. Eccles     (Eds.), Development of  achievement  motivation    (pp. 285-306). San Diego:
          Academic Press.
Paris, S.G., & Paris, A.H. (2001). Classroom applications of research on self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 36(2), 89-101.
Perry, N. (2002). Introduction: Using qualitative methods      to enrich  understandings of self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist,
          37(1), 1-3.
Pintrich, P., & Zusho, A.    (2002). The development of academic self-regulation: The role of cognitive and motivational factors. In A.
          Wigfield & J. Eccles (Eds.), Development of achievement motivation (pp. 249-284). San Diego: Academic Press.
Reiser, B., Tabak, I., Sandoval, W., Smith, B., Steinmuller, F., & Leone, A. (2001). BGuILE: Strategic and conceptual scaffolds for scientific
          inquiry in biology classrooms. In S. Carver & D. Klahr (Eds.), Cognition and instruction: Twenty-five years of progress (pp. 263-
          306). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schunk, D. (2001). Social cognitive theory and self-regulated learning. In B. Zimmerman, & D. Schunk (Eds), Self-regulated learning and
          academic achievement: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 125-152). Mawah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shapiro, A., & Niederhauser, D. (2004). Learning from hypertext: Research issues and findings. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.). Handbook of
          Research for Education Communications and Technology (2nd ed). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. C. (2000). The Knowledge Integration Environment: Helping students use the Internet Effectively. In M. Jacobson
          & R. Kozma, R. (Ed.), Learning the Sciences of the 21st Century. LEA.
Suthers, D., & Hundhausen, C. (2003). An experimental study of the effects of representational guidance on collaborative learning processes.
          Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-218.
Vye, N., Schwartz, D., Bransford, J., Barron, B., Zech, L., & CTGV. (1998). SMART environments that support monitoring, reflection, and
          revision. In D. Hacker,  J. Dunlosky, &  A.  Graesser     (Eds.) Metacognition    in educational theory and  practice (pp. 305-346).
          Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
White, B.Y., Shimoda, T.A., & Frederiksen, J.R. (2000). Facilitating students' inquiry learning and metacognitive development through
          modifiable software advisers. In S.P. Lajoie (Ed.), Computers as cognitive tools II: No more walls: Theory change, paradigm
          shifts and their influence on the use of computers for instructional purposes (pp. 97-132). Mawah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Winne, P.H. (2001). Self-regulated learning viewed from models of information processing. In B. Zimmerman & D. Schunk (Eds.), Self-
          regulated learning and academic achievement: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 153-189). Mawah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Winne, P.H., & Perry, N.E. (2000). Measuring self-regulated learning. In M. Boekaerts, P. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-
          regulation (pp. 531-566). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Zimmerman, B. (2001). Theories of self-regulated learning and academic achievement: An overview and analysis. In & B. Zimmerman & D.
          Schunk (Eds.), Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 1-37). Mawah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zimmerman, B., & Schunk, D. (2001). Self-regulated learning and academic achievement (2nd ed.). Mawah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by funding from the National Science Foundation (REC#0133346) awarded to the first author. The authors
would like to thank Stacy Pritchett for constructing the lesson plans, assisting the classroom teachers, and scoring the pretests and posttests;
and, Susan Ragan at the Maryland Virtual High School for allowing us to use RiverWeb in this classroom study. We also like to thank Laura
Smith, Lucia Buie, and Jennifer G. Cromley for assisting in the data collection, and the high school teachers (Wendell Hall and Philip
Johnson) and their students for participating in this study.

                                                                    57
