      Replaying History: Engaging Urban Underserved Students in
     Learning World History Through Computer Simulation Games
                                            Kurt Squire1 & Sasha Barab2
      1Curriculum & Instruction, School of Education, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706
                                        Tel: 608-263-4672, Fax 608-263-9992
                                        E-mail: kdsquire@education.wisc.edu
                     2Instructional Systems Technology and Cognitive Science, Indiana University

        Abstract: A growing number of educators are exploring digital games for engaging students in
        learning experiences, but relatively little is known about how games engage players, how learning
        occurs through gameplay, or what interactions occur when complex games are brought into school
        culture. This case study examines what happens when Civilization III was brought into an urban
        school for underserved students. Engagement in gameplay was a complex process of appropriation
        and resistance, recruiting students' identities and intentions. Learning occurred through recursive
        cycles  of   failure and revising strategies, which  led to frustration, engagement  and      learning.
        Students developed familiarity with game concepts and deeper understandings of relationships
        among history, geography, economics, and politics.

Introduction and Purpose
        A growing number of researchers and scholars are acknowledging the cultural impact of digital games and
exploring the potential for using game technologies and design features to engage learners (i.e. Media-X) (Gee,
2003; Prensky, 2001). It is theorized that games require players to master rich semiotic systems, marshal resources
and solve complex problems, and engage in sophisticated forms of literacy, which scholars such as Jim Gee (2003)
have compared with the relatively impoverished context of schooling. Most interesting to learning scientists may be
the way  that   they motivate    engage  learners  in complex  problem  solving   tasks and sophisticated       learning
communities in the process of completing personally meaningful goals, a   (Games-to-Teach Team, 2003; Gee, 2003;
Cordova & Lepper, 1996). Commercial quality games, however, costs millions to produce, and before educators
spend millions on development, perhaps lessons can be learned about their design and enactment by examining how
existing games can support learning. Historical simulation games (i.e. Civilization III) require players to master
geographic facts, anticipate the interactions among geographic processes, become fluent with historical concepts,
and understand relationships among geographical, political, economic, and historical systems. Given that history is
consistently listed as the least favorite subject among students and that marginalized students frequently reject the
study of history altogether (Loewen, 1995), these games have interesting potential for stimulating students' interest
in history while helping them develop deep conceptual understandings (e.g. Kolson, 1996).

        This study examines what classroom practices emerge and how learning occurs when Civilization III is
used as the basis for learning about world history in an Humanities enrichment course in an inner-city school. Using
case study techniques (Stake, 1995), we examine the following three research questions:
             1.  What practices emerge when a game is brought into a formal learning environment, and, how do
                 gaming practices (e.g., competition, learning through failure) intersect with schooling practices?
             2.  How does Civilization III engage players in a formal learning context?
             3.  What learning occurs through gameplay?
Becoming engaged by Civilization III as a tool for studying history was a complex process of appropriation and
resistance that mobilized    students' identities. Learning arose through students'  questions,  intentions,    and the
affordances of Civilization III as mediated through social practices. Civilization III was a powerful organizer of
activity, and gameplay led students disaffected with history to deep thinking and enriched understandings of history.
Bringing Civilization III into a classroom was not without its problems, which are described as well.

Background
        In the past, educators have treated history as an apolitical scientific enterprise and learning history a linear
developmental process whereby students enter the classroom as naïve thinkers and gradually acquire facts in order
to master the "correct narrative"(Downey & Levstick, 1991). Critics of the "best story" approach have noted how

                                                         505
little this process of "learning history" reflects how actual historians engage in historical inquiry (Siexas, 2000).
Whereas  students   read  textbooks,   memorize   facts, and recite  "ready-made"     knowledge,      academics,   curators,
journalists, and   social activists do a  lot  more: They   consider research    topics of  theoretical    and/or  practical
importance,  consult  original sources,   produce  arguments,   interpret data   in dialogue     with existing theory, and
negotiate findings within social contexts (Greene, 1994; VanSledright, 1998). History is presented as received,
uncontentious truth, free from social context and beyond debate. Seixas (2000) argues that what passes as history ­
the memorization of a collection of facts, causal explanations and sanctioned narratives ­ might better be described
as the construction of myth or heritage than doing history in any real sense.

        Treating history as myth or heritage, a "cultural literacy," tends to lead to many misconceptions about the
nature of history, alienate students, and as a result, leave most students unaffected, or even hostile towards school-
based history (Greene, 1994; Loewen, 1995; Seixas, 2000; Wineburg, 2001). The majority of students perceive this
history which is cleaved from social context as the meaningless recitation of names, dates, and facts and fail to
understand the practices through which historians construct and judge historical arguments (Seixas, 2000; Wineburg,
2001). Perhaps also not surprisingly, most students also list history as "the most boring" of all 21 subjects studied in
school (Loewen,     1995).  Students  frequently  resist or reject dominant,     state-sanctioned   narratives  when   they
contradict   lived experience,  family   history, folklore,  and underground      channels   (Wertsch,     1998).  Wertsch
distinguishes between students learning history and students appropriating historical texts, arguing that texts serve as
"identity resources" that are mastered and employed according to situational demands. A challenge for educators,
then, is how to provide opportunities for historical inquiry where they explore their identities and reconcile their
historical interpretations within communities of inquiry (Barnett et al., 2000).

        How to design learning environments around these principles is a topic currently under investigation
among learning scientists (e.g. Barnett, et al., 2000), and the solutions are not entirely clear, particularly in urban
classrooms. If students come to school disinterested in, or even rejecting school-sanctioned histories, how do we
engage students in the hard and painful work of historical inquiry­ the processes of seeking out and engaging with
multiple histories, practicing introspection, and exploring one's own (multiple) identities? Within a world history
context, how do we honor students' desire to affiliate themselves with cultural traditions (whether European, Native
American, Asian, or African) with the very real politics of colonial history?

        World history, a concept which arose in response to critiques of traditional "Western Civilization" courses,
seeks "to encourage students to ask large and searching questions about the human past, to compare patterns of
continuity and change in different parts of the world, and to examine the histories and achievements of particular
peoples or civilizations with an eye to wider social, cultural, or economic contexts" (National Standards for History,
cited in Dunn, 2000, p. 122). An emerging body of world history scholarship suggests models for how world history
can be used to investigate patterns of change (e.g. Diamond, 1999). However, such inquiry-based world history
demands that students have an organizing framework for interpreting understandings and generating questions that
spans thousands of years and the six populated continents. Studies of students' reading historical texts have shown
that students frequently lack the background knowledge to comprehend even the most basic passages in historical
texts, lacking any understanding of even basic concepts such as "England" (e.g. Beck, McKeown & Gromoll, 1989).

        One   intriguing   approach  to  engaging  students  in studying  world     history might     be through  computer
simulation   games  such  as Civilization III, an entertainment  game  with   deep   historic,   geographic,   and political
simulation. Success demands that players understand the basics of geography, using knowledge of geography is a
"tool" for gameplay, such as where to focus food production. Players confront political dilemmas such as whether to
pursue isolationist politics, enter complex alliances for protection, or gain natural resources (i.e. oil) through military
force. Finally, players can view use tools included in the game (i.e., maps, charts, and graphs) to examine how their
civilization grows culturally, geographically, scientifically, and politically over time. Using Civilization III as a
simulation tool changes the method of studying history from one of memorizing facts and mastering sanctioned
narratives to one of exploring the emergent properties of a simulated system. The specific trajectory of events
comprising any one game may have no analog in real life history; however, the rules binding the game ­ the core
variables included in the model, the interrelationships among political, economic, and geography systems ­ allow
players to gain insights into each of these areas and therefore the unfolding of history itself.

                                                          506
Methods
       This paper uses case study techniques within a design experiment methodology in order to both develop
research findings that uncover and extend theoretical issues and a tangible educational program (Barab & Squire, in
press; Brown, 1992). Consistent with Cobb and colleagues (2001), we created an instructional context with specific
research goals and manipulated the local context to achieve the desired ends in a recursive process of theory
building and instructional intervention. Such a flexible approach allows us to manage multiple unknowns, including
(but not limited to) the affordances of the game as a tool for learning, the trajectory of students' understanding of
history throughout the game, or simply how a given group of students and their teacher will react to its use in formal
instruction. In this phase of the design research project, we use a case study methodology which employs multiple
data gather and analysis techniques to examine the practices that emerge, how engagement unfolds, and what
learning occurs (Stake, 1995). Critically, pre and post tests were designed and administered, but students refused
(even under threat of grade reduction) to complete the pre-test, making pre and post-test comparisons impossible.

Context
       One    researcher participated as an   instructor-researcher while a second      researcher was  a participant-
observer. Both researchers took field notes on all classroom activities and interactions attending especially to
individual actions, social exchanges, and broader patterns of activity within the classroom. The second researcher
focused specifically on interactions likely missed by the first researcher. The researchers also partnered with a
practicing world humanities teacher who helped design the unit but due to time constraints and minimal experience
with the gameplayed a less central role in organizing activity. After each session, we met (along with the students'
regular teacher, when possible) to compile our observations, explicate our shorthand field notes, and discuss/debate
what transpired in class. A third researcher reviewed data and evaluated the research program.

       In this case, Civilization III was used in a six-week (three times per week, 45 minutes per class) period in a
high school classroom at a Media and Technology Charter School designed to cater to inner-city youth in a large
Northeastern city. 18 students participated in the study, playing Civilization III as a part of an interdisciplinary world
cultures course. The school does not specifically teach history or geography, instead folding social studies into
humanities and technology courses. The class was comprised entirely of students who had failed ninth grade the
previous year and were being held back for a year before advancing to tenth grade. Roughly 75% of the students
were African-American, 15% were Latino, and 10% were of European descent. Five of these students participated in
a one week, 15 hour extension camp at the end of the unit. Consistent with Stake's (1995) case study approach to
data collection and reporting, we use observations, interviews, and document analysis to triangulate sources and
generate more trustworthy and credible data.

Data Collection
       Observations focused on two objectives: 1) Capturing students' gameplay practices (including use of
offline resources) and 2) capturing social interactions. We focused on the (1) content of the talk among participants,
(2) the character of the social interactions surrounding the gameplay, (3) how knowledge was shared among them,
(4) what meanings became taken-as-shared with in groups of players, (5) instances when players use Civilization III
to discuss understandings of other social phenomena (and instances when they did not), and (6) occasions when
cooperative or competitive play emerged.  Both researchers adopted an active stance as educators in the classroom,
making regular use of informal interviews to clarify observations and learn more about players' own understandings
of their activities and context. Each day, we collected students' journals and inscriptions created in support of their
gameplay. On most days, participants wrote a short description of what happened in a journal, noting any major
game decisions they had made. We tried a variety of activities in each case, ranging from student timed-writings to
having students submit questions on post-it notes, which were also used to triangulate observations.

       Students   were   interviewed  throughout  the  study in order  to investigate     emergent   hypotheses,  gain
participants' views and  triangulate  interpretations. In addition, nine  participants   were  given  semi-structured
interviews following the unit. We queried interviewees about their attitudes toward social studies and probed their
conceptual understanding of social studies phenomena, using both discussion and performance tasks dealing with
historical timescales, maps and texts. All interviews were audio-taped and transcribed.

                                                        507
Data Analysis
         Observations, transcribed interviews, and student artifacts were combined into a primary case document.
The primary data, roughly 300 pages was worked into a coherent narrative flow of events by combining relevant
data from multiple sources and removing redundancy. Working through several iterations, we reduced the text
through what Stake (1995) calls winnowing and sifting the data. Due to space allotments, the full case study has
been omitted from this paper. Using the constant comparative method (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), we analyzed the
case events based on emergent themes and patterns that bear on the original research questions, scanning the data for
counter-factual evidence, competing contradictions and informally verifying the inferred patterns with the second
researcher as they were established. Specifically, the analysis focused on: (1) the gaming and social practices that
emerged, (2) moments of engagement or lack thereof, (3) students' displayed understandings of historical
phenomena and how the game might (or might not) be remediating those understandings, and (4) the affordances
and constraints of Civilization III as a tool for learning within this context.

Findings: Engagement and Appropriation
         Learning to   play Civilization   III was  a very   complex   process    which could   be   described as one  of
appropriation (Wertsch, 1998), whereby participants learn not just how to use it but why ­ in effect, making the tool
their own, which affected the practices students engaged in and in turn, the kinds of learning that occurred. Many
students at  initially rejected the  activity, much   as they   rejected school-based   history education  or   most any
externally-mandated activity that was not perceived to be in their immediate best interests. Even for those students
who were gamers, it took a few days before Civilization III was appropriated as a tool for gaming, let alone as a tool
for learning history.  Students  all felt that Civilization III was very  complex,    perhaps too  complex  to  learn. In
addition, many students did not see how it could help them in school or real life.

         It was not until day four, when students realized that they could use the game to replay history, using the
game as a tool for exploring hypothetical history that they began to appropriate Civilization III (See Figure 1). The
researcher drew a map of the world on the board, explaining where students' in-game civilizations were on the map,
making links between the curriculum and the game explicit. The teachers suggested that students could try to reverse
colonization, and make the Americas African, which intrigued students. They quickly began to play-out historical
hypotheticals, such as: "Why did the Europeans colonize the Americas as opposed to the reverse?" Some students
wanted to make the Americas African, while others wanted to examine Japanese / Chinese history. Other students
became engaged in the game as a tool for exploring geography and spent most of their time investigating the map,
locating resources, and in the case of one student, designing experiments to see under what conditions cities grew
the quickest. One student simply enjoyed nurturing her civilization as one might a pet, becoming peeved when other
civilizations threatened it and engaging in long, contested battles over strategic territories. Other seemed more
engaged in the social aspects of the activity, describing their goals as, "playing with my friends."

      Why am I doing this?

                         Replaying
                         History
                                               This game isn't bad...
                                               emergence of game talk (questions, analysis)

                                                                      Purposeful Gameplay
                                                                      "Recursive gaming"

    Day                  4                        8                   12                 17
    1

                 Figure 1: Outline of emergent activities when Civilization III entered a classroom.

                                                            508
       Identity was central to the appropriation process. When students perceived the game as in their interests,
helping them express ideas they believed in or investigate questions they cared about and defined who they were in
then world, the game was more easily appropriated. When students perceived the game as an external agent, one
inscribed with values different from theirs, they rejected it. When students did appropriate the game, it was only
after a significant time investment in playing the game; it was a process of trying different strategies and examining
the game's affordances. While games can be motivating tools, the process of appropriating games as learning tools
is complex. Wertsch's (1998) describes how one cannot assume that just because an individual uses a tool that they
have appropriated it: "Cultural tools are not always facilitators of mediated action, and agents do not invariably
accept and use them; rather, an agent's stance toward a mediational means is characterized by resistance or even
outright rejection" (p. 144). Building on the work of de Certeau (1984), Wertsch argues that appropriation of a tool
is a productive act in that users of tools are always remaking them by repurposing them for their own use. For these
students, appropriating Civilization III also meant making it their own, but it was not until a several days of play that
students developed unique goals and, in so doing, repurposing and fully appropriating the tool.

       As such, "motivation" was a complex phenomenon, occurring at the intersection of personal goals and
fantasies, the possibility space of Civilization III as a simulation, a desire to learn world history through the game,
and at times, the social pressure to complete the presentation for the other classes. This multi-dimensional view of
motivation closely resembles Cordova and Lepper's (1996) proposed framework of fantasy (or context), control,
challenge, and curiosity. However, the social situatedness of this activity ­ the way that the social context of the
school and the camp played a role in students' motivation and the way that students' goals shifted and changed
throughout the activity in response to the context ­ suggests that framing students' practice not as motivation, but as
goal-driven activity may be fruitful. For these students, Civilization III was an endogenous historical game; studying
and replaying history was part and parcel of the fun.

Findings: Fostering Deep Learning
       Several taken as shared meanings arose, as students played their games and asked one another for advise,
examined the consequences of decisions, and predicted how events from one game might relate to the unfolding of
others. Students starting in "the Old World" (Egypt, Babylonians) came to see their long-term survival dependent on
colonizing the new world for resources. This pattern was influenced by several factors, including a scarcity of
resources, an awareness of the relatively unsettled lands in the Americas, the need to accommodate expanding
populations, and perhaps a mobilization of historical understandings of the Americas. Second, understandings of the
importance of horses in military history and lack of horses in the Americas arose as both lessons from students'
gameplay and just-in-time lectures and emphasized the military importance of horses.

       Two key understandings emerged specific to students playing in the Americas. The first was a hypothesis
that American tribes could avoid European settlement of the Americas by sailing to the Old World, making contact
with other civilizations, trading technologies, and then securing a supply of horses. At first, most students simply
wanted to build a defense against colonizers (who were assumed to be Europeans). Once the Celts landed on the
shores of Nova Scotia in Dan's game, students realized that they would need to trade for technologies and horses to
survive. They learned that they could "reverse engineer" either Native American migrations across the Bering Strait
or Viking voyages across the North Atlantic (along Greenland) to reach other continents. As students played out
these experiments, a second understanding emerged: Such voyages were hypothetically possible, but gaining horses
or trading technologies alone were not enough to compete with the Europeans.

       The majority of basic concepts employed in Civilization III were new to students, and the most common
student practice was asking about game concepts. In one 15 minute period, students asked about: theology, steam
power, free artistry, coastal fortresses, mutual protection pacts, wealth, the corporation, embargoes, astronomy,
refining, espionage, and cavalry, as well as if threatening civilizations affected diplomatic relations. These questions
ranged from simples queries about terms (e.g., What is the Colossus?) or geographical facts (e.g., Is there oil in
Greenland?) to functional questions (e.g., What are the effects of democracy?) to procedural questions (e.g., How do
I improve trade?) to questions about the simulation (e.g., Does the game include World War I?). Who the Celts were
and where they came from was a common question for students playing in North America. Old World players asked
similar questions about the Babylonians, Greeks, or barbarian tribes (i.e. Mongols). A few students simply learned to
read or pronounce terms; others learned rudimentary definitions and could point to an illustrative example in history.
In a somewhat unanticipated outcome, students reported learning many geographical facts, such as where Egypt,

                                                         509
Nova Scotia, or Greenland are located. The partnering teachers were encouraged by the sincere questions that
students posed ­ a stark contrast to their typical school behavior. Rarely, however, did students ask "why" questions
about history itself. More often, teachers introduced historical narratives as explanatory devices to understand
games, such as the causes of World War I, which became tools for thinking about their games.

       Much of the impetus for learning came through failure. Failures in problem-solving ­ most notably cities in
disarray, barbarian attacks, poorly balanced economies, and ineffective uses of natural resources ­ caused students
to restart their games periodically. Early in the game, these failures were routine and predictable but caused a lot of
frustration. At this point, most students had not established any goals, did not understand the game controls, and
frequently perceived their failures as the result of bad game design rather than as a consequence of their own
actions. Consistent with classic attribution theory (Bandura 1976), many students perceived the causes of failure as
outside of themselves and became embittered by failure. Later, students began to understand the game system and
saw how failure was a consequence of their own decisions. In time, students could recap game events and developed
theories about why their civilization collapsed, such as a poor defense or economy. As Tony explained, "Playing the
game forces you to learn about the material. It actually forces you to learn about other civilizations in order to
survive." For Tony, this meant understanding who the Celts were, where they came from, what resources they were
likely to have. Andrea struggled to fend off the Greeks and subsequently explored Europe to learn where they
originated. Helping students construct narratives for unfolding play and devising strategies that brought knowledge
of geography or history as a tool for gameplay became a teacher's primary function.

       Failure drove recursive cycles of identifying problems, developing causal interpretations of events (such as
why a civilization grew slowly), devising solutions (possibly drawing from knowledge of history or geography),
implementing solutions, examining results, and repeating. Solutions to these problems became more complex as
students started perceiving issues (i.e. domestic happiness) as the result of more and more factors (i.e. available
luxuries, entertainment, luxuries, religion, and economics). There was a movement away from simple, one variable
solutions to problems (i.e. create entertainers to make        citizens happy) toward more complex   solutions   that
incorporated several variables as long-term success in the game demanded that students examine several underlying
game systems and devise solutions that leveraged the affordances of each. Restated, students realized that they could
needed to design elegant solutions that addressed multiple needs. As a result, by the end of the unit, students all
agreed that a major understanding was that "you can't separate geography from economics from politics."

       Knowing what natural and strategic resources were available was a common thread for most students, and
world history served as a tool for thinking about how resources would help them. The quest for resources turned
many students to examining South America, a continent that they knew little about. As a result, several students
spent days mapping South America and an interplay emerged between the joy of exploring a new world and learning
where resources were located. Tony reported that how geography and natural resources affected his civilization was
the most important thing he learned in the unit, stating, "I always knew that certain locations helped certain people
but with this (game) I have a better understanding of it."

       Powerful learning moments occurred outside of the game itself, when students reflected about the interplay
of history, geography, politics, and economics. As students prepared to present what they learned to other students,
they attempted to classify lessons that they learned by discipline. Because geography, politics, economics, and
history are all connected (in Civilization III as in life), it was difficult for them to discern where one domain began
and another ended. Tony found it impossible to talk about the importance of the Nile River without talking about
economics, which then had political implications. This became clearer as the class discussed amphibious warfare.

       Tony:            Could be bias...could be history and politics. In a way it's history...it allows
                        you to bombard other countries. But politics-wise you can demand stuff now.
       Researcher:      Unifying Africa made us powerful. Dwayne, where would you put that?
       Dwayne:          Politics and geography. I got all of these resources then I could trade them with
                        other countries. So it made my politics stronger.
       Tony:            It   makes   more  production.          Everyone    can  work   faster  and  more
                        efficiently...Well, in some ways, they're all related to each other. (Students nod)
       Researcher:      We could make that one thing we learned. How would you write that?

                                                           510
       Tony:            Well, money is the key... money is the root to everything. With money you can
                        save yourself from war, and that also means that politics...with money, that ties
                        everything together.

Tony argues that money relates all these factors, perhaps prodded by my encouragement to find a single unifying
theme, perhaps due to his own interpretations of the game, perhaps from his own personal beliefs. The class
discussed connections between geography and politics. The majority of our topics ­ amphibious warfare, luxuries,
geography, uniting Africa ­ were now in the middle of the chart connecting history, geography, and politics.

       Researcher:      One thing we learned is that history geography and politics are all related. Why?
       Tony:            Luxuries buys you money and money buys you everything. The right location
                        gives you luxuries gives you income more income gives you technology which
                        affects your politics. It all connects.
       Kent:            Geography    affects your     diplomacy  because  it   gets your   more  resources and
                        affects how they treat you.
       Tony:            Geography can affect the growth of your civilization.
       Dwayne:          It affects your war.

The game helped Tony see interconnections between geography, economics, and politics. His idea then spread
through the class. In closing interviews, he expounded on these relationships:

       Tony:            If you're next to the ocean, that's a good place for any city to be. It has food,
                        water, the   climate would     be moderate, and  that's   a  good   place for a city to
                        flourish. If you  have    luxuries around  water, that   brings    in trade ­ brings in
                        money that you can talk with other Civilizations. If you have enough money you
                        can buy a lot of things and you can sell a lot of things.

Reflecting on what they learned through the game drew students to system-level conclusions about the game and
about history. Tony then made a critical, materialist reading of the game, arguing that the game is ultimately about
the accumulation of wealth which is geographically driven. This kind of reading of the game is akin to developing a
Marxist, feminist, or "great man" theory of history.

       Many students played Civilization III as an historical simulation ­ particularly a colonial simulation game
and derived pleasure from comparing gameplay to history, affecting how learning that occurred. Although this
Civilization III scenario was not designed to be a colonial simulation per se, many students appropriated it as such,
beginning with their engagement   on  day 4   and     continuing through  their  fascination    with  the arrival of the
Europeans, or, for the Egyptian players, by their efforts to discover sailing technologies and find a route to the
Americas in order to expand. Turning Civilization III into a colonial simulation affected the kinds of questions
students asked, observations they made about their games, and the solutions they posited to problems. Students
mostly read their game events off of pre-existing notions of colonization or geography, expanding and modifying
their understandings of colonization in the process.

       Students' emergent understandings of factors behind colonization were an amalgamation of several factors.
In post-interviews students said that colonization was the result of a combination of several interacting factors (with
each student having his own particular take): population density, access to strategic resources (specifically horses),
relations with other civilizations, and access to global trade networks. Dan also included culture in his model of
colonization; Chris privileged geography more. Bill, who played as the Bantu learned that sub-Sahara Africa was
full of luxuries (ivory, gems) but lacking farmland and removed from global trade by the Sahara desert. Tony
derived particular pleasure in comparing his game to history. Tony spent the last few days sailing about, examining
how history played out in his world. Of particular interest to Tony was how isolated civilizations (i.e. Aborigines)
developed and how nomad populations thrived in remote islands and went undiscovered into the 19th century. Tony
deduced from these exercises that access to resources (farmable land and other natural resources) and geographical
proximity to other civilizations were critical factors in how a civilization developed.

                                                         511
Educational Implications
         This study suggests that games can be powerful tools for engaging learners, but that engagement is a
complex process of appropriation, interacting as a relation among individuals' goals, identities, the affordances of
the game, encompassing community cultures, and emergent social practices. In this case it was not until students
perceived that the game would allow them to explore power dynamics and potentially reverse history that the game
was appropriated. Whereas many educators (perhaps naively) assume that "games will engage students," in this
study at least, playing   Civilization   III was  at times  engaging,   and     at times frustrating (or  even uninteresting).
Students' perception    of  the  politics of  the   game   and  identities as   learners  were   critical components    in  this
appropriation process, as were local social patterns and emergent interpretations of the tool. Civilization III was
repurposed and reshaped by players in various ways, yet its affordances also affected classroom interactions.
         For most students, world history and geography became tools for playing their games, a stark contrast to
how history is frequently taught. Failure to understand basic facts (such as where the Celts originated) drove them to
learn. For students such as Tony, powerful systemic-level understandings emerged through gameplay, which he used
as tools for understanding history. It is critical to note that this game practice emerged only after Tony had played
for some 30 hours, and there were significant comparisons to be made between his gameplay and history. As such,
learning occurred through interpretive cycles of reading his gameplay off of history.              This learning was highly
interpretive, driven   by  his own   goals   and mediated    by classroom   discourse.      Finding more ways to integrate
historical texts as resources and allow students to develop representations of understanding might further mediate
gameplay away from purely learning about the simulation and toward understanding history.
References
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social-cognitive theory. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Barab, S.A. & Squire, K.D. (in press). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. To appear in The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences.
Barnett, M. Barab, S.A., Schatz, S., Warren, S. (2000). Designing a Community of Inquiry in an Undergraduate History Course:
         A Clash of Cultures. Paper presented at the 2000 Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
         New Orleans, LA.
Beck, I., McKeown, M. & Gromoll, E. (1989). Learning from social studies texts. Cognition and Instruction (6), 99-158.
Cobb, P., Stephan, M., McClain, K., & Gravemeijer, K. (2001). Participating in classroom mathematical practices. Journal for
         the Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 113-164.
Cordova, D. I., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Intrinsic motivation and the process of learning: Beneficial effects of contextualization,
         personalization, and choice. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 715-730.
De Carteau, M. (1984). General Introduction. The Practice of Everyday Life. Trans. Steven F. Rendail. Berkeley: University of
         California Press, 1984.
Diamond, J. (1999). Guns, germs, and steel: The fates of human societies. New York: Norton.
Downey M. T. & Levstick, L. S. (1991). Teaching and learning history. In Shaver, J. P., (Ed). Handbook of research on social
         studies teaching and learning. New York: Macmillan pp. 400-410.
Dunn, R. E., (2000). Constructing World History in the Classroom. ? In Stearns, P.N. Seixas, P., & Wineburg, S. (Eds.), Knowing
         teaching & learning history. New York: New York University Press.
Games-to-Teach   Team.  (2003).  Design  principles of next-generation  digital gaming  for education. Educational Technology,
         43(5), 17-33.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning. New York: Palgrave.
Greene, S. (1994). The problems of learning to think like a historian: Writing history in the culture of the classroom. Educational
         Psychologist, 29(2), 89-96.
Kolson, K. (1994). The Politics of City Planning Simulations. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Political
         Science Association, New York, NY, September 1-4, 1994.
Levstik, L. S., & Barton, K. C. (1997). Doing history: Investigating with children in elementary and middle schools. Mahwah,
         NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Loewen, J. W. (1995). Lies my teacher told me: Everything your American history textbook got wrong. New York: Simon &
         Schuster.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital Game-Based Learning. New York: McGraw Hill.
Siexas, P. (2000). Schweigen! die Kinder! Or, Does postmodern history have a place in the schools? In Stearns, P.N. Seixas, P.,
         & Wineburg, S. (Eds.), Knowing teaching & learning history: National and international Perspectives. New York:
         New York University Press.
Vansledright, B.  A. (1997/98).  On  the importance    of historical positionality to thinking about and  teaching history. The
         International Journal of Social Education, 12(2), 1-18.Wertsch, J. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University
         Press.
Wineburg, S. (2001). Historical thinking and other unnatural acts: Charting the future of teaching the past. Philadelphia: Temple
         University Press.

                                                             512
