                 Learning in Massively Multiplayer Online Games

                                              Constance A. Steinkuehler
                     112A Teacher Education Bldg., 225 North Mills St., Madison WI 53706
                                                 Tel: (608) 265.9817
                                             Email: steinkuehler@wisc.edu

        Abstract:  Given  their   increasing  domination    of the entertainment   industry  and wide  spread
        popularity  among     a wide   range  of populations,   massively  multiplayer    online videogames
        (MMOGs)     are  quickly      becoming   the  form  of  entertainment  and   a major   mechanism   of
        socialization. Researchers have taken notice, and educational MMOGs are now beginning to
        emerge; however, there is a paucity of research on the actual culture/cognition of MMOGameplay,
        despite its necessity for sound theory and viable design. This paper outlines an ongoing cognitive
        ethnography of a currently thriving MMOG. Using discourse analytic methods, this project is
        developing a "thick description" (Geertz, 1973) of naturally-occurring gameplay, paying particular
        attention to the forms of socially and materially distributed cognition that emerge, the learning
        mechanisms embedded within community practice, and the ways in which participation shapes
        and is shaped by the situated (on- and off-screen) identities of its members. After outlining the
        data collection and analysis methods used, I present an illustrative analysis of selected data and
        preliminary findings specific to learning within this new virtual space for play.

Massively Multiplayer Online Games?
        Imagine an entire 3D world online, complete with forests, cities, and seas. Now imagine it populated with
others from across the globe who gather in virtual inns and taverns, gossiping about the most popular guild or
comparing notes on the best hunting spots. Imagine yourself in a heated battle for the local castle, live opponents
from all over collaborating or competing with you. Imagine a place where you can be the brave hero, the kingdom
rogue, or the village sage, developing a reputation for yourself that is known from Peoria to Peking. Now imagine
that you could come home from school or work, drop your bookbag on the ground, log in, and enter that world any
day, any time, anywhere. Welcome to the world of massively multiplayer online gaming.

        Massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs) are highly graphical 2- or 3-D videogames played online,
allowing individuals, through their self-created digital characters or "avatars," to interact not only with the gaming
software (the designed environment of the game and the computer-controlled characters within it) but with other
players' avatars as well. These virtual worlds are persistent social and material worlds, loosely structured by open-
ended (fantasy) narratives, where players are largely free to do as they please ­ slay ogres, siege castles, barter
goods  in town, or shake  the   fruit out of trees.  They  are notorious  for their peculiar  combination of  designed
"escapist fantasy" yet emergent "social realism" (Kolbert, 2001): in a setting of wizards and elves, princes and
knights, people save for homes, create basket indices of the trading market, build relationships of status and
solidarity, and worry about crime. Such games are ripe for cultural/cognitive analysis of the social and material
practices attending them: Given their increasing domination of the entertainment industry, wide-spread and growing
popularity with people of all age groups, ethnicities, and economic classes, and purported addictive quality for those
who plug in (Jewels, 2002), MMOGs are quickly becoming the form of entertainment and a major mechanism of
socialization for young and old alike.

        MMOGaming is "one of the few unambiguously profitable uses of the Internet, other than pornography"
(Kolbert, 2001). Last year, the videogame industry made a reported $9.3 billion ­ more money than Hollywood box
office movies ($8.1 million). As more and more games go online, the gaming industry will soon out-profit both the
record industry ($14.3   billion) and  home  video  rentals ($19 billion) as  well  (Snider, 2002). The virtual worlds
created for such games are non-trivial. Thanks to out-of-game trading of in-game items, Norrath, the virtual setting
of the MMOG EverQuest, is the seventy-seventh largest economy in the real world, with a GNP per capita between
that of Russia and Bulgaria. One platinum piece, the unit of currency in Norrath, trades on real world exchange
markets higher than both the Yen and the Lira (Castronova, 2001).

                                                          521
       MMOGs are ubiquitous to contemporary pop culture, yet there is a paucity of research on the phenomena
as an important site for learning. Despite frequent public dismissals and indictments, videogames do constitute a
complex and nuanced set of multi-modal social and communicative practices, tied to particular communities and
consequential for membership and identity (Gee, 2003).    MMOGaming is participation in a discourse space, one
with fuzzy boundaries that expand with continued play: What is at first confined to the game alone soon spills over
into the virtual world beyond it (e.g., websites, chatrooms, email) and even life off-screen (e.g., telephone calls,
face-to-face meetings). The discourse communities these practices serve likewise expand from collections of in-
character playmates to real-world affinity groups. Understanding the forms of (voluntary) participation in complex
communities and environments such as MMOGs, where learning is the precursor to playing ­ if not the very same
thing ­ is crucial. Such virtual communities function as a major mechanism of enculturation for those engaged with
them: "Playing one's character(s) and living in [these virtual worlds] becomes an important part of daily life.     Since
much of the excitement of the game depends on having personal relationships and being part of [the] community's
developing politics and projects, it is hard to participate just a little" (Turkle, 1995, p. 184).

       Videogaming (let alone MMOGaming) is a nascent topic in educational research, yet the broader topic of
online virtual communities has a long history. A quick perusal of the proceedings of the International Conference of
the Learning Sciences (ICLS) over the past several years, let alone its sister organization Computer Supported
Collaborative Learning (CSCL), indicates the widespread interest in online communities and virtual worlds within
the field of educational research. This interest is hardly new: Online technologies provide new opportunities for
"anytime/anywhere" social interaction, and the number of innovative curricular designs that incorporate online
collaborative environments has been steadily increasing since such technology first emerged. Yet, as Lave and
Wenger (1991) argue, understanding the shape of learning in naturally occurring contexts and not just formal ones
(e.g., classrooms) is crucial if we are to forward educational theory and practice beyond the contexts we ourselves
contrive. Innovative initiates such as the Games-to-Teach project at MIT (Jenkins, Squire, & Tan 2003; Squire,
2003) or Stanford University's recent Media X "Gaming To Learn" Workshop are beginning to investigate how we
might leverage gaming technologies toward educational ends. Some projects, such as Barab's Quest Atlantis (Barab
et al, in press), have begun using MMOGs as sites for formal learning. However, before designing virtual learning
environments that might capitalize on MMOGs' capacity for "retribalizing" people across time and place, we ought
to investigate more naturally occurring, self-sustaining indigenous virtual cultures so that our theory might be a
more accurate reflection of them and our practice a better reflection on them in days to come.

Research Questions
       This ongoing research project aims to establish a basis and beginning for just such work by examining the
Discourse (Gee, 1999) of MMOGaming ­ how participation in an MMOG is constituted through language and
practice both within the game (e.g., virtual social interaction and joint activity) and beyond (e.g., the creation of
written game-related narratives and websites). Four core questions lay at the center of this investigation: (1) What
are the social and material practices of MMOGaming? Specifically, (a) what does participation on the individual
level look like (e.g., what is the shape of a game day)? and (b) what are the routine social and material practices that
constitute MMOGame play, both within the actual game space and beyond? (2) What does it mean to be literate in
this social space? Which is to ask: What forms of participation mark community membership in such settings?
Which practices are valued? (3) How does one become a member of this community?                     In other words, (a) what
means for learning are embedded not in the game as designed but rather in the community practice of those who
inhabit it? and (b) what does an individual trajectory of learning look like? And finally, (4) what import does
participation in this community have for the situated (on- and off-screen) identities of its members? All four core
questions are approached from a perspective that focuses on the ways in which cognition is socially and materially
distributed ­ a perspective most now call, for the sake of simplicity, the Learning Sciences.

Cognition as (Inter)action
       From a Learning Sciences perspective, cognition is (inter)action in the social and material world.            This
body of theory and research includes work in activity theory (e.g., Engestrom, Miettinen, & Punamaki, 1999),
d/Discourse theory (Gee, 1999), distributed cognition (e.g., Hutchins, 1995), ecological psychology (e.g., Gibson,
1979/1986), ethnomethodology (e.g., Garfinkel, 1967), mediated action (e.g., Wertsch, 1998), situated learning (e.g.,
Lave, 1988; Lave & Wenger, 1991), sociocultural theory (e.g., Vygotsky, 1978), and situativity theory (e.g., Greeno,
& Moore, 1993). Despite its vast internal diversity, the Learning Sciences share a focus on interactive systems of
activity of which the individual is only one part. Cognition, from this perspective, cannot be adequately accounted

                                                        522
for by computational models of structures and processes "in the head"; rather, one must look to the intact activity
systems in which the individual participates ­ systems which necessarily include social relationships, physical and
temporal contexts, symbolic and material resources (such as artifacts and tools), and historical change.   Within such
systems, cognition is "a complex social phenomenon... distributed ­ stretched over, not divided among ­ mind,
body, activity and culturally organized settings (which include other actors)" (Lave, 1988, p.1).      Of interest, then,
are the interactional structures of such social and material systems, not structures in the individual mind per se.

        Through participation in a community of practice, an individual comes to understand the world (and
themselves) from the perspective of that community. Here, semantic interpretation is taken as part of what people do
in the lived-in world; it arises through interaction with social and material resources in the context of a community
with its own participant structures, values, and goals (Greeno & Moore, 1993).    For example, an individual becomes
attuned to a particular object's constraints and affordances through the regular pattern of interaction that individual
has with  it, but this regular pattern of interaction is shaped      by the individual's    membership  in a particular
community for whom the object has meaning, usefulness, and relevance for a given task with a given (individual or
collective) goal. Such activities have direct import for the identity of the individual.   Who one is determines, and is
reflexively determined by, one's participations in various communities (Gee, 1999; Greeno, 1997).        "A community
of practice transforms nature into culture; it posits circumscribed practices for its members, possible ways of being
human, possible ways to grasp the world--apprehended first with the body, then with tools and symbols--through
participation in social practices in relationship with other people. Knowing is this grasping that is at the same time a
way of participating and relating." (Packer & Goicoechea, 2000, p. 234)      Changes in knowing become changes in
being: through participation in a given Discourse community (Gee, 1999), an individual does more than merely
acquire and reorganize symbolic knowledge about the world; she is ontologically transformed by it.

        Learning, from this perspective, is progress along "trajectories of participation" (Greeno, 1997) and growth
of identity within a given community of practice (Gee, 1999).        Thus, accounts of how an individual interacts with
their material and social contexts, and how these interactions change over time, replace accounts of individual
knowledge construction occurring "in the head." It is the gradual transformation of an individual from "legitimate
peripheral participant" (Lave & Wenger, 1991) to central member of a community through apprenticeship and
increased participation in values community   practices.  At the      aggregate level of   the community,  this learning
process takes the form of an emergent reorganization of the patterns of member participation coupled with a growth
of shared knowledge through changing practices and artifacts; at the individual level, however, it is ontological in
nature, "a process of coming to be, of forging identities in activity in the world" (Lave, 1988).

Data Collection & Research Methods
Context of the Research
        The primary context of study in this research is an MMOG entitled Lineage, a game set during medieval
times, featuring elves, knights, mages (magicians), and prince/sses, in which guilds or "blood pledges" vie for
control of various castles within the virtual kingdom (see Figure 1). Although several leading MMOG's on the
market are included peripherally in this research as a means for validating inferences and checking generalizability,
the game Lineage was chosen as the central site for investigation based on its success on the American market
(Xander, 2002) and its purported depth of play (Lafferty, 2002; Warso, 2002).

        Lineage's reputation for "depth of play" stems from its complex "blood pledge system," a system tightly
coupled to both the guiding narrative and the virtual world's economic system. "Like chess, the prince or princess is
frail and must be protected" (Foster, 2001), therefore they must compete with one another to recruit other classes of
characters into their pledge as both protection and armed forces for castles siege. Within- and between-pledge
activities are the yarn from which Lineage history and narrative is woven: Pledges (and individual players) quickly
gain reputations over daily affairs, wars break out over who said/did what to whom, alliances are made and broken,
and stories of intrigue perpetually fill the air (or, more specifically, the chat window). Such pledge politics drive the
entire kingdom's economic system:      Each castle in the kingdom collects taxes from the local area, allowing the
currently holder to set the local tax rate and distributes castle income as she sees fit. Yet, her decisions have political
consequences; for example, local village members can revolt should the tax rate be set to high. "After joining a
[pledge], players develop a pride and loyalty that is unique to the multiplaying world.     Until now, online games had
not been designed to wholly incorporate players' actions into the over-arcing story of the game... The potential for
ego boosting and bashing, epic [pledge] feuds, and history-making battles is so great for Lineage that it is hard to

                                                       523
imagine" (Murphy, 2001). The end result is a complex social space of affiliations and disaffiliations, constructed
largely out of shared (or disparate) social and material practices ­ ways of behaving, communicating, interacting,
and valuing that are "forms of life" (albeit virtual) through which individuals enact not just their character class, be
it elf or princess, but the "kinds of people" (Hacking, 1986) that they construe themselves to be and that others can
recognize. Gamers call this depth of play; from a Learning Sciences perspective, it is shared Discourse.

Data Collection: Cognitive Ethnography
       Given this Learning  Sciences perspective,    the proper unit of study    for work  on cognition     is not the
individual "head" but rather the intact interactional structures of social and material activity. As such, the proper
method of research is cognitive ethnography (Hutchins, 1995): a "thick description" (Geertz, 1973) of the socially
and materially distributed cognitive practices that constitute the game. As with most ethnographies, the researcher
participates overtly in the daily life of the game (to date, in this study, for a period of over 19 months), observing
what goes on within the virtual world, taking digital video recording and fieldnotes, listening to what is said, asking
questions, and generally "collecting whatever data are available to throw light on the issues that are the focus of the
research." (Hammersley & Atkinson, 1986, p.1) From such data, patterns of routine cognitive/cultural activities can
be discerned, (answering research question 1 above). Moreover, because meaning is "not in anyone's head, but
embedded in the history and social practices of the group" (Gee, 1999, p. 105), answers to the remaining research
questions, such as what and where learning occurs and what it means for the identity of participants in the gaming
culture, are inaccessible without such groundwork. In addition to routine observation and fieldnotes, informants of
varying ages, ethnicities, socio-economic statuses, and levels of expertise/social status within the community are
recruited and interviewed repeatedly in unstructured (e.g. informal conversation within the game), semi-structured
(e.g. telephone interviews about particular topics of interest), and structured (e.g. repertory grid interviews, Fransella
& Bannister, 1977) formats. Finally, community documents (such as player-authored user manuals, fan sites, and
fan fiction) and transcripts from game-related discussion boards and chatrooms are also collected in order to capture
gameplay not only within the virtual game space itself (between login and logoff) but also beyond.

Analytic Method
       The various theories of mind and meaning embedded in different strands of the Learning Sciences are each
useful for gaining insight on different aspects of cognition as (inter)action in the social and material world. In
particular, this research draws on Gee's d/Discourse theory and method of analysis (1999) as a tool for answering
those research questions whose answers are beyond the purview of basic cognitive ethnography. Understanding
which and how particular social and material practices mark membership in the MMOGaming community (question
2) and how participation in those practices shape, and are shaped by, participants' identities within and beyond the
game (question 4) requires understanding the situated meanings individuals construct (not just the information they
process), the definitive role of communities in that meaning, and the inherently ideological nature of both. Coming
out of the New Literacy Studies (e.g., Gumperz, 1982; Halliday, 1978; Kress, 1985; Street, 1984), d/Discourse
theory provides a way to maintain the Learning Sciences' focus on intact interactional structures while, at the same
time, foregrounding the role of d/Discourse (language-in-use / "kinds of people") in such interactions. I am keenly
interested in socially distributed cognition and its role in learning; thus, a theory of language more nuanced than the
typical transmission container model (cf. Vera & Simon, 1993) is crucial to developing any viable account of the
situated meanings people construct and the definitive role of communities in that meaning-making process.

       Therefore, data collected from the ongoing cognitive ethnography are analyzed using discourse analysis
(Fairclough 1995; Gee, 1999; Gumperz 1982; Halliday, 1978): "the analysis of language as it is used to enact
activities, perspectives, and identities" (Gee, 1999, p. 4-5). Such analyses focus on the configurations of linguistic
cues used in spoken or written utterances in order to invite certain interpretive practices ­ for example, word choice,
foregrounding/backgrounding  syntactic and     prosodic   markers, cohesion      devices, discourse      organization,
contextualization signals, and thematic organization. Configurations of such devices signal how the language of the
particular utterance is being used to construe reality in terms of: (1) semiotics, what symbol systems are privileged,
how they construe the relevant context (the world), and on what epistemological basis; (2) the material world, what
objects, places, times, and people are relevant and in what way; (3) sociocultural reality, who is who and what their
relationships with one another are, including the implied identity of the speaker/writer and who the audience is
construed to be, all in terms of affect, status, solidarity, and (shared or disparate) values and knowledge; (4)
activities, what specific social activities the speaker and her interlocutors are taken to be engaged in; (5) politics,
what social goods are at stake and how they are and "ought" to be distributed; and finally (6) coherence, what past
and future interactions are relevant to the current communication (Gee, 1999). Particular configurations of linguistic

                                                      524
cues prompt specific situated meanings of these six aspects of "reality," meanings which evoke and exploit specific
cultural models which are indelibly linked to particular Discourses, allowing speakers and hearers to display and
recognize the "kind of people" each is purported to be.     Through microanalysis of how group members' utterances
construe the world in particular ways and not others, we are able to infer the cultural models and concomitant
Discourse(s) as play. With such analyses comes explication of the full range of social and material practices with
which they are inextricably linked, since the meaning of those practices is done with and through language-in-use.
Through such discourse-analysis-based ethnographic work, then, we capture the sense human beings make of the
social and material world and their (inter)action with it ­ in other words, we finally get at the phenomena of
cognition itself, in all its unbounded, situated, distributed, social, and ideological messiness.

Apprenticeship into Doing Being a Lineage Elf
        Before discussing some of the project's preliminary findings on learning in MMOG environments, I want
to ground  the previous  discussion of   data collection    and  analysis  methods with   an      example  of the kind of
ethnographic data collected and ways in which discourse analytic procedures can be leveraged to unpack what is
happening in such activities. The following (semi-raw, semi-processed) transcript and subsequent analysis is an
example illustrating the kinds of learning built into Lineage not as designed object but rather as a social practice.
Discourses such  as   those constituting MMOGaming         are not mastered   by overt  instruction    but rather through
apprenticeship (Gee, 1999; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Tharp & Gallimore, 1988). Gamers who have already mastered
the social and material practices requisite to game play enculturate, through scaffolded and supported interactions,
newer gamers   who  lack such  knowledge   and skill.     The following excerpt, transcribed1 from digital videodata
collected during the summer of 2002, illustrates this process In it, a rather "newbie" female elf named JellyBean
(level 10, played by the researcher) and a more experienced female elf named Myrondonia2 (level 25) jointly engage
in the routine elven activity of hunting for mithril.

        First, a bit of context: Prior to this exchange, JellyBean ran into a bit of trouble with a monster ("mop") in
an area called the Elven Forest. While making her escape, she cried for help. In response, a female elf named
Myrondonia came to help. Realizing that JellyBean was a newbie, Myrondonia offered to take her hunting for
mithril, a requisite raw material for many elven goods.    Mithril is a rare drop from monsters in all areas except one:
the Elven Dungeons.   Two kinds of mops inhabit the dungeons: undead zombies, which frequently drop mithril, and
orcs, which rarely drop anything of any value. Orcs are herd monsters: Should you hit a single one of them, they rest
will gang up on you and bludgeon you to death.          The following transcript is a full account of how Myrondonia
apprenticed JellyBean into the elven social practice of gathering mithril.

                                         Figure 1.     The apprenticeship of JellyBean.

                                                           525
       JellyBean and Myrondonia are walking through the Elven Dungeons, in search of zombies to kill
       for their associated mithril drops. The two are discussing the glut of dangerous orcs in the area.
       JellyBean:       I'm scared I will click on one just walking
       Myrondonia:      I know a secret
       JellyBean:       what?
       Myrondonia:      hold your mouse key down
       I try out this navigation strategy, clicking down when the cursor is over empty ground, causing my
       avatar JellyBean to move to the screen location just clicked.
       Myrondonia:      wait [meaning, don't release the mouse key yet]
       I do as instructed, causing JellyBean to move fluidly across screen.
       JellyBean:       wow
       Myrondonia:      there you go
       JellyBean:       that's so cool!
       A zombie rounds the corner into the room. JellyBean shoots and kills it. It falls to the ground.
       Myrondonia:      another rule
       JellyBean:       ok
       Myrondonia:      quickly use your mouse cursor over the dead bodies
       Myrondonia:      make sure they didn't drop
       I run my cursor over the zombie corpse as instructed and find a piece of mithril on the ground.
       JellyBean:       oh wow
       JellyBean:       I never new that
       Myrondonia:      sometimes it's sneaky
       Myrondonia:      you don't want to lose a mithril
       A zombie walks into the room and attacks Myrondonia. Meanwhile, JellyBean is walking over to
       pick up the mithril on the ground from their last kill.
       Myrondonia:      no
       Myrondonia:      take this one [the zombie hitting her]
       Myrondonia:      try to look for zombies & hit them
       JellyBean does as instructed. The two continue the hunt, moving into a corridor. Another zombie
       approaches; JellyBean kills it and grabs the mithril on the ground.
       Myrondonia:      good
       The two continue their way to the end of the corridor. An unknown elf named IrisArker passes by.
       Myrondonia:      another rule
       JellyBean:       yes?
       IrisArker:       ^_^ [smiley face gesture while walking by]
       Myrondonia:      If you see someone go one way, go the other
       Myrondonia:      hi [to IrisArker]
       Myrondonia:      we are all here for mithril

       Throughout this episode, Myrondonia, the more knowledgeable elf, apprentices JellyBean into a highly
valued and routinely engaged-in practice in all the classic ways: She engages JellyBean in joint participation in a
meaningful activity with a mutually understood and valued goal.    She scaffolds her students by modeling successful
performance, focusing her attention on key material, social, and contextual aspects that are crucial to its success
(such as attending first to the incoming and attacking zombies, second to the busywork of collecting one's mithril),
entrusting more and  more  control over    the  ongoing  actions   to the apprenticeship, and allowing      numerous
opportunity for practice and situated feedback. Information, such as how to navigate the virtual territory or what to
do should another mithril-hunting elf cross your path cross, is not orated prior to actually engaging in joint work.
Rather, the information is given "just in time," always in the context of the goal-driven activity that its actually
useful for ­ and made meaningful by ­ and always at a time when it can be immediately put to use.

       However, more is happening here than mere training in a routine practice. Using discourse analysis, we can
tease out how Myrondonia construes various aspects of the game world ­ here, most notably, the political or
ideological aspect ­ what social goods are taken to be at stake and how they "ought" to be distributed. Myrondonia
is socializing JellyBean into certain ways of being in and understanding the virtual world, ways that are tied to
particular values. This is most apparent toward the end of the excerpt, when Myrondonia explains what to do should
you run into another elf during a mithril hunt: you go a different way. Why? Because the elves in that particular area

                                                       526
can all safely be presumed to be there for the same thing: mithril. By avoiding the same areas, one can display
oneself as "people like us" (like Myrondonia), the kind that display courtesy by not stealing drops, by sharing
hunting territories, and, yes, even by responding to newbie elf's cries for help. Two distinct but related things are
being taught here: one is the social practice, the other is the kind of person/elf Myrondonia wants JellyBean to be.

Preliminary Findings
        This research project is not complete; however, preliminary data analysis offers some suggestive answers
for the research questions outlined above. In terms of (3a) the mechanisms or means for learning embedded in the
community practices of those who inhabit the MMOGaming space, several patterns consistently emerge. As the
previous excerpt illustrates, newcomers learn the game through full participation in genuine game play with more
knowledgeable/skilled others.   You not only "have to play to learn," (Turkle, 1995, p. 70), but you also have to play
with others if you ever hope to develop genuine expertise.     During collaboration, the focus is on the activity, with
information  (e.g., manuals,   guidebooks,   websites)  playing only a   secondary and    supporting role (unlike    most
classrooms). There is early over-learning -- extended practice coupled with immediate feedback from both the
game system (e.g., error-produced death) and other participants (e.g., "Dude, that rocked.") -- and one's progress
and accomplishments are clearly represented in some way, if only by a displayed increased level of experience and
its concomitant increase in social status.  Failure functions as feedback: What you do risk by failing is minimal and
easily recovered (cf. the high stakes testing practices implemented by the Bush administration under the No Child
Left Behind Act), particularly in the early stages of game play, and performing at the outer edge of one's current
competency, which seems to sustain engagement (cf. notion of flow, Csikszentmihalyi, 1993; zone of proximal
development, Vygotsky, 1978) and to constantly pull one forward into more complex and demanding tasks, is highly
valued and socially promoted (challenging yourself earns you bragging rights as "hardcore," regardless of level).
From the very outset of game play, the individual engages in the virtual social and material world as a complex, ill
structured, dynamic,  and    evolving system,   not some  watered   down  version  of it.  Finally, there is a socially-
sanctioned precociousness and wonder, that simple secular instinct that provides motivation for scientific inquiry
(Fisher, 1999): Gamers transform design curiosities into empirical questions by collecting data (in spreadsheets),
building mathematical models based on that data, and then placing those models in competition with one another to
see which can most accurately predict (read: exploit) the system (i.e. minimaxing). Little wonder parents have to
worry about addition to gaming (which is, by definition, learning) but never to deskwork.

Implications
        Serious commendations are due to those educational technology designers who are leveraging gaming
technologies  toward   educational    ends. By  far,  videogames  (MMOGs      in particular)  are  the most    important
entertainment media in the lives of the millennial generation -- those who have grown up on the PlayStation rather
than Atari 2600 (or to go back even further, your basic pinball). However, two caveats are needed. First, we need to
better understand what contemporary informal online learning environments do well and do miserably if we want to
leverage those features that are productive and eschew those that are not. Designing in the dark is neither efficient
nor  advantageous.   We   know   that kids  are thoroughly  engaged   by  MMOGs     and   some/many    of us   are fairly
convinced that what they do there is far from cognitively trivial. However, without the kind of basic ethnographic
work  conducted     here, it will  remain   difficult to tease  out what  practices,  understandings,   and     identities
MMOGaming recruits from those who play and whether or not they are portable, plausible, or productive. Second,
this research suggests    that the mechanisms    for  learning  entailed in gameplay   in  virtual cultures/worlds    are
contingent on the game not only as a designed object but also as a social practice. This moral of this story is a long
familiar one for Learning Science researchers: Designing learning environments is not merely a matter of getting the
curricular material right but is crucially also a matter of getting the situated, emergent community structures and
practices "right." In this case, unless we are designing appropriate social structures to accompany such technological
systems (a feat which may very well not always be possible, given their situated and emergent nature), we cannot
easily leverage the learning mechanisms within MMOGs for play in creating MMOGs for instruction. Still, an
understanding of the cultural/cognitive structures at play in online worlds might one day improve our understanding
of those that emerge in life beyond them.

Endnotes
(1)  The transcript excerpts are verbatim save changes for ease of reading, such as expansions of truncated words,
     typographical corrections, and supplementation of dietic references with appropriate referents (in brackets).
(2)  I am using pseudonyms in place of all actual avatars names in order to protect (virtual) confidentiality.

                                                          527
References
Barab, S., Thomas, M. Dodge, T., Carteaux, R. & Tuzun, H. (in press). Making learning fun: Quest Atlantis, a game
        without guns. To appear in Educational Technology Research & Development.
Castronova, E.   (2001). Virtual worlds: A first-hand account of market and society on the cyberian frontier.    CESifo
        Working Paper Series No. 618.       Center for Economic Studies and Ifo Institute for Economic Research,
        California State University, Fullerton, December 2001.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1993). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: Harper Perennial.
Engestrom, Y., Miettinen, R., & Punamaki, R.-L. (1999). Perspectives on activity theory.         Cambridge: Cambridge
        University Press.
Fairclough N. (1995).  Critical discourse analysis. London: Longman.
Fisher, P. (1999). Wonder, the Rainbow, and the Aesthetics of Rare Experiences. South Bend, IN: Saint Augustine's
        Press.
Foster, M. (2001, June 1). Lineage The Blood Pledge by NCSoft. Wewp!, www.wewp.com.
Fransella F. & Bannister, D. (1977). A manual for repertory grid technique .    London: Academic Press.
Garfinkel, H.  (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology.   Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Gee, J. P. (1999).  An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method.      New York: Routledge.
Gee, J. P. (2003).  What videogames have to teach us about learning and literacy. New     York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Geertz, C. (1973).  The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Gibson, J.  J. (1986).   The  ecological  approach    to visual perception.     Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.   (Original work
        published 1979).
Greeno, J. G. & Moore, J. L. (1993).  Situativity and symbols: Response to Vera and Simon.        Cognitive Science, 17,
        49-59.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong questions.   Educational Researcher, 26(1), 5-17.
Gumperz, J. J. (Ed.) (1982). Language and social identity.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hacking, I.   (1986). Making up people.     In T.   C. Heller, M.  Sosna,    &  D. E. Wellbery  (Eds.), Reconstructing
        individualism, (pp. 222-236). Stanford CA: Stanford University Press.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978).  Language as a social semiotic.  London: Edward Arnold.
Hammersley, M. & Atkinson, P. (1986). Ethnography: Principles in practice (Vol. II). London: Routledge.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Jenkins, H. Squire, K. & Tan, P. (2003). You can't bring that game to school!: Designing Supercharged! To appear
        in B. Laurel (Ed.) Design Research: Methods and Perspectives. Cambridge, MIT Press.
Jewels (2002, December 9).   But in the end, they're still nothing more than video games.  Jive Magazine.
Kolbert, E. (2001).  Pimps and Dragons.   The New Yorker, May 28, 2001.
Kress, G. (1985). Linguistic processes in sociocultural practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lafferty, M.   (2002, October 24). The power behind the Aden throne reveals the world of Lineage. GameZone,
        www.gamezone.com.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice. Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991).    Situated learning:    Legitimate  peripheral    participation. Cambridge:  Cambridge
        University Press.
Murphy, M. (2001, December 12). Lineage: The Blood Pledge, IGN, www..ign.com.
Packer, M. J. & Goicoechea, J.    (2000).  Sociocultural and constructivist theories of learning: Ontology, not just
        epistemology.    Educational Psychologist, 35(4), 227-241.
Snider, M. (2002). Where movies end, games begin.      USA TODAY, May 23, 2002
Squire, K. (2003). Video games in education. International Journal of Intelligent Simulations and Gaming, 2(1).
Street, B. (1984). Literacy in theory and practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tharp, R. G. & Gallimore, R.  (1998). Rousing Minds to life.    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Turkle, S.  (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York: Touchstone.
Vera, A. H. & Simon, H. A.   (1993). Situated action: A symbolic interpretation.    Cognitive Science, 17, 7-48.
Vygotsky L. S.   (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Warso, J.  (2002, July 14). Lineage: The Blood Pledge.   Gamers Pulse, www.gamerspulse.com.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998).   Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.
Xander (2002).   Lineage: The Blood Pledge.  Stratics Central, www.stratics.com.

                                                          528
