                          Supporting Middle School Students Use
                   Nonlinear Science Texts in an Inquiry Classroom

                                       Agnes Stylianou & Sadhana Puntambekar
                                           Cyprus College, Nicosia, Cyprus
                                     Tel: 00357-22713164, Fax: 00357-22590539
                                              Email: agni@cycollege.ac.cy

        Abstract: The goal of this study was to investigate whether supporting sixth grade students to
        monitor and regulate their navigation behavior while reading from nonlinear science texts would
        lead  to   better navigation and   learning. Metanavigation     support   in the form of prompts   was
        provided    to groups   of students who   used  a system     called CoMPASS      to complete a   design
        challenge.   The   metanavigation     prompts  aimed   at encouraging     students  to understand   the
        affordances of the navigational aids in CoMPASS and use them to guide their navigation. The
        results suggested that providing metanavigation support enabled the groups to make coherent
        transitions among the text units. Findings also revealed that reading comprehension, presence of
        metanavigation support and prior domain knowledge significantly predicted students' individual
        understanding of science principles and the relationships among them.

        In recent years there is a push in science education to encourage students learn science in interactive
inquiry-based environments (Blumenfield, Soloway, Marx, Krajcik, Guzdial, & Palinscar, 1991). Part of the inquiry
process is to examine different sources of information to see what is already known and plan investigations.
Researchers have expressed the need for development of science resources that will support the interactive nature of
science and allow for exploration of unique investigation paths based on students' learning goals (Puntambekar &
Stylianou, 2002; Wallace et al., 1998). Digital texts which are based on hypertext and hypermedia technologies
provide the students with a more active role than is possible with traditional textbooks (Rouet & Levonen, 1996).
However,    recent studies  have   shown   that students  lack metacognitive      knowledge   and skills to  use digital
information resources (Soloway & Wallace, 1997). Students tend to focus on finding answers on a specific page
instead of constructing the answers to the questions that drove their explorations by synthesizing and evaluating
information from different resources. According to Soloway and Wallace (1997) students are accustomed to the
textbook model and this mindset "transcends technology".

        One might argue that navigating the web requires metacognitive skills because there is a plethora of links
than can lead to multiple paths in the hyperspace. Learners need to make frequent and important decisions about the
selection of relevant links that will enable them to pursue their learning goals. They need to engage in cognitive
monitoring, to slow down and take a moment to consider various paths and question why they are considering some
paths over others (Charney, 1994; Rouet, 1992). Our studies in middle school science classrooms have suggested
that even when learners use nonlinear science texts that have been designed to show relationships among text units,
they still need  a metacognitive   ability to relate navigation   to their  goals and to be  able to visit related units
(Puntambekar    &  Stylianou,   2002). Classroom     implementations    of   an interactive  system  called  CoMPASS
(Puntambekar, Stylianou & Hübscher, 2003; Puntambekar, Stylianou & Jin, 2001) suggested that students needed
support to make connections among the science principles they were reading even though the system provided a
visual interface to show such relationships. Teacher support enabled students to focus on their goals and bridge their
real-world  experiences    with the  conceptual   knowledge    in    CoMPASS      by posing   questions  and providing
explanations (Puntambekar & Stylianou, 2002). However, teacher's support did not help navigation per se. Thus, we
believe that supporting middle school students to use a combination of reading comprehension and metacognitive
strategies (i.e., monitoring and self-regulation) as well as make thoughtful navigational decisions while using
nonlinear science texts may lead to a richer text understanding. We define one's awareness of and ability to utilize
strategies for enhancing rich understanding of the domain while navigating a nonlinear text as metanavigation
(Stylianou & Puntambekar, 2003).

        Literature suggests that there might be other factors that relate to student learning while interacting with
nonlinear  texts even   when  support  is  given. Reading   comprehension       research suggests  being   aware of the

                                                          529
metacognitive strategies that learners employ while reading can influence how well they plan and monitor their
understanding from traditional texts (Brown, Armbruster & Baker, 1985; Jacobs & Paris, 1987). Prior research has
also demonstrated the importance of prior knowledge for learning from traditional texts (Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978).
According to McNamara (2002), readers need background knowledge to "fill contextual gaps within the text and to
develop a global understanding" of the text. Even when reading from nonlinear texts, learners who are highly
knowledgeable about a particular subject area have been found to be much more efficient at finding relevant
information than those with low or moderate background knowledge (Rouet, 1992).

        In  this paper  we  discuss  our framework    of  providing metanavigation prompts  to compel sixth grade
students to monitor and regulate their navigation behavior in order to accomplish their learning goal. We then
discuss the lessons learned as we used this framework in a real classroom setting in an effort to understand how
groups of learners use nonlinear texts to find science information while engaging in inquiry-based activities and
what kind of support they need in order to gain a rich understanding of science principles. The specific research
questions we are exploring are:
   ·    Does    metanavigation   support lead   to different navigation behavior? How  does it influence students'
        navigation paths?
   ·    Given the support, what factors might affect student learning?

Integrating CoMPASS in the Science Classroom
        This study was a part of the spring 2003 implementation of CoMPASS in sixth grade science classes.
During this implementation students used CoMPASS to find information and read about the science concepts and
principles that  were   involved in the  unit  of `Simple Machines'.  We  developed  a design-based curriculum in
collaboration with two science teachers where students undertook different task challenges for each of the six simple
machines (lever, wheel and axle, pulley, inclined plane, wedge, and screw) as well as an overall design challenge
that was adapted from the Learning by Design TM Curriculum at Georgia Tech. This study focused on one challenge,
the `pulley challenge'.

        CoMPASS is a science hypertext system that has two tightly integrated modes of representation: a textual
representation of the content units and a visual representation in a form of concept maps. The maps in CoMPASS
show the local subnetwork of the domain and where the links lead to, enabling readers to see the relationships
among the text units (concepts) and make thoughtful decisions of what paths to follow without getting lost or
confused. The maps also allow for exploration and support students to take multiple investigation paths based on
their learning goals at any particular time.

        The study involved four sessions of forty-five minutes that were conducted during the science class period.
The first session involved an assessment of students' prior domain knowledge through a pre- science knowledge test
and an assessment of students' metacognitive awareness and perceived use of reading strategies through the MARSI
instrument (Mokhtari & Reichard, 2002). The second session started with the presentation of the task. The task was
a design challenge that required students to build a pulley device that would lift a bottle of water that weighed 600
grams off a table using the minimum amount of effort. Students were allowed some time to think about the
requirements of the task and write down their initial ideas. Then, they were asked to collaborate in groups to plan
their quest of finding information to solve the challenge. Groups were asked to read the information that was
available for pulleys in the `Simple Machines' unit in CoMPASS. Groups used CoMPASS for approximately
twenty-five minutes. The second session ended with a reading comprehension assessment task. During the third
session students were asked to continue their quest of searching information about pulleys in CoMPASS and finalize
their pulley designs. The groups in the metanavigation support condition received metanavigation prompts in a
written format to guide their exploration in CoMPASS. The fourth session included an assessment of students'
individual science knowledge through a concept map test.

        One hundred thirteen sixth graders in six science classes participated in the study. The students were from
different ethnic backgrounds and academic abilities. Approximately 47% (53 participants) of the sample were girls
and 53% (60 participants) were boys. Each class was randomly assigned to one of two conditions (metanavigation
support, no support). Students collaborated in groups of three or four while using CoMPASS to solve the design
challenge. The metanavigation support condition included 12 groups of students and the no support condition 15
groups.

                                                          530
Intervention
         Metanavigation support in the form of prompts was provided to the groups in the metanavigation support
condition to encourage them to monitor and regulate their navigation strategies in order to gain a rich understanding
of science principles while reading from hypertext. Metanavigation support was based on two indices that were
informed by group's navigation path while interacting with the CoMPASS system. Our framework for providing
metanavigation support was inspired by the artificial intelligence in education literature especially the guidelines
that are provided in the development of intelligent tutors (del Soldato & du Boulay, 1995). Below we discuss this
framework in detail.

         Log file information that captured groups' navigation path enabled us to assess their navigation  behavior
and decide what metanavigation prompts would be given to each group. Computer log files recorded information
about what science concepts the groups explored while using CoMPASS, how much time they spent on each
concept and what navigation tools they used to make their navigation choices. Two main indices from group's
navigation path informed our decision of what type of metanavigation support each group needed: navigation
choices and transitions among text units. Specifically we were interested in whether or not the group members had
chosen to read about the science principles that were relevant to their learning goal and whether the transitions they
made among the text units that were available in the hypertext environment would enable them to gain a rich
understanding of the domain. For example, did the group make coherent transitions while reading about science
concepts? Coherent transitions were defined as the transitions among closely related concepts to the ones they had
chosen. Considering the binary state of each of these categories, we could have four different cases, described in the
"metanavigation support rules' cells of Table 1, as well as various combinations.

Table 1. Conditions for providing metanavigation prompts

                                                 Metanavigation support rules
                       Navigation    If choice of non goal-related concepts fi
                       Choices       encourage goal-related navigation
                                     If goal-related navigation fi
                                     encourage integration of science knowledge

                       Transitions   If transitions are not coherent fi
                                     encourage regulation of navigation behavior to make
                                     coherent transitions between text units while reading
                                     If transitions are coherent fi
                                     encourage integration of science knowledge

         For example, let us consider the situation of a group that chose to read about science principles that were
not important for solving the pulley challenge (i.e. kinetic energy, potential energy and power) and did not read
about goal-related science principles such as mechanical advantage, distance and force. The log file information also
indicated when    the group made    incoherent transitions  among       science   principles while navigating.  The
metanavigation prompts that were given to the group encouraged students to think about their goal and use the
concept maps to make thoughtful decisions of what paths to follow. It was pointed out that the concept maps could
help students make connections and decide what science principles were related to what they were reading at any
particular time.

Data Sources and Measures
         Multiple sources of group and individual data were collected over four classroom sessions. Measures
included  student's  individual performance in a pre- science knowledge      test, the Metacognitive   Awareness  of
Reading Strategies Inventory (MARSI), a reading comprehension test and a concept map test. Process measures
included log file information that captured group navigation paths during the use of CoMPASS.

                                                      531
        A  pre-  science knowledge  test was   administered    at the  beginning  of the  study  to  test whether the
participants had any prior knowledge about science principles related to the Simple Machines unit. The test was
delivered online and included thirteen multiple choice items and five open-ended questions. Student's responses to
the open-ended questions were scored based on a three point scale: 0 point for an incorrect response, 1 point for a
partial correct response and 2 points for a correct response. The open-ended questions were scored by two raters that
were trained to use the scoring scheme. The inter-rater reliability was .95. A total score was calculated for each
student and represented student's prior science knowledge.

        Students' metacognitive awareness and perceived use of reading strategies while reading school-related
materials was also assessed at the beginning of the study through the MARSI instrument (Mokhtari & Reichard,
2002). MARSI consisted of 30 Likert-type items with a 5-point response format which represented three subscales:
Global Reading Strategies (GLOB), Problem-Solving Strategies (PROB) and Support Reading Strategies (SUP). An
overall total average MARSI score was calculated for each student indicating how often the student uses reading
strategies when reading academic materials.

        Assessing reading comprehension is an important indicator of whether the reader has understood the
information presented in a hypertext. It is also important to assess reader's ability to synthesize and integrate ideas
and recognize connections that reflect the interconnected nature of science. In this study the reading comprehension
of each student was assessed after the end of the first CoMPASS session through a multiple choice test that included
ten questions.

        Computer log files were used to look more deeply into the navigation paths of groups of learners in an
attempt to detect  differences in approaches     to reading   and   learning from   nonlinear  texts when   providing
metanavigation support. Log files recorded information about what science concepts the groups explored while
interacting with the CoMPASS system in a chronological order. Two primary dimensions were used for the analysis
of group navigation paths. The first dimension was based on whether groups chose to focus on science principles
that were related with their goal. A goal-relatedness index was calculated by dividing the total number of goal
related concepts visited to the total number of concepts visited. The second dimension was based on whether the
groups made coherent transitions among the different text fragments. A coherent transition index was calculated by
dividing the number of coherent transitions to the total number of transitions among concepts.

        A paper and pencil concept map test was used to assess students' understanding of science concepts at the
end of the pulley challenge. The students were provided with a list of science concepts from which they were asked
to create a concept map providing an explanation for each concept, making connections among concepts and stating
how they are related. Students' concept maps were analyzed using a rubric that was developed in a study conducted
by Puntambekar, Stylianou and Hübscher (2003). Two aspects of the maps were examined: the explanation provided
for the concepts and the explanation provided for the connections among the concepts. Students' responses were
scored on a scale of 0-3 based on the depth of science understanding that they demonstrated. A score of 0 indicated
an incorrect explanation, while a score of 3 indicated a complete and clear explanation for the concept or the
connection. A concept ratio was calculated for each student by dividing the score that was given for the explanation
of the concepts by the number of concepts included in the concept map. This ratio was a measure of student's
understanding of science principles. A connection ratio was calculated by dividing the score that was given for the
explanation of the connections with the number of connections in the map. This ratio was a measure of the depth of
understanding of the relationships among science principles.

Results: Understanding Metanavigation
        To  address  the research questions   of this study,   we   used a   mix of group and    individual data. We
investigated groups' navigation behavior in each condition and drew conclusions about the overall effectiveness of
the metanavigation support. We also investigated whether the effects of individual characteristics and the type of
support students received on their performance in the concept map science knowledge test. Both types of data
contributed to understanding the effects of metanavigation support.

Effects of metanavigation support on navigation
        The first research question focused on whether metanavigation support provided to the group of students
had any effect on their navigation behavior. To address this question we studied groups' navigation paths based on

                                                       532
the log file information that was collected as the groups interacted with CoMPASS. Descriptive statistics and a
factorial multivariate analysis of variance     (MANOVA)                              were         conducted  to  study changes in group   navigation
behavior throughout the two CoMPASS sessions.

          Group navigation paths were analyzed based on the two navigation indices (goal-related navigation index
and coherent transition index) to investigate whether metanavigation support encouraged groups to read about
concepts that were relevant to their goal and make coherent transitions among concepts, thereby making their
navigation more focused as opposed to random. Table 2 presents the means, standard deviations, and effect sizes for
the two navigation indices over the two days groups used CoMPASS (day 1 and day 2). The means are also
displayed graphically in Figures 1 and 2.

Table 2. Means and standard deviations for navigation indices

                                     Metanavigation support                                               No support
                                    Day 1       Day 2                           Overall            Day 1    Day 2    Overall    dday 1    dday 2

     Coherent              Mean      .62          .65                               .64              .80      .48       .64     -.86      .59
     Transition Index      SD        .37          .24                               .30              .21      .29       .29
     Goal-related          Mean      .70          .64                               .67              .71      .66       .68     -.04      -.06
     Navigation Index      SD        .27          .30                               .28              .25      .32       .28
    Note. Effect size guidelines are as follows: small = .20, medium = .50. large = .80

          Figure 1 indicates that the groups in the metanavigation support condition made more coherent transitions
during the second day they used CoMPASS than the first day. On the contrary, the groups in the no support
condition made less coherent transitions during the second day compared to the first day. The first day the coherent
transition index was lower in the metanavigation support condition (M = .62) compared to the no support condition
(M = .80).  This difference  represents      a large                         effect size (d        = -.86). The   second  day, groups   who received
metanavigation support made more coherent transitions (M = .65) than groups who did not receive any support (M =
.48). The difference in the coherent transition index between the two conditions during the second day represents a
moderate effect size (d = .59). This implies that groups who received metanavigation support tended to make more
meaningful transitions among science principles that were related to each other than groups who did not receive any
support.

                                            Means for Coherent Transition Index

                                                                                                      Metanavigation
                                   00.8.84                                                            support
                                   00..772600..6648                                                   No support
                                   00.5.66
                                   00..4582
                                   00.4.44
                                                                       Day 1                 Day 2

                  Figure 1. Means for Coherent Transition Index Throughout Days of Navigation

                                                                                    533
                                          Means for Goal Related Navigation
                                                                                 Index
                                                                                                      Metanavigation
                                     0.76                                                             support
                                     0.72
                                     0.68                                                             No support
                                     0.64
                                      0.6
                                                                        Day 1                 Day 2

                 Figure 2. Means for Goal Related Navigation Index Throughout Days of Navigation

         Figure 2 indicates that the goal-related navigation index was lower in the metanavigation support condition
compared to the no support condition during both days of using CoMPASS. The differences in the goal-related
navigation index between the two conditions during the two days represents a small effect size (dday1=-.04, dday2=.06).
The goal related navigation index was also higher in the first day than the second day for both the metanavigation
support condition and the no support conditions. Groups in both conditions seemed to have visited more science
principles that were not directly related to their goal during the second day. Even though the metanavigation
prompts encouraged groups to focus on their goal, groups had to think which science principles were important for
solving the pulley challenge. It seems that directing groups attention at the affordances of the concept maps in
CoMPASS enabled them to make meaningful transitions but did not promote goal-related navigation behavior.

         In order to investigate whether the metanavigation support provided to the groups had any effect on their
navigation behavior a 2 x 2 factorial multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was performed using the two
navigation indices (coherent transition index and goal related navigation index) as dependent variables. Independent
variables were the type of support that was given to the groups (metanavigation support and no support) and the day
of navigation (day 1 and day 2). The results of the factorial MANOVA indicated that there was evidence for
significant interaction effect across the combined set of dependent variables (coherent transition index and goal
related navigation  index), Wilk's  L =.883,  F(2,49)=3.233,                              p=.048.       The   results reflected a modest  association,
partial _2=.117. 11.7% of the generalized variance on the collection of dependent variables could be explained by the
interaction effect. The Wilk's L  test did not find  any multivariate statistically                              significant main effect for the type of
support  (Wilk's L=     .999,  F(2,49)=.007, p=.993)                            or the    day       of navigation  (Wilk's   L =.932,    F(2,49)=1.787,
p=.178).

         Univariate F-tests   found a  statistically                          significant interaction      effect  on  the   coherent transition index,
F(1,50)=5.325, p=.025, with small effect size _2=.096. No univariate differences were found on the goal related
navigation index, F(1,50)=.001, p=.981. Roy-Bargmann stepdown analysis revealed that the multivariate findings
seemed to be driven primarily by a univariate factorial interaction on the coherent transition index, F(1,50)=5.325,
p=.025. After adjusting for the coherent transition index, no statistically significant differences were found for the
goal related navigation index, stepdown F(1,49)=1.128, p=.293.

Predictive Models of Science Learning Measures
         Multiple regression analyses were conducted to study the extent to which individual performance in the
concept map science test could be predicted from measures of prior domain knowledge, reading comprehension,
metacognitive awareness of reading strategies and the presence of metanavigation support that aimed at encouraging
regulation of comprehension and navigation strategies while interacting with a hypertext environment.

Predicting Concept Ratio in the Concept Map Test
         The first regression model used the concept ratio in the concept map test as the dependent variable.
Students' prior domain knowledge, reading comprehension, metacognitive awareness of reading strategies and
presence of metanavigation support were used as independent variables. A hierarchical regression technique was
used forcing the independent variables into the equation in two blocks. The first analysis was conducted to predict
the concept ratio from the metacognitive awareness of reading strategies, the reading comprehension and the
presence of metanavigation support. The results of this analysis indicated a statistically significant overall model

                                                                                   534
explaining approximately 28% of the variance in the concept ratio, R2 =.28, F(3,109) =14.35, p<.001. This can be
considered  a large   effect  size  according to  Cohen's  criteria  (Cohen,  1988). Examination   of  the  regression
coefficients revealed that metacognitive awareness of reading strategies was not a significant predictor of the
explanation  of concepts   rating,  F(1,109)=1.52,  p=.22.   Reading  comprehension   was   a statistically significant
predictor of the concept explanation rating, F(1,109)=27.88, p=.00, uniquely explaining 18% of the total variance in
the concept ratio after adjusting for metacognitive awareness of reading strategies and presence of metanavigation
support. This  represents  a  large effect size.  The presence  of   metanavigation  support  was also a    statistically
significant predictor, F(1,109)=7.93, p=.01, uniquely explaining 5% of the total variance in the rating of concept
explanation after adjusting for metacognitive awareness of reading strategies and reading comprehension. According
to Cohen's criteria this is a small effect size (Cohen, 1988). A second analysis was conducted to evaluate whether
prior domain knowledge predicted the concept ratio over and above metacognitive awareness of reading strategies,
reading  comprehension    and   presence of   metanavigation  support.  Students' science   knowledge  in   the pretest
uniquely accounted for a significant amount of the variability of the concept ratio after controlling for the effects of
metacognitive awareness of reading strategies, reading comprehension and presence of metanavigation support,
R2change=.09, F(1,108)=16.14, p<.001. By including pre science knowledge in a model that contains metacognitive
awareness of reading strategies, reading comprehension and presence of metanavigation support 9% of additional
unique variance in the concept ratio was obtained. This represents a medium effect size.

Predicting Connection Ratio in the Concept Map Test
         Multiple regression analyses were also conducted to examine the relationships among the connection ratio
in students' concept maps, prior domain knowledge, reading comprehension, metacognitive awareness of reading
strategies and presence of metanavigation support. A hierarchical regression technique similar to the one used for
the concept ratio was also used here forcing the independent variables into the equation in two blocks. The first
analysis was conducted to predict the connection ratio from the metacognitive awareness of reading strategies, the
reading  comprehension    and   the presence  of  metanavigation support.  The  results  of this  analysis  indicated a
statistically significant overall model explaining approximately 18% of the variance in the connection ratio, R2 =.18,
F(1,109)=7.99, p<.001. This can be considered a large effect size according to Cohen's criteria (Cohen, 1988).
Examination of the regression coefficients revealed that metacognitive awareness of reading strategies was not a
significant predictor of the connection ratio, F(1,109)=3.49, p=.06. Reading comprehension was a statistically
significant predictor  of the  connection  ratio, F(1,109)=10.62,   p=.00, uniquely  explaining   approximately  eight
percent of its variance. This represents a medium effect size (Cohen, 1988). The presence of metanavigation support
was also a statistically significant predictor, F(1,109)=8.32, p=.01, explaining 6% percent of the variance in the
connection ratio. According to Cohen's criteria this is a small effect size. A second analysis was conducted to
evaluate whether prior domain knowledge predicted the connection ratio in the concept map test after adjusting for
the other predictor variables (metacognitive awareness of reading strategies, reading comprehension and presence of
metanavigation support) in the regression model. Pre science knowledge uniquely accounted for a significant
amount of the variability of the connection ratio after controlling for the effects of metacognitive awareness of
reading strategies, reading comprehension and presence of metanavigation support, R2change=.03, F(1,108)=4.69, p
= .03. Also 4% additional explanation of variability in the connection ratio is achieved by including pre science
knowledge in a model that already contains measures of metacognitive awareness of reading strategies, reading
comprehension and presence of metanavigation support. 3% of the variability in the connection ratio was explained
uniquely by prior science knowledge. Although statistically significant, according to Cohen's criteria this represents
a small effect size.

Conclusion
         The goal of our research was to investigate what role metacognition plays in the process of making
navigation decisions and integrating knowledge acquired from the different text units in nonlinear science texts. We
hypothesized  that   supporting middle   school  students to reflect on their navigation  processes enables   them    to
navigate in ways appropriate to their learning goals and gain a rich understanding of science principles. We used
diverse levels of analysis to investigate the effects of metanavigation support on navigation behavior across groups
of learners and on learning outcomes across individuals. The findings of this study revealed that the metanavigation
prompts we provided to groups of learners who used a non-linear resource encouraged them to attend to the different
functions of the navigational aids and used them to make coherent transitions among text units. Regression analyses
also revealed  that   reading comprehension,    presence  of metanavigation   support  and  prior domain    knowledge
significantly predicted students' understanding of science principles and the relationships among them based on the

                                                          535
concept maps they created. The predictive models for both the concept and the connection ratios suggests that after
controlling for prior knowledge differences, the variability in concept maps scores (explanations of concepts and
explanations of connections) was accounted for by student's individual reading comprehension and presence of
metanavigation support. Students who had high reading comprehension scores and were in groups that received
metanavigation support were more likely to give better explanations about the science principles that they included
in their concept maps (concept ratio) and the connections they made among them (connection ratio). Our future
research plans are to study groups' navigation behavior in depth and provide rich descriptions that will contribute to
our understanding of the reading comprehension processes employed while interacting with nonlinear texts. More
empirical evidence from research studies conducted in control settings and for extended time periods can also
provide insights about how we can make our metanavigation support framework more rigorous.

References
Blumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991) Motivating Project-
       Based Learning: Sustaining the Doing, Supporting the Learning, Educational Psychologist, 26(3&4), 369-
       398.
Brown, A., Armbruster, B., & Baker, L. (1985). The role of metacognition in reading and studying. In J. Orsany
       (Ed.) Reading comprehension: From research to practice. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Charney, D. (1994). The impact of hypertext on processes of reading and writing. In S. J. Hilligoss and C.L. Selfe
       (Eds.) Literacy and Computers. New York: Modern Language Association.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Del Soldato, T. & Du Boulay, B. (1995). Implementation of motivational tactics in tutoring systems, 6, 337-378.
Jacobs, J. E., & Paris, S. G. (1987). Children's metacognition about reading: Issues in definition, measurement, and
       instruction. Educational Psychologist, 22, 255-278.
Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Toward a model of text comprehension and production. Psychological
       Review, 85(5), 363-394.
McNamara, D.S. (2001). Reading both high and low coherence texts: Effects of text sequence and prior knowledge.
       Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 51-62.
Mokhtari, K., & Reichard, C. A. (2002). Assessing students' metacognitive awareness of reading strategies. Journal
       of Educational Psychology, 94(2), 249-259.
Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Jin, Q. (2001). Visualization and external representations in educational hypertext
       systems. In J. D. Moore, C. L. Redfield & W. L. Johnson (Eds.) Artificial Intelligence in Education, AI-ED
       in the wired and wireless world (pp. 13-22). IOS Press, Netherlands.
Puntambekar, S. & Stylianou, A. (2002). CoMPASS: Students' use of external representations in science learning.
       In P. Bell, R. Stevens & T. Satwicz (Eds.), Keeping Learning Complex: The Proceedings of the Fifth
       International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) (pp.352-358). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A.,  &  Hübscher, R.    (2003).   Improving  navigation         and learning in hypertext
       environments with navigable concept maps. Human Computer Interaction, 18 (4), 395-426.
Rouet, J. F. (1992). Cognitive Processing of Hyperdocuments: When Does Nonlinearity Help?, Proceedings of the
       ACM Conference on Hypertext (pp. 131-140). ACM Press.
Rouet, J.F. & Levonen, J.J (1996). Studying and Learning with Hypertext: Empirical Studies and their implications.
       In J.F. Rouet, J.J. Levonen, A. P. Dillon, & R. J. Spiro, (Eds.), Hypertext and Cognition. Hillsade, NJ:
       Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Soloway, E. and Wallace, R., (1997). Does the Internet Support Student Inquiry? Don't Ask. Communications of the
       ACM, 40(5), 11-16.
Stylianou, A. & Puntambekar, S. (2003). How do students navigate and learn from nonlinear science texts: Can
       metanavigation  support  promote learning?    In    C. P. Constantinou         & Z.  C.  Zacharia (Eds.), New
       Technologies And Their Applications in Education: Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on
       Computer Based Learning in Science (CBLIS), Volume I (pp. 674-684), Nicosia, Cyprus.
Wallace, R., Soloway, E., Krajcik, J., Bos, N., Hoffman, J., Hunter, H., E., Kiskis, D., Klann, E., Peters, G.,
       Richardson, D., &  Ronen,  O. (1998). ARTEMIS:       Learner-Centered         Design of an Information Seeking
       Environment for K-12 Education. Paper presented at the CHI, Los Angeles, CA.
Acknowledgments
This work was completed while the authors were at the University of Connecticut.       The CoMPASS project is funded
by the National Science Foundation's early CAREER grant (#9985158) to S. Puntambekar. We wish to express our
sincere thanks to the students and teachers who are participating in this project.

                                                     536
