                        Technology-Supported Systemic Reform:
                         An Initial Evaluation and Reassessment

         Daniel D. Suthers, Violet H. Harada, William E. J. Doane, Joyce Yukawa, Bruce Harris & Viil Lid
        Dept. of ICS, University of Hawai`i at Manoa, POST 309, 1680 East West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822
                                    Tel: 1.808.956.3890, Fax: 1.808.956.3548
                                 Email: suthers@hawaii.edu, vharada@hawaii.edu

        Abstract:   This paper  reports and reflects   on the  use  of  information technology to  support a
        systemic reform effort in rural, geographically distributed schools.  An evaluation conducted after
        a year and a half of effort indicated limited use of the technology outside of face-to-face events.
        We reassess the potential roles of technology in systemic reform in terms of the communities and
        practices to be supported and the tension between supporting and changing practice.

Introduction
        As new information technologies are invented they are often associated with efforts to improve education.
Applications of information technology include attempts to more effectively convey information to students, to
empower students' own agency in accessing information and constructing knowledge, and to aid teachers' classroom
management,    lesson preparation, and  assessment.    Information   technology  can  also support  systemic  reform
processes in several ways. Technology can act as a change agent: teachers will need to change their practices in
order to teach about technologies designed for doing authentic inquiry and communicating or collaborating with
others. Information technology can also support professional development through access to online courses, and
enable participation in distributed communities of practice.

        Because today's school systems operate in an environment of constant change, professional development
for survival and success in such a setting requires a paradigm shift from a scripted training approach to a more fluid
approach that encourages the incorporation of networks, coalitions, and partnerships. The capacity to network with
other professionals is embedded in the notion of communities of practice. McLaughlin and Mitra (2001) argue that
sustaining large-scale theory-based reform efforts "requires a community of practice to provide support, deflect
challenges from the broader environment, and furnish the feedback and encouragement essential to going deeper"
(p. 10). Barab (2003) defines a community that advances ongoing and open-ended professional development as a
"persistent, sustained network of individuals who share and develop an overlapping knowledge base, set of beliefs,
values, history   and experiences  focused  on  a  common      practice and/or mutual   enterprise" (p. 198). These
communities change the relationships among teachers, breaking the isolation that most teachers have found so
confining. Members of a community learn new patterns of behavior primarily through their interactions with others,
not through front-end training designs (Fullan, 1993).

        A natural extension of such communities of practice involves the use of the Internet to grow and sustain
these enterprises. Yet, Barab   (2003)  maintains, "attracting   to the forum  a group  of people   who will  form a
community   is  a  considerable accomplishment"    (p.   197).  An  emerging   body  of literature confirms  Barab's
observation and documents the challenges faced by design teams. Marx and associates (1998) reveal the importance
of building systems and tools that allow for cycles of collaboration, trial, reflection, and modification over time. The
researchers emphasize that these online innovations supplement not supplant face-to-face professional development.
Working with the Inquiry Learning Forum (ILF), Barab, MaKinster, & Scheckler (2003) find that a web-supported
community must focus on issues of sociability more than usability, i.e., how the design links to and supports
people's social interactions, focusing on issues of trust, time, value, and collaboration. Kling and Courtright (2003)
contend that it is easier to foster technology supported community development than to nurture technology initiated
communities. They note that if teachers have not engaged in reflective discussion even in face-to-face settings, it is
unrealistic to expect this behavior in an online environment. In addition, the researchers attribute low usage of ILF
to participants' fear of "exposing themselves" (p. 227). Trust building is an essential feature of online engagement.
Working with TappedIn, Schlager and Fusco (2003) find that certain communication, database, and search tools are
necessary components of a community of practice infrastructure (e.g., stronger tools for content-specific authoring

                                                         537
and reflective inquiry to support local practice). They identify certain significant characteristics of communities and
their implications for building infrastructure support. Learning occurs primarily in the context of work: formal
training supplements informal learning with more experienced members taking the lead while new members are
initiated by participating peripherally. Groups within the community are fluid: participants, objectives, tools, and
divisions of labor change over time. To support community evolution and reproduction, the online technology must
build its capacity for resource-intensive  informal   professional    development    activities such as mentoring  and
coaching. Based on her case study research of nine schools implementing technology as part of educational reform,
Means (1998) associates the following factors with successful use of technology: teacher input into school decision
making, broad teacher ownership for a school reform agenda, teacher belief in a rationale linking technology use to
the school's vision, provision of supported time for teacher interaction and feedback around the use of technology,
distribution of technology to classrooms, interaction with an external partner, and easily accessible, nonjudgmental
technical support. She maintains that these factors are crucial conditions that impact not only community building
within a school but also within an extended community of professionals.

          Thus, technology can serve systemic reform in a variety of ways. A reform effort must choose from among
these and address the issues raised above. If the goal is assimilation into the practice of community members,
designers must seriously consider how and when new tools and artifacts are introduced. Issues of compatibility,
interoperability, and overlap with existing infrastructure, as well as user readiness, must be carefully addressed. We
will return to these critical issues in the concluding section of this paper. First, we describe our own systemic
initiative and the technology (hnlc.org) that was created to support its work. We report the results of an internal
evaluation of educators' use of hnlc.org, and then return to this discussion, informed by that experience.

Hawai`i Networked Learning Communities
          The goal of Hawai`i Networked Learning Communities (HNLC) is to empower educators to prepare
students  in economically disadvantaged    rural  schools for    life and   careers in today's   complex   and dynamic
technological world by enabling them to attain high standards in science, mathematics, and technology (SMT).
HNLC is the result of collaboration between the Department of Information and Computer Sciences (ICS) of the
University of Hawai`i at Manoa (UHM) and the Advanced Technologies Research Branch (ATRB) of the Hawai`i
Department of Education (HIDOE). Hawai`i is unique in having a single public school district, which is also a state
agency.

          HNLC is funded by the National Science Foundation's Rural Systemic Initiative (RSIs). NSF created the
RSIs in 1994 to support educational reform of SMT programs in economically disadvantaged, rural regions of the
United States. The goals of the RSIs are to improve SMT education, increase student achievement, strengthen
schools  through partnerships with   institutions of higher education,      and enhance  scientific  understanding and
appreciation among students and the general community (National Science Foundation, 2000). As well as facing
typical reform issues, such as standards alignment and professional and leadership development, the RSIs face
unique challenges. Rural schools serve small, isolated, and poor communities that are often ambivalent toward
education (Inverness Research Associates, 2001).

Organization and Activities
          Presently 20 schools on six Hawaiian Islands participate in HNLC, having joined the initiative in two
cohorts: Cohort I (starting in 2002) and Cohort II (2003). Schools were selected according to criteria that include a
rural or small town location, at least 30% of students receiving free or reduced lunches, and a preference for high
percentages of under-served populations, especially of Hawaiian/Part Hawaiian ancestry. Benefits to schools include
leadership development   activities, mentoring by    state-level   resource teachers,  training on instructional use of
technologies, and access to HNLC's online resources (described below). Each school's HNLC leadership team
includes an administrator, a half-time HNLC-funded teacher partner, and two additional teachers and/or support
services personnel (e.g., technology coordinator, librarian). SMT expertise must be reflected in the team. HNLC
requirements are aligned with those of HIDOE: a school-wide Standards Implementation Design that aligns SMT
curricula with state standards and reflects inquiry-centered instruction, elimination of tracking, increased teacher
participation in the standards implementation, and building community support for SMT education. Development of
an assessment-driven reflective practice is of particular concern.

                                                        538
       To ground leadership development in practice, HNLC requires that each school develop a unit plan that
provides a concrete example of standards-based inquiry learning and serves as a model that can be replicated to
accomplish full implementation of the school's Standards Implementation Design. The unit planning process is
intended to expose barriers in practices, policy, and infrastructure that inhibit the best practices exemplified by the
units. HNLC units have emphasized environmental and cultural themes as a strategy for increasing the relevance of
SMT curricula to Hawaii's students. HNLC has provided leadership development activities for the unit planning
process in its summer institutes, presenting exemplary units that combine exciting hands-on learning with an
orientation towards standards and assessment, and providing training in the use of technologies. School teams
brainstorm  potential  unit  plans at  the institute and then  continue  the planning    process   throughout    the year,
encouraged to share their work in our online workspaces. The completed unit then provides an example within the
school and for subsequent cohort schools.

Technology
       Our working assumption at the outset was that if teachers experienced the use of technology in their
learning they would better understand how to use it for their students' learning. Based on this concept as well as
feedback from state educational leaders and findings of a needs assessment survey, we planned to use networked
computer technology to make statewide resources available to the rural schools through: (1) a searchable resource
database with a web-based interface (Suthers, Johnson & Tillinghast, 2002); (2) telementoring to provide critical
access to people; and (3) workspaces to support the collaboration that is so vital for learning and professional
development. The website, hnlc.org, was developed to provide access to these tools. All of the components of the
website have been developed using open source software packages that are inexpensive and easily reproducible on a
range of computing equipment (Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP, PHPMyAdmin, Qmail, and EZMLM).

       The    first generation of  hnlc.org  consisted  of  static  HTML  pages    that stated the goals of HNLC      and
announced upcoming events, with a link to a prototype online discussion tool (Suthers & Xu, 2002). This tool was
designed to support artifact-centered discourse, allowing discussants to simultaneously view and comment on a
webpage, containing for example unit plans in progress or student work. A new version of the discussion tool is now
being used on hnlc.org.

       Our early experiences indicated that educators needed guidance on instructional planning aimed at reform
objectives. We conceived a simple guide, an online unit plan template, for designing the units and facilitating access
to completed units via the resource database. The template consists of eleven web-based forms, covering unit
description, designers, grade level and curriculum areas, standards, assessment, samples of student work, overview
of goals, learning outcomes, resources, unit flow, and reflection. Though these sections can be completed in any
order, they are sequenced to prompt authors to first identify learning objectives in terms of state standards and how
these objectives will be assessed. This was the first tool designed specifically for our systemic reform effort.

       In keeping with our community building focus, we made a significant change to hnlc.org in August 2002.
To promote active online involvement and participant "ownership," the hnlc.org homepage was replaced with a
dynamically generated, story-based page modeled on Slashdot.org. Users who log into the site can submit stories for
the front page, and project staff can use this community forum to publish information for the HNLC community.
Members are notified by email when a new story is posted, with a link to the story.

       In June 2003 we introduced a resource database with a focus on SMT resources in Hawai`i. The database
is searchable by keyword in simple mode, and in advanced mode on specified fields ­ audience, title, creator,
contributor, subject, coverage, description and resource type. The database also has fields for identifier, date,
standards, format,  language,  learning    time, publisher, rights, source, and relation  (enabling  relations    to other
resources  to be    constructed).   The    fields  were  derived    in part  from   the   Learning   Object      Metadata
(http://ltsc.ieee.org/wg12/) and   the keywords    from  the GEM     (Gateway   to Educational   Materials)   controlled
vocabularies (http://www.geminfo.org/Workbench/Workbench_vocabularies.html).

Evaluation
       An evaluation of the use of hnlc.org and its interactive tools was conducted by the third author as his
master's thesis, with assistance from the first two authors. The objective was to understand how, why, and under

                                                         539
what circumstances hnlc.org is used, as well as how well the interactive tools are meeting the needs of participants.
This descriptive study included a survey, analysis of server logs and online content, and a focus group.

         A survey was distributed at the 2003 HNLC Summer Institute, to which all 47 attendees of the Institute
responded voluntarily and anonymously. Respondents were asked to: (1) provide basic biographical information and
information concerning the technology capacity of their school; (2) report frequency of use of several common
networking technologies (email, discussion boards, instant messaging, etc.); (3) report frequency of use of hnlc.org,
as well as any benefits they perceive hnlc.org as providing; and (4) assess their attitudes toward technology used for
teaching, learning by students, and for professional development.

         Web server access logs for the period of August 2002 to August 2003 inclusive and participant login logs
for the period of January 2003 to August 2003 inclusive were analyzed to determine usage patterns for the site,
using the Webalizer   server  log  analysis tool (http://www.webalizer.com/).     These logs  were pre-processed     to
eliminate HNLC staff use, demonstrations, development/testing of the site, and search engine "spidering." We also
examined the content of online stories and discussions.

         A focus group was convened for one day in April 2003. Participants were asked to discuss their current
practices, perceived challenges, and possible improvements with regard to three key topics: alignment of curriculum
to state standards; use of technology to support and improve SMT education; and integration of inquiry-based
learning into the curriculum. They also reviewed the tools available on hnlc.org and discussed how the tools could
be used  to   improve their teaching  practice,  the relevance    of the tools to their existing practice,   and   what
improvements they could imagine for the tools.

Results
         The profile of survey respondents suggests that they are motivated, seasoned professionals who are largely
new to   the  HNLC   initiative. The 47 respondents     included classroom  teachers (40%),   teacher    partners (6%),
technology coordinators (11%), library media specialists (6%), administrators (19%), and "other" (17%). About
76% had served 10 or more years as professional educators (65% in Hawai`i). Few had been with HNLC for the full
two years of the initiative (4%), while 30% have been with HNLC approximately one year, and 66% for less than
six months.   A majority of respondents said that the purpose of hnlc.org was clear to them and that hnlc.org was
relevant to  the success of their students. However,    when  asked  about the effectiveness and appropriateness     of
hnlc.org, at least half were "neutral" on whether hnlc.org had a positive impact on their professional activities or a
positive impact on SMT programs in their schools, or whether hnlc.org provided services unavailable to them
elsewhere. Neutrality may be consistent with the large number of new members surveyed. Responses to an open-
ended question indicated that the most valuable services provided were "current info on technology," "networking
with other schools on problem based learning," "resource listings," "ideas for units," and "the unit plan template."
"The discussion area" was identified as least valuable.

         Many of the respondents reported frequent use of computers in the classroom. Respondents felt strongly
that computers were relevant to their teaching, assisted them in planning, and helped them integrate innovative
methods. They also felt that computers enabled them to focus on individual students' needs better. About 58% felt
that they had sufficient training to incorporate technology successfully into their teaching. Respondents also reported
a high frequency of use of computers in-class by students, although not as high a rate of use as for "in-class
instruction."

         In contrast, most respondents reported that their use of ICT for professional development was limited to the
use of online resources and email. Many have never used online discussion boards (50%), online chat rooms, or
instant messaging (85%) for professional development. HNLC participants have only limited exposure to and
understanding of the online communication and collaboration tools we offer. Despite this, over 75% felt that online
communication and active collaboration were important to their professional development. While over 60% reported
that they found inspiration for new uses of computers from their students, only 39% felt that students were inspired
by respondents' use of computers.

         The web-server log analysis distinguished between site visits (not requiring login) and login logs. A unique
site visit occurs when a new Internet address visits the website, or when the same Internet address visits the site after

                                                          540
making no requests for 30 minutes or longer. The monthly number of unique visits to the website increases from
about 600 in August 2002 to about 1800 in August 2003; fluctuations do not show an obvious relationship to
HNLC-sponsored      events. The   login logs  provide   an  estimate  of use of  specialized tools  such as the  unit plan
template, discussion forums, posting stories, and submitting resources. Login rates are low (below 100/month)
except in months in which HNLC-sponsored workshops were held. After filtering out logins generated from the
ATRB network (since those can be attributed to use during HNLC sponsored workshops or to HNLC staff doing
their work),   we obtain  the best picture   of participant  adoption    of hnlc.org  tools by educators  for their   own,
spontaneous use outside of workshops sponsored at ATRB. In general, from January to August 2003 there were an
average of 21 logins per month outside of ATRB, although this includes a spike of 56 in June 2003, suggesting that
some Cohort I participants logged in around the time of the summer institute to work on their assigned unit plans.

          The record of online stories provides further usage data. For the period covered by the server log data
(8/2002-8/2003), 43 postings (54%) were contributed by HNLC staff, including 17 from ATRB and 26 from the UH
team. The remaining 36 postings (46%) were by others, with 33 by teachers and 3 by other organizations who were
offering resources. Of the 33 postings by teachers, 18 were by school teams introducing their schools at our request
during a sponsored workshop; the other 15 posts were by teachers on their own initiative, with many of these posts
provided by one teacher known for his innovation.

          Asynchronous participation in web-based discussion forums has been particularly low. Our first proposed
topic, discussion of an indicator of successful systemic reform (National Science Foundation, 2000), fell flat.
Responses to informal queries attributed this to the abstract nature of the topic (too far removed from practice), lack
of time, and forgetting to check the web site (email notification of activity had not yet been implemented). Most use
took place when ATRB staff used the discussion forums as meeting-support tools. Discussion spaces are now also
created automatically for each unit plan, and school teams were asked to comment on each other's units. More
recently  we   have been  trying  to use  the   discussion  forums    as a  bridge  between    meetings  and  subsequent
asynchronous work by asking participants to seed a discussion with action items identified during their face-to-face
sessions, and asking ATRB resource teachers to use the workspaces to mentor school planning. These conversations
have just begun and are not reflected in the data reported.

          Five HNLC   participants volunteered   to attend  a   focus group   discussion,   joined by seven  HNLC     staff
members. Issues raised included their broad concern that the goals of the HNLC initiative might be critically
different from  their own   goals  and  that HIDOE      expectations  of them    were unreasonable,   given  the stage  of
development of their reform efforts. Also, participants recognized that HNLC was an evolving initiative and that
Cohort 2 schools (and, by implication, HNLC staff) could learn from the mistakes made with Cohort 1. Attendees
were re-introduced to the existing hnlc.org tool set.   While they liked the tools, they reported that they had little or
no experience using such tools online. Finally, they were asked to suggest new tools. Without exception, they
suggested tools for use by students. Also, during discussions of the resource database, attendees primarily suggested
the addition of websites that students would use as part of lessons. The prevailing view of "technology in education"
appears to be "technology for use by students," not "technology for use by educators."

Discussion
          Overall, respondents seem to have positive attitudes about the use of technology for a range of purposes,
but as of Summer 2003 had not made significant use of hnlc.org outside of sponsored events, with the exceptions of
school teams preparing for those events and the initiative of a few individuals. The results of this study raise
theoretical and   design concerns  about  our   efforts to  use technology    in support  of systemic  reform.   We   have
considered four interpretations of these facts. These are discussed below, beginning with the most pessimistic and
the most optimistic interpretations, and concluding with the complex middle ground where truth probably lies.

Can Technology Help?
          First, there is the possibility that technology support for systemic reform is too difficult to be worthwhile,
or is not a solution to the most fundamental problems faced. Clearly, we feel that, despite the challenges, technology
can and should help some aspects of education reform efforts. In the conditions of isolation of rural schools in
Hawai`i, we would be irresponsible not to make every effort to take advantage of the powerful possibilities offered
by technology to connect people and ideas into communities of practice. We are committed to furthering and
supporting the desires for reform these communities hold for themselves. Yet we acknowledge that, along with the

                                                            541
need for new teacher competencies and practices that might possibly be addressed with technology support, what
educators also need is more time and better funding for their schools. The public educational system faces great
challenges in shrinking resources that often are accompanied with underfunded mandates for greater accountability
with punitive consequences.

An Optimistic View
        Second, at meetings and school visits, participants have indicated positive attitudes about the resources
database and the unit plan template as a prompt to organize work. The server logs suggest that HNLC staff and
participants are logging in to prepare for and supplementing HNLC sponsored events (Marx et al, 1998). Therefore,
the hnlc.org tools may be serving a useful purpose in providing resources for and organizing HNLC sponsored
activities. Also, the data reported cannot capture all use of hnlc.org, particularly the dissemination of information via
the community forum. When a new story is posted, email goes out to all members with a URL to the story. Members
can view the story without logging in; our present logging mechanism cannot identify such use, which may well be
the most frequently used service. One school has reported that they sought and obtained a grant as a result of a story
posted on hnlc.org. Although only a few educators have taken the initiative to share information, these innovators
have been given a voice and hnlc.org is providing an important service to educators as consumers. However, we
cannot ignore the fact that tools that have been the focus of much of HNLC's development efforts have not been
made an integral part of participants' professional practice.

Patience Is Required
        Third, it may be that the basic approach is right, but more time is required to realize the benefits and some
adjustments are required. We note that 66% of school team members have been with HNLC less than six months;
participants reported low prior use of the kinds of tools we offer; and they are neutral about whether the benefits of
HNLC match their own goals. It is clear that the majority of school participants need more time and guidance to
understand the demands of HIDOE's systemic reform program and to become familiar with and adopt the inquiry-
based, reflective practices we are advocating as well as the tools we provide to help them meet those demands.
Many educators have little experience with reflective and evaluative practice, so use of the discussion forum for that
purpose requires more than a technical understanding of the tool.

        We are also learning to better coordinate efforts of the technology team at UH and other HNLC staff at
ATRB. The current ATRB team ­ which has the most direct contact with school teams ­ has been in place only for
the last five months of the period reported on in this study. Recently both teams have developed a strong sense of the
urgency of closer coordination of our work, and are working together to examine the appropriate use of technology
support. New activities have recently been added under the initiative of a new project director. School visits to all
schools were conducted by representatives of the ATRB and UH teams to provide further clarification of the
program, technology training, and time for work on the unit plans. An online course for professional development
credit is being developed.

        Looking more specifically at the technology, there are reasons to expect that incentive for use will increase
and barriers will decrease in the coming year. Usability issues are being resolved and new features added that may
increase use, such as email notification of new discussion activity. Also, telementoring (mentoring of school teams
by disciplinary experts, master teachers at other schools, and state curricular specialists) is a frequently requested
service that we will provide once our infrastructure is capable of supporting it.

Supporting and Changing Practices of Multiple Communities and Teams
        Fourth, we have seriously considered the possibility that our approach is misguided and fails to meet the
needs of the community of practice that we target. This conclusion receives support from the low participant login
numbers and from comments made in the focus group suggesting, for example, that teachers want software for their
students, not themselves. It is this conclusion that has generated the most reflection and debate within our group.

What Community?
        Questioning what community of practice we are trying to support, we first reaffirmed that it is necessary
that we support educators. Although our ultimate goal is increased student performance and participation in SMT,
we are working with those responsible for this outcome rather than directly with students. Considering communities
of practice within our partner schools, we realize that we have not deliberately identified existing communities
(Kling & Courtright, 2003); rather we are working with teams constituted for the purpose of representing the school
to HNLC   that may  or     may not (yet) constitute a community      of practice.    We  also recognize that relevant

                                                       542
communities of practice can extend beyond the schools. Teachers specializing in a given subject or grade level may
want to  network  with   each    other across schools.  There  are also groups       (if not communities)   defined by
administrative structures such as the HIDOE complexes (high schools and their primary and intermediate feeder
schools). Educators at different grade levels are interested in working with each other towards continuity in the
students' learning experience. We also considered whether our HNLC colleagues within the HIDOE should be the
primary targets of our technology support. The ATRB team members plan the leadership development program and
carry it out in scheduled events, school visits, and (soon) online instruction. Although ATRB staff suggest that we
focus on teachers, we recognize the need to work closely with the ATRB staff to ensure that the affordances of our
technologies mesh well with their plans. Because participants will most likely try new tools and practices at face-to-
face meetings, we need to design for transitions between face-to-face and online use. Also of interest for our
systemic reform  agenda   is  the statewide  community   of SMT    educators     within  HIDOE,  and  the even broader
community of stakeholders and interested parties that includes parents, employers, and representatives of other
federally funded programs that have an educational outreach component.

         As a result of this discussion, we now explicitly acknowledge that hnlc.org must support nested and
overlapping communities of practice (c.f., "nested learning communities," Resnick & Hall, 1998; and "double-knit
organizations," Wenger, McDermott & Snyder, 2002) that extend beyond the schools and into the community. We
need to  focus on teachers    as those  primarily responsible for  student achievement,      but not neglect the larger
community context of education.     Our primary focus in the design of hnlc.org remains on the school teams and on
inter-team collaborations (communities of practice) in which educators and ATRB staff share ideas and advice. Our
secondary focus remains on the larger community that forms the environment of resources and expectations within
which our primary communities grow. It is essential for the sustainability of systemic reform that we not only
address the needs of the practitioners, whose work immediately impacts upon student performance, but also initiate
change in the broader community that places expectations on the school system as well as provides the resources to
meet those expectations.

What Practice?
         Having clarified the overlapping and nested spheres of communities of practice that we intend to support,
we are still faced with the question, "What practice?" Specifically, we considered whether there is a conflict
between the view that tools for communities of practice should meet practitioners' immediate needs and systemic
reform's objective of changing practice. We also considered the request for technology for students in terms of
pathways by which technology is adopted into practice.

         For its primary target community of cohort teachers, HNLC aims to guide them toward utilizing best
practices in inquiry-based learning in their classrooms. Technology should be incorporated as an integral part of
inquiry activities. Although we began under the assumption that educators could learn to teach with technology by
learning to learn with technology, we found that HNLC educators tend to view technology as resources for use with
their students, and are more likely to be inspired by their students' use of technology. Yet they also acknowledge
that technology is an important resource for their own professional development. Perhaps the resolution to this
apparent tension between teacher-first versus student-first use is to shape professional and leadership development
so that participants use the tools in the way students would be asked to use them in inquiry-based learning. They
would thereby gain simultaneous training in the practice of inquiry-based learning and the use of technologies as
specifically applied to the inquiry activities of themselves and their students.

         Practice can    also refer to  best practices for achieving systemic       reform,  which involves  leadership
development and coordination specifically for changing practice. Central to our systemic reform effort is practice
informed by inquiry and reflection. Teachers are asked to examine the effects of their instruction on student
performance in SMT, and adjust their practice to improve performance based on their knowledge of best practices.
School administrators and HIDOE leaders at all levels of our nested communities are asked to question, reflect upon,
and reassess their effectiveness in promoting a vision of high quality teaching and learning, creating a climate for
school reform,  providing  professional   and  leadership  development  opportunities,     and fostering  collaborative,
inquiring communities based on trust and respect. If these were the prevalent practices of our user communities, then
the tools they needed and indeed demanded might be different. Can we offer technology, integrated with leadership
development, that meets the demands of this imagined community of practice of the future? Strategically, we should
build tools to support current practice, gain acceptance of these tools, and then build on this base to change practice
with and through the tools. The process of learning how to become better professionals and leaders may then involve

                                                         543
face-to-face, school-based communities of practice in addition to inter-school communities of practice that evolve
from formal, distance learning groups or informal curriculum collaborations. This process could be supported by
technology serving as a collaborative workspace with functions to enable socialization and interpersonal connection
(Barab et al., 2003).

What do we build?
         We have so far considered what we can do to support multiple communities and teams. A deeper issue
arises if many of these communities of practice do not already exist. Then the question becomes, "What do we build
­ the community, the practice, the tools?" As indicated by the earlier review of experiences in educational reform,
professional development,    and web-supported   communities,    communities  of practice  need              to be built from  a
complex array of factors and in a manner that is timely and unique to each group. A community design cannot
simply be proffered to a group. Communities evolve within groups around their particular needs and for purposes
that they value. As we have noted before, fostering trusting and respectful relationships is paramount. This is the
basis for community building, and, once established, each community of practice then directs the development,
adoption, and use of technology for its specific needs. The process combines both bottom-up and top-down efforts to
answer the questions we pose here. When multiple, nested communities of practice are involved, our responsibilities
for attentiveness and technological responsiveness are correspondingly increased and should be clearly prioritized.

References
Barab, S. A. (2003). An introduction to the special issue: Designing for virtual communities in the service of
         learning. The Information Society, 19, 197-201.
Barab, S. A, MaKinster, J. G., & Scheckler, R. (2003). Designing system dualities: Characterizing a web-supported
         professional development community. The Information Society. 19, 237-256.
Fullan, M. (1993). Change forces: Probing the depths of educational reform. London: Falmer Press.
Kling, R., & Courtright, C. (2003). Group behavior and learning in electronic forums: A sociotechnical approach.
    The Information Society, 19, 221-235.
Inverness Research Associates. 2001. Setting the foundation for reform: the work of the Rural Systemic Initiatives.
         Inverness, CA: Inverness Research Associates.
Marx, R. W., Blumenfeld, P. C., Krajcik, J. S., & Soloway, E. (1998). New technologies for teacher professional
         development. Teaching and Teacher Education, 14, 33-52.
McLaughlin, M. W., & Mitra, D. (2001). Theory-based change and change-based theory: Going deeper, going
         broader. Journal of Educational Change, 1, 2-24.
Means, B. (1998). Models and prospects for bringing technology-supported education reform to scale. Paper
         presented at Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego.
National Science Foundation (NSF). (2000). Rural systemic initiatives in science, mathematics and technology
         education. (NSF 00-47). Washington, DC: National Science Foundation. Retrieved September 6, 2003
         from http://www.nsf.gov/pubsys/ods/getpub.cfm?nsf0047
Schlager, M. S., & Fusco, J. (2003). Teacher professional development, technology, and communities of practice:
         Are we putting the cart before the horse? The Information Society, 19, 203-220.
Resnick, L. B. & Hall, M. W. (1998). Learning organizations for sustainable educational reform. Daedalus, Journal
         of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 127(4), 89-118.
Suthers, D., Johnson,   S., & Tillinghast,  B. (2002). Learning   object meta-data for   a database             of  primary  and
         secondary school resources. Interactive Learning Environments 9(3), 273-289.
Suthers, D. & Xu, J. (2002). Kukakuka: An online environment for artifact-centered discourse, Education Track of
         the Eleventh   World  Wide Web     Conference   (WWW    2002),  Honolulu, May     7-11,             2002, pp. 472-480.
         Available: http://www2002.org/CDROM/alternate/252/
Wenger, E., McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         Business School Press.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the numerous individuals who have contributed towards HNLC,  including  our closest           colleagues Vicki
Kajioka (HNLC co-PI and ATRB director), Pat Donohue (HNLC project director), and Claudia Atta (former HNLC interim
project director), and the other members of the ATRB and UH teams for their hard work during the period reported in this paper:
Malia Chow, Laura Girardeau, Kyle Shodai, and Ryan Yoshioka. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
under Cooperative Agreement No. 0100393. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

                                                         544
