            Leveraging Handhelds to Increase Student Learning:
  Engaging Middle School Students with the Mathematics of Change
                                 Phil Vahey1, Deborah Tatar2 & Jeremy Roschelle1
                        1SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave., Menlo Park, CA 94025
                            2Virginia Tech, 660 McBryde Hall, Blacksburg, VA 24061
                                      Tel: 650/859-2143, Fax: 650/859-3673
                      Email: philip.vahey@sri.com, tatar@cs.vt.edu, jeremy.roschelle@sri.com

       Abstract: Handheld computers are poised to build upon the success of graphing calculators in
       mathematics classrooms, as they share important characteristics such as small size and low cost,
       while increasing representational richness. However, few studies provide evidence that these
       devices can help students learn complex mathematics. In this paper we provide such evidence. We
       show   that the  communication     capabilities and representational  infrastructure  of handheld
       computers can support a variety of effective learning activities, ranging from activities that are
       collaborative to activities that are practice-oriented. Furthermore, we show that eighth grade
       students   who  participated   in a month-long    curriculum   using our  handheld   technologies
       outperformed high school students on AP Calculus Exam items.

Introduction
       Graphing calculators have had a profound influence on mathematics education (Burrill et al., 2002; Doerr
& Zangor,  2000),  as evidenced  by  the NCTM's   principle  that technology  (typically in the form   of    graphing
calculators) is "essential" to teaching and learning mathematics (NCTM, 2000). Handheld computers are poised to
build upon the success of graphing calculators, as they share many important characteristics--both are small,
inexpensive, portable, boot-up immediately, and enable rich interactive representations. These characteristics allow
frequent, integral use of technology in the math classroom, which can lead to increased student learning (Burrill et
al., 2002; Norris & Soloway, 2003; Tatar et al. 2003; Tinker & Krajcik, 2001; Vahey & Crawford, 2002). However,
much existing use of handhelds in math is for supporting calculations, and few studies provide evidence that
handheld computers can be used to help students learn complex and conceptually difficult mathematics.

       To  investigate  the potential of  handhelds in  education  we built upon an already   proven   educational
intervention, SimCalc (Roschelle, et al., 2000), in the creation of NetCalc. In this paper we discuss (1) how we
leveraged affordances of handheld computers in the creation of NetCalc learning activities, (2) aspects of these
activities we found to be most productive, and (3) evidence that student use of NetCalc led to students learning
complex mathematics. Among other things, we set out to investigate the following: Are dynamic mathematical
representations still powerful when translated to a small screen and stylus-based interaction? Are there collaborative
mathematical activities that addresses NCTM standards and can be supported with peer-to-peer beaming?

Related Research: Collaboration and Representations
       There is a significant research base on designing external representations to support side-by-side student
collaboration in the areas of mathematics and science learning (e.g. White, 1993; Roschelle, 1992; Vahey, et al.,
2000). White, in particular, compared the achievement of middle school students to norm-referenced measures of
high school achievement as a way to show proof of concept of effectiveness. We will build on this precedent.

       The  paradigm    for much  prior  CSCL  research   is students sharing a  relatively large display,    jointly
manipulating the available representations, and engaging in collaborative sense making. This research shows that the
primary value of representations is not to embody experts' knowledge so that students absorb the experts' mental
models, but instead to provide a resource for discussion and sense making as students come to understand the
conceptual meaning    underlying the  representations  (Roschelle, 1996). Effective learning    activities   leverage
resources such as the shared screen, gestures, and conversational norms to help students jointly construct meaning,
become more proficient in participating in representation-based discourse, and build an understanding of the subject

                                                       553
matter (Roschelle, 1992). In this paradigm students are provided little opportunity to privately interact with the
educational environment.

       Related research investigates representation use with traditional graphing calculators. This research shows
that calculator-based whole-class activities are more productive than small group activities (Doerr & Zangor, 2000).
While engaged in whole class discussions the teacher's calculator is typically projected to the front of the room, and
students can either watch the projection, or follow the teacher's instructions for pressing keys. In more recent
efforts, the whole-class display is tied to a central server that networks all the students' calculators, displaying either
an individual student's work, or an aggregation of student work (Kaput & Hegedus 2002; Wilensky & Stroup,
2000). While this research combines private work and whole-class activities, the small, low-resolution screen and
the lack of peer-to-peer communication of graphing calculators can be a challenge for small group collaboration.

       In our investigation we sought to exploit the unique capabilities of handheld computers while leveraging
findings from prior research. For instance, to leverage the small, private displays and the beaming capabilities of
handhelds, while also allowing students to take advantage of aspects of face-to-face communication (such as talk
and gestures) we created a set of "information hiding" activities. We also created a set of "practice" activities that
allowed students to privately work on difficult problems, with the ability to send their responses to a partner for
face-to-face grading and feedback. This flexibility in creating activity structures that combine private work with
face-to-face collaboration was  a key aspect of  our innovation,       and is a key  differentiator between handheld
computers and previous technologies. We sought to determine if leveraging this flexibility could provide students
the opportunity to learn complex and conceptual difficult mathematics.

Prior SimCalc Research
       As detailed elsewhere (Kaput, 1994; Kaput & Roschelle, 1998; Roschelle et al., 2000), the goal of SimCalc
is to provide access to the mathematics of change and variation (MCV) to all students. Although understanding
change is of critical importance for a variety of economic, social, scientific, and technological issues, only a small
percentage of students are introduced to MCV. This introduction typically is in calculus class, where students tend to
master symbol manipulation without coming to a deep understanding of the topic (Tucker, 1990).

       To achieve its goal, SimCalc builds on three lines of innovation: restructuring the subject matter; grounding
mathematical experience in students' existing understandings; and providing dynamic representations. In this study
we built upon the following SimCalc principles within the constraints and affordances provided by handheld
computers, to help eighth grade students learn the fundamentals of MCV in the context of a unit on algebra:

   ·   Student definition and direct manipulation of graphically defined functions, especially piecewise-defined
       functions. Students can manipulate these functions without ever seeing the algebraic description, which
       might be quite complex.
   ·   Links   between   the graphically defined and editable functions       and  their derivatives or integrals. For
       example, as students manipulate a velocity graph, they can see the impact on the corresponding position
       graph (or vice-versa).
   ·   Links   between   graphical representations and  motion        simulations. This  relationship aids  student in
       interpreting the graphs, as the mathematics is about something.

The Design of NetCalc
       We undertook a multi-year design experiment to create NetCalc. NetCalc was not intended to be a stripped-
down version of desktop SimCalc--instead we designed a new set of applications and activities based on the
principles (and lessons) of SimCalc. This work took place in parallel with the creation of a graphing-calculator
version of SimCalc for other classrooms (Kaput & Hegedus, 2002). This paper does not discuss the iterative design
issues surrounding the creation of NetCalc (interested readers should see Tatar et al, in submission). During this
design research we found that the interactive representational forms of SimCalc, which were designed for large
displays and included rich, detailed graphics, could be modified to be instructionally effective on small, personal
learning devices. We then focused on the most appropriate way to leverage the communicative and representational
flexibility of handheld computers in creating the NetCalc activities.
       The NetCalc curriculum and technology was co-developed by the research team, the software development
team, a retired teacher, and the classroom teacher. We focused on the following content:

                                                      554
   ·   Reinforcing  existing  understandings    of position graphs,  and especially the notion that   the      slope    of a
       position graph represents the velocity of the motion
   ·   Understanding characteristics of velocity graphs with constant velocities, including forward, backward and
       stopped motions
   ·   Translating between position and velocity graphs (the essence of the concept of derivative)
   ·   Computing the area under a velocity graph to get displacement (the essence of integration)
   ·   Understanding characteristics of non-constant linear velocity graphs and the resulting parabolic position
       graphs
       Table 1 provides an overview of a subset of our technology-based activities. Each activity lets students
participate in specific mathematical processes while learning particular content. We chose to create a variety of
activities to allow students to participate in a range of important mathematical practices. The activities in Table 1
represent our decision to provide enough variety to shed insight into the range of activities that could be supported
by handheld computers, while not overwhelming the students.

Table 1. NetCalc learning activities
 Activity        Type                Student         Primary                        Content Goals
  Name                               Exposure        Process
                                                       Goal
Exciting Sack   Expressive     2 class periods:    Reasoning          Class 1: Characteristics of position graphs.
Race                           ·      30 minutes                      Class 2: Characteristics of velocity graphs,
                               ·      15 minutes                      including backward and stopped motions.
   Summary: Students make a two-car race that ends in a tie and is as exciting as possible, with a
    corresponding narrative (See Hegedus & Kaput, 2002).
 Match My       Hidden         3 class periods,    Communication      Class 1: Characteristics of position graphs.
        Gra     information    of 30 minutes                                  Class 2: Characteristics of velocity
        ph                     each.                                  graphs.
                                                                      Class 3:Translating between position and
                                                                      velocity graphs
   Summary: Working in pairs, one student (the grapher) creates a function that is hidden from the other (the
    matcher). The matcher makes and beams an initial guess of the function, and receives a verbal clue from
    the grapher. The matcher makes more refined guesses based on the clues. In this activity students struggle
    to create and interpret clues such as "Mine is steeper" and "Yours is not as fast." In the first instance of this
    activity the grapher and matcher both had position graphs, and the grapher received the matcher's position
    graph and motion (see Figure 1). In the second instance the grapher and matcher both had velocity graphs,
    and the grapher only received the motion (not the graph). In the third instance, the grapher had a position
    graph and the matcher had a velocity graph, and the grapher received both the motion and the graph.
Slot Machine    Incentivized   3 class periods:    Representation     Class 1: Relationship between simple
                practice       ·      40 minutes                      position and velocity graphs.
                               ·      30 minutes                              Class 2: Relationship between
                               ·      20 minutes                      complex position and velocity graphs.
                                                                      Class 3: Relationship between position graphs
                                                                      and non-constant linear velocity graphs.
   Summary: Students working individually are presented with a position graph, a velocity graph, and an
    animation. They determine which, if any, of these representations describe the same motion, and click the
    corresponding set of checkboxes (the representations and checkboxes are color coded, and a white
    checkbox indicates no match). Students can have the computer check their answers and provide feedback,
    or can exchange problems with a partner, who "grades" the other's work. Students receive points for getting
    their individual problem correct, for grading the partner's work correctly, and receive bonus points for
    correctly answering and grading five problems in a row. Students can complete many problems in rapid
    succession, allowing for significant practice in building their representational competency. See Figure 1.
Aggregation     Aggregation    2 class periods,    Reasoning          Class 1: Understanding characteristics of
                               15 minutes each                        velocity graphs
                                                                      Class 2: Understanding characteristics of
                                                                      non-constant linear velocity graphs.
   Summary: Each student is responsible for creating one part of a function family, and the students
    investigate the resulting pattern. (See Kaput & Hegedus, 2002).

                                                       555
         The "Exciting Sack Race" and Aggregation have already been reported on (Hegedus & Kaput, 2002; Kaput
& Hegedus, 2002; Roschelle et al. 2003) and will not be discussed here. In this paper we will analyze the two
activities that NetCalc students had the most exposure to: Match-My-Graph and Slot Machine. Example screen shots
of these activities are found in Figure 1.

                      Figure 1. Screen shots of Match My Graph (left) and Slot Machine (right)
         Although the focus of this paper is a set of technology-based activities, we stress that paper-based activities
played an important role in our classroom. The classroom teacher wanted students to be able to apply what they
learned with technology to paper-based situations (such as high-stakes assessments) and often assigned paper-based
homework that reinforced the technology-based activities. She also preferred that student work be handed in on
paper, because she considered that easier to grade and hand back. Fortunately, we found that this did not interfere
with  our activities. In fact, we found     that  the use of handheld   technology  allowed a natural  shift between
technology- and paper-based activities, and students could easily move between different tasks and technologies.
Participants and Context
         This study took place in an affluent suburb in the San Francisco Bay Area. We developed a one-month
curriculum  for an advanced    eighth grade    mathematics   class with 25 students (16 male,  9  female; 1  African-
American, 4 Asian-American, 20 Caucasian). We report on our last instantiation of this curriculum, which took
place in  March  2003.   The school   used   block  scheduling, and   math class met every  other day. The   NetCalc
curriculum consisted of nine 90-minute periods over the course of a month, with two additional days for testing.
         The classroom teacher in this study preferred small group work over other activity structures, occasionally
punctuating the small group work with short teacher-led discussions (typically of less than 10 minutes). During
group work, the teacher typically walked around the class and answer individual students' questions. Although this
teacher was technologically advanced (for example, she taught digital video as an after-school activity), had six
computers in her classroom, and had access to the school's computer lab, she rarely used graphing calculators or
computers in her mathematics classes. When given the choice of collecting student work electronically (via either a
handheld computer or laptop) or on paper, she chose paper for ease of grading and redistribution. In short, while a
technology proponent in many ways, she has found that traditional technology does not meet her needs as a
mathematics teacher.
         This site, with advanced students and a reform-oriented teacher, was chosen for three reasons. The first was
to address a criticism of prior SimCalc work. While SimCalc has demonstrated impressive gains while working with
some of the most disadvantaged students in Massachusetts and New Jersey, these gains need not be attributed to
SimCalc, but to the fact that students are getting more attention than is normal in their school, thus boosting
performance.  This    study strengthens     prior SimCalc  work    by investigating the effectiveness  of SimCalc's
representational affordances for high-performing students learning conceptually difficult topics. The second was to
provide a sister site with a significantly different population of students than the graphing calculator study that was
occurring in parallel with disadvantaged students in Massachusetts (Hegedus and Kaput, 2003), which also reported
strong learning gains. The third was to provide a testbed that allowed us to easily introduce new collaborative
structures. To investigate the potential of handheld computers in supporting a wide range of collaborative activity
structures, we chose to enlist students and a teacher who were already accustomed to collaboration. This allowed us
to focus on how well handheld computers fit into the range of activities used in a collaborative classroom, instead of
focusing on how to transform classroom practice to be more collaborative.

                                                          556
Methodology
   Three or more members of the research team observed all class sessions. Research team members did not
participate in the instruction, although they were available to help with technical glitches. Two members of the
research team each videotaped a focus table during small group work, and each of the two focus tables consisted of
four students, typically working in pairs. During whole class discussions each of the two cameras captured half of
the class. Extensive classroom field notes, transcriptions of select portions of the videotapes, debriefing interviews
with the teacher after each class, pre- and post-test results, log files generated by NetCalc, and planning sessions
with the teacher and research team constitute the data used for this study.
   In this study we set out to ask: can the representational and communicative capabilities of handheld computers
provide students with an opportunity    to master    complex    and conceptual    difficult mathematics?   Three related
analysis will provide insight into this question:
   ·    Students' content learning, as measured by our pre- post-test results. Pre- and post-test items consist of a
        set of previously administered SimCalc items and a set of slightly modified Calculus AP exam items. The
        AP exam items were modified to use language familiar to the students (e.g., when necessary "velocity" was
        substituted for "f '", and graphs that crossed the y-axis were translated so as to not invoke negative time).
   ·    Students' mathematical communication, as measured by the quantity and content of hints provided in
        Match-My-Graph. To determine the quantity and content of hints, the videotapes from the two focus tables
        were transcribed for all three "Match" activities. All hints (defined as statements by the grapher that had the
        apparent intent of providing    information    to the   matcher  for the  next hint)  were   excerpted from    the
        transcripts and entered sequentially into a file. The hints were then coded for content, as described in Table
        2. The first author coded all hints, and another member of the research team coded a subset of hints from all
        "Match" activities, achieving an inter-rater reliability of 86%.
   ·    Students' translating between representations, as measured by their performance in Slot Machine. Slot
        Machine log files were used to generate a summary of student activity, including the number of attempted
        problems and the number of correct responses.
Results
Students' Content Learning: Pre- and Post-test Results
        All twenty-five students took the pre-test and post-test. Out of a total of 33 points, students on the pre-test
averaged a score of 9.3 (SD = 4.0), and on the post-test averaged a score of 22.7 (SD = 2.8). This improvement is
statistically significant (t(24) = 16.11; p < .0001), and shows that students did increase their proficiency in MCV
during the NetCalc curriculum. Furthermore, the NetCalc students performed well on AP Calculus items when
compared to published figures on high school students taking the AP exam: Figure 2 shows two slightly modified
AP exam items administered to NetCalc students. We expected these items to be especially challenging for NetCalc
students, as they were worded in a more formal manner than most NetCalc materials, and addressed non-constant
velocity, a difficult topic covered only late in the NetCalc curriculum. Figure 3 shows those NetCalc students made
large gains from pre- to post-test, and outperformed high school students taking the AP exam (The College Board,
1999). We note that students who take the AP Calculus exam are self-selected high mathematics achievers; to have
even high-achieving eighth grade students outperform this elite group is no small feat. We next look at two activities
that may have led to these gains.

                                                                     1. At what value of s does the bug
                                                                     change direction?

                                                                     (A) 2  (B) 4    (C) 6     (D) 7   (E) 8

                                                                     2. What is the total distance the bug
                                                                     traveled from s = 0 to s = 8?

        A bug begins to crawl up a vertical wire at time s = 0.      (A) 14  (B) 13  (C) 11    (D) 8   (E) 6
        The velocity v of the bug at time s, 0  s  8, is given
        by the function whose graph is shown above.
    Figure 2. Modified AP Exam Question (the only modifications were to maintain consistency with NetCalc
              terminology: time is denoted by s instead of t, and the y-axis label is m/s instead of v).

                                                          557
                                                       100%                  88%                       NetCalc Pre-test
                                                                                                       AP Students
                                                         80%            67%                            NetCalc Post-test
                                                         60%
                                                                                                    40%
                                                         40%                                   27%
                                                         20%       16%
                                                                                          4%
                                                          0%
                                                                    % Correct Q1           % Correct Q2

   Figure 3. NetCalc student performance compared to AP High School student performance on items in Figure 1
                                      (AP Results from The College Board, 1999).

Students' Mathematical Communication: Hints in Match My Graph (Information Hiding Activity)
         Classroom   observations     suggest                 that     students      in "Match"          were        engaged,   on  topic,   and provided
mathematically appropriate hints. An indicator of this engagement was the rate at which students provided hints.
Averaging over all three "Match" activities for all videotaped pairs, hints were delivered at a rate of 1 per minute.
Previously reported results confirm that students were actively engaged in this activity, as over 90% of student
utterances were on topic (Tatar et al., 2003). While student engagement is important, the content of hints (defined in
Table 2) is important to our argument that this activity addressed the NCTM "Communication" standard. Table 3
shows that in the first Match activity, in which the matcher and grapher both had access to position graphs, the hints
were predominantly related to the graphical representation. In the second and third match activities, where the
grapher and matcher had access to different representations, the hints were predominantly related to the simulation.
That is, the student's mathematical communication reflected the mathematical content of their displays.

Table 2. Codes used for hints in Match My Graph
  Code                                                       Description                                                              Examples
 Graph         Refers to aspects of the graph, such as slope or steepness on a                                               "Your graph is too steep"
               position graph, height on a velocity graph, or a point on the graph                                           "Your line stops above mine"
 Simulation    Refers to aspects of the simulation, such as the speed or direction of                                        "You're going too fast"
               the motion or the distance traveled.                                                                          "I go farther than you"
 Graph/Sim     Ambiguous in referring to the graph or simulation, typically referring to                                     "Yours is less meters"
               distance in a shorthand manner
 No Math       A statement without any explicit mathematical content, typically used                                         "You are close"
               when a student is closing in on the solution                                                                  "Still wrong"

Table 3. Types of hint used in each activity
                   Match Activity                             Graph               Simulatio             Graph/Si               No Mathnm
                     Both Position                               59                     0                          3                4
                  Velocity/motion only                            3                     78                         0                7
                    Velocity/Position                             3                     45                         5                4

Students' Translating Between Representations: Problems Solved in Slot Machine (Practice
Activity)
         Slot Machine was created as a reaction to our teacher's observation that in the first years of the study
NetCalc   students seemed  to  make    simple                   mistakes         that could        be   attributed       to a  lack of  practice with   the
representations. Slot Machine was designed to provide students with practice in translating between position graphs,
velocity  graphs,  and motion. Classroom                      observations        suggest     that      participation       in Slot Machine    resulted  in
significantly less discussion than during Match My Graph, and students were engaged privately during much of this
time. On average each student solved more than 20 problems in a session, with 72% of problems answered correctly
(each problem had five possible answers). These results indicate that Slot Machine problems were at a level of
difficulty that was appropriate for these students, without reaching a ceiling or floor effect. A closer look at student
performance, found in Table 4, indicates that the third activity was harder than the previous slot machine activities.
We believe this is due to the more complex content in the third activity. While in the first two activities students
practiced with motions   described    by constant                      velocities,    the    third      activity     mixed     constant and   non-constant
velocities, which our prior research suggests presents a significant challenge. This practice may have prepared

                                                                                 558
students for the AP items discussed earlier (but we do not have a research design that allows us to infer causality).
Based on this evidence, we conclude that students were engaged in the Slot Machine activity, and were given
significant opportunity to practice the challenging and assessment-relevant skill.
Table 4. Problems attempted and solved in Slot Machine
                         Slot Machine Activity                       Attempted        Correct           Percentcorrect
             Activity 1: Simple Position and Velocity*                    120             87                73%
             Activity 2: Complex Position and Velocity                    502            400                79%
             Activity 3: Linear Velocity                                  545            356                65%
             Overall Performance                                         1167            843                72%
*Due to technical difficulties, over half the entries were not logged for Activity 1
Conclusions and Discussion
          This study provides evidence that handheld computers can be used to increase student learning of complex
and conceptual difficult mathematics, allowing eighth grade students to become proficient in concepts typically only
found in a high school Calculus class. Thus we showed that the learning gains due to dynamic representation can be
retained despite a move from expensive, large devices to inexpensive small ones. Furthermore, we have identified a
form of small group collaboration that can productively leverage the capabilities of these devices. Through Match
My Graph        we demonstrated       that the  small     screen and    built in peer-to-peer  beaming  allowed   the  creation   of
"information      hiding"      activities that  engaged      students   in addressing  the   "Communication"     standard.  While
information     hiding   is    common     in  everyday    games     (such  as Battleship, MasterMind,      and  card games),   it is
surprisingly rare with traditional classroom technologies (but see "Monsters, Mondrian, and Me", NRC, 1999).
Possible reasons are that the large screen of traditional desktop computers makes this interaction cumbersome (for
instance,    it is easy     for  someone     to see  the   "private"    screen),  and neither  the  at-a-distance nature    of web
collaborations nor the stand-alone nature of traditional graphing calculators are amenable to face-to-face classroom
conversation. We also demonstrated that handheld computers could be used to create variations across the same
basic activity structure, shown with Match-My-Graph. Reusing an activity structure with increasingly difficult
content is one technique to focus cognitive load on the content learning and not the activity structure. Finally, we
demonstrated that handheld computers can support a wide range of activity structures, from the communication
intensive "Match" to the practice-oriented Slot Machine.
          While our research suggests that handheld computers and beaming are promising innovations for the
mathematics classroom, much work still needs to be done before we can expect handhelds to have a widespread
impact.   A  variety    of  requirements      must  be    fulfilled before    an innovation  scales up, including    providing  full
curricular   materials      (see Curtis,   et al., 2003),    designing   for  local adaptability (Fishman,    2002), and aligning
curricular goals with assessments (Shephard, 2000). We also emphasize that we do not consider our preliminary
work to be the only approach that can lead to successful student learning of more complex and conceptually
challenging mathematics. Other approaches to employing this new generation of low-cost, portable, networked
technologies also have great potential (e.g. Colella et al, 1998; Hegedus & Kaput, 2003; Wilensky & Stroup, 2000),
and research is required to determine the relative merits of each approach.

References
Burrill, G., Allison,   J., Breaux,   G,  Kastberg, S.,   Leatham,  K., and Sanchez,  W. (2002). Handheld  Graphing  Technology   in
          Secondary Mathematics: Research Findings and Implications for Classroom Practice. Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX.
Colella, V., Borovoy, R., & Resnick, M. (1998). Participatory Simulations: Using computational objects to learn about dynamic
          systems. In Proceedings of CHI '98, Summary, (pp. 9-10), (Los Angeles CA, April 1998).
Curtis, M., WIlliams, B., Norris, C., O'Leary, D., and Soloway, E. (2002). Palm Handheld Computers: A Complete Resource for
          Classroom Teachers. Eugene, OR: ISTE Publications.
The College Board (1999). Released Exams: 1997 AP Calculus and Calculus BC. New York: The College Board.
Doerr, H. M. & Zangor, R. (2000). Creating meaning for and with the graphing calculator. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
          41(2), 143- 163.
Fishman,  B.    (2002). Linking   the learning  sciences   to  systemic reform:  Teacher learning, leadership & technology. Annual
          Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA.
Hegedus,  S.,   &  Kaput,   J. (2003, July).  The  effect of a SimCalc   connected  classroom on students' algebraic thinking. Paper
          presented at the Psychology in Mathematics Education conference, Honolulu, HI.

                                                                    559
Hegedus,   S. & Kaput, J. (2002). Exploring the  phenomenon     of classroom  connectivity. Paper  to     be presented  at the 24th
         Conference for the North American Chapter of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education.
         October, 26-29 2002. Atlanta, Georgia.
Kaput, J. (1994). Democratizing access to calculus: New routes to old roots. In A. Schoenfeld (Ed.) Mathematical thinking and
         problem solving (pp. 77­156). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kaput, J. & Hegedus, S. (2002). Exploiting classroom connectivity by aggregating student constructions to create new learning
         opportunities. In A. D. Cockburn, & E. Nardi (Eds.) Proceedings of the 26th Conference of the International Group for
         the Psychology of Mathematics Education. Vol3, pp.177-184
Kaput, J., & Roschelle, J. (1998). The mathematics of change and variation from a millennial perspective: New content, new
         context. In C. Hoyles, C. Morgan, & G. Woodhouse (Eds.), Rethinking the mathematics curriculum. (pp. 155­170).
         London: Springer-Verlag.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and Standards for School Mathematics. Reston, Va.: NCTM.
National Research Council. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience and school. Washington, DC: National Academy
         Press.
Norris, C.  & Soloway, E. (2003)."The   Viable  Alternative: Handhelds,"  The School Administrator,       Web  Edition, Apr. 2003;
         www.aasa.org/publications/sa/2003_04/soloway.htm.
Roschelle, J. (1996). Designing for cognitive communication: Epistemic fidelity or mediating collaborating inquiry. In D. L. Day
         & D. K. Kovacs (Eds.), Computers, Communication & Mental Models (pp. 13-25). London: Taylor & Francis.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(3), 235-
         276.
Roschelle, J., Kaput, J., & Stroup, W. (2000). SimCalc: Accelerating students' engagement with the mathematics of change. In
         M.   Jacobson &    R. Kozma  (Eds.),   Innovations  in science  and  mathematics   education:     Advanced    designs  for
         technologies of learning (pp. 47­75). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Roschelle, J., Vahey, P., Tatar, D., Kaput, J., & Hegedus, S. J. (2003). Five key considerations for networking in a handheld-
         based mathematics classroom. In N. A. Pateman & B. J. Dougherty & J. T. Zilliox (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2003
         Joint Meeting of PME and PMENA, v4, pp. 71-78. Honolulu, Hawaii: University of Hawaii.
Shepard, L. A. (2000). The role of assessment in a learning culture. Educational Researcher, 29(7), 4-14.
Tatar, T., Michalchik, V., Moless,J., Vahey, P., Roschelle, J., & Ye, W. (2003). Beaming, Teaming & Talk: Handheld Wireless
         Math Meets Middle School Sociality. Presented at NCTM Annual Meeting, San Antonio, TX.
Tatar, D., Roschelle, J., Vahey, P., and Penuel, W. (2003). Handhelds Go to School. IEEE Computer, 2003. 36(9): p. 30-37.
Tatar, D., Vahey, P., Roschelle, J., Ye, W., and Brecht, J. (in submission). Student Learning Increases Via New Handheld Genres
         in the Math Classroom.
Tinker, R. & Krajcik, J. (2001). Portable Technologies: Science Learning in Context. R.F. Tinker and J.S. Krajcik, eds., Kluwer
         Academic, 2001.
Tucker, T. (1990). Priming the calculus pump: Innovations and resources. Washington, DC: MAA.
Vahey, P. and V. Crawford, (2002). Palm Education Pioneers Program: Final Evaluation Report. SRI International: Menlo Park,
         CA.
Vahey,  P., Enyedy,  N.,  & Gifford, B. (2000).  Learning    Probability Through the Use    of A Collaborative,    Inquiry-Based
         Simulation Environment. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, pp. 51-84. Charlottesville, VA: AACE.
White, B.Y. (1993). ThinkerTools: Causal models, conceptual change, and science education. Cognition and Instruction, 10(1),
         1-100.
Wilensky, U., & Stroup, W.M. (2000, June 14-17). Networked Gridlock: Students Enacting Complex Dynamic Phenomena with
         the HubNet Architecture. In B. Fishman & S. O'Connor-Divelbiss (Eds.), Fourth International Conference of the
         Learning Sciences (pp. 282-289). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
This work was conducted with the support of NSF Grant #0087771. We wish to thank Rupal Sutaria for her extraordinary efforts,
and and her students who participated in this project. We also wish to thank Wenming Ye and John Brecht, who wrote the
NetCalc applications, Jeff Huang who provided support for much of this project, and Tristan deFrondeville for his efforts on
curriculum and technology design.

                                                             560
