                     The Effects of Teacher Social Presence on
               Student Satisfaction, Engagement, and Learning

                         Alyssa Wise, Juyu Chang, Thomas Duffy, & Rodrigo del Valle
                        Center for Research on Learning & Technology, Indiana University
                         201 N. Rose Avenue, Suite 2100, Bloomington, Indiana 47405
                                             Tel: 812-856-8213
                                          Email: afwise@indiana.edu

        Abstract:  This research experimentally manipulated the    social       presence cues  in instructor's
        messages to students. The context was an online professional development one credit course with
        1:1 mentoring of students. Additionally, student learning goals, beliefs about learning, and levels
        of trust were examined as factors that may mitigate the effects of social presence. Results indicate
        that social presence affects the learner's interactions and perception of the mentor but has no effect
        on perceived learning, satisfaction, engagement, or the quality of their final course product. These
        findings suggest social presence is a correlational rather than a causal variable associated with
        student learning. Exploratory analyses suggest no effect of student learning goals, but that trust is
        associated with performance.

        Interaction is central to distributed education, especially in its current online incarnation (Picciano, 2002).
The student-instructor interaction in online learning is highly valued by both teachers and students (Soo & Bonk,
1998) and increased student-teacher interaction is an important factor in motivating students (Coldeway, MacRury
& Spencer, 1980). At the same time that online learning presents the opportunity for greater interaction, reality
shows us that this promise is often not being fulfilled. Social presence has been proposed as a primary factor in
creating the context for online participation. At its most basic level, social presence is simply the perception that
there is another real person taking part in the interaction (Visser, Plomp, Amirault & Kuiper 2002, Tu & McIsaac
2002). More generally, it is considered a continuum reflecting the degree to which participants feel they know one
another (Abdullah, 1999; Rourke, Anderson, Garrison & Archer, 2001).

        Social presence was initially considered to be a set attribute of the communication medium itself based on
its capacity to transmit secondary communication information such as facial expression and verbal intonation. Over
time, however, social presence has evolved to include the specific interactions that take place within the medium
(Walther, 1992) as well as users' subjective perceptions of these interactions. In this way, it is related to the face-to-
face concepts of intimacy and immediacy which are based on individual behaviors and the perceptions of these
behaviors.

        Though computer mediated communication (CMC) does not support facial expression or verbal intonation
as means for establishing social presence, context and presence can be conveyed in CMC though alternate means.
Rice and Love (1987) found that to compensate for the lost non-verbal cues in computer mediated communication
(CMC) users expressed the missing non-verbal cues in written form. Furthermore, CMC users often report positive
relational behaviors (Walther, 1992;  Baym, 1995) and perceive     CMC    as      interactive, active, interesting and
stimulating (Gunawardena, 1995). Importantly, it is not just communicating, but rather the style of communicating
that leads to high levels of social presence in a CMC environment.   Swan and Richardson (2003), Rourke, et al.
(2001), and Abdullah (1999) have identified specific textual cues that contribute to a feeling of social presence in
CMC.

        The cues identified for promoting social presence coincide with many guidelines for facilitating online
courses to promote learning through a sense of community (Collison, Elhaum, Haavind & Tinker, 2000; Solomon,
2000).  However, there is little empirical data to support that guidance, and the findings that exist are almost
entirely correlational. Higher student social presence is associated with greater interaction and use of CMC (Tu &
McIsaac, 2002; Perse, Burton, Kovner, Lears & Sen, 1992) and greater social presence is also associated with higher
levels of student satisfaction and perceived learning (Richardson & Swan, 2003). But within a correlational study, it

                                                    568
is certainly possible that the causal relation could be in the opposite direction: highly motivated and more able
students will participate more and exhibit greater social presence. There may also be other variables impacting both
social presence and motivation and learning.

        Existing research on instructor social presence has taken place primarily in face-to-face classrooms using
the related  concepts of   intimacy  and  immediacy:  increased   teacher  immediacy    behaviors   are associated  with
increased affect for the course, its content, its instructor (Anderson, 1979), increased intent to take related courses
and use the   knowledge     acquired (Kearney,  Plax & Wendt-Wasco,        1985) and perceived     learning (Sanders  &
Wiseman, 1990), however studies using objective measures of student learning have produced mixed results (Kelly
& Gorham 1988; Anderson, 1979).

        In sum, there is considerable correlational evidence to suggest that the social presence of the instructor in
an online course is an important factor affecting student motivation and satisfaction.       While there have been causal
inferences made concerning this relationship, it is entirely possible that a third variable is impacting both social
presence and performance.     For example, we would expect highly motivated learners to both express greater social
presence and demonstrate greater learning. In the work reported here, we have experimentally manipulated social
presence in an authentic learning context to examine the causal impact on learning.

        Social presence is indexed by the social presence cues found in the interaction of participants, e.g., taking a
friendly tone in the postings and sharing personal information. In an experimental context, these cues would be
manipulated   so  as to   promote  social presence and hence     learning. However,  there     are numerous   individual
differences and situational variables such as students' perception of their own computer expertise (Perse, Burton,
Kovner Lears & Sen, 1992), their perception of the privacy of the medium, and their level of trust (Tu & McIsaac,
2002) that could mitigate the effects of social presence cues.

        In our own work, we are examining two such variables. The first factor is the individual's goals: if
participants are in a course simply to fulfill a requirement, then we would certainly expect little impact of social
presence cues on a feeling of knowing each other or on learning.      However, if they are seeking to apply what is
being learned, then high social presence may be expected to encourage participation, motivation, and satisfaction.
The second factor is trust, a factor presumed to be central in the willingness of people to discuss openly with a
stranger they cannot see. Individuals enter a course with an operating level of trust which may be high or low
(Yamagishi & Yamagishi, 1994) and this may be expected to interact with the social presence level presented by the
instructor.

The Current Study
        The present study seeks to extend the existing research on social presence in three ways.       First, this study
will use one-to-one mentoring as the learning context with the instructor establishing the level of social presence.
Second, we    will examine    the relationship of learning  goals  and trust  to social presence.    Finally, this is an
experimental test of the effects of social presence (i.e. we will manipulate the level of social presence cues presented
by the instructor) to determine if we can infer a causal effect of instructor social presence on student performance
and satisfaction

        In this study, instructors provided the same quality of feedback and amount of information to learners while
varying the quantity of social presence textual cues associated with the feedback. We expect higher social presence
to lead to a greater sense of learning and higher satisfaction.   Finally, we expected that the modeling of the high
social presence instructor will lead to higher social presence in their students' responses.

Method
Learning Environment
        Students chose 1 of 35 courses to enroll in from the Learning to Teach with Technology Studio (LTTS -
http://ltts.indiana.edu). Courses are short (25 hrs), entirely web based, self-paced, and individually mentored, and
address technology integration - learner centered teaching.    Course design is guided problem solving beginning with
a curriculum problem; 4 to 7 tasks guide student work; and the outcome is a student designed lesson plan for his/her
course (see Malopinsky, L., Kirkley, J. R., Stein, R. & Duffy, T., 2000).

                                                        569
Participants
         Participants, 20 graduate students in education, were randomly assigned to a high or low social presence
condition and to one of two mentors with the exception that those with no salaried teaching experience were equally
distributed across the two social presence conditions.

Mentors
         The two mentors had over five years teaching and more than 6 months LTTS mentoring experience. Each
mentored five students in each condition. They introduced themselves at the start of the course, encouraged students,
provided feedback, answered questions and otherwise interacted in response to students. Mentors were trained in
responding with high and low social presence messages, had a reference guide of textual cues indicating social
presence, and met periodically in the first days of the course to ensure consistency in cue usage.

Independent Variable
         Mentors always provided the information and guidance they felt the student needed but varied the style of
interaction that they used to convey this information. One might think of this as an engineering versus liberal arts
style of communication. In the low social presence condition, the mentor provided the encouragement and feedback
to students in a formal, efficient way. In the high social presence condition, the interactions were enhanced to make
them more friendly and personal.     Eight social presence cues identified in the research of Abdullah (1999) and
Rourke et al. (2001) were used by the mentors with the high social presence group:

ß  Humor / Playful Asides
ß  Emotion
ß  Self-Disclosure
ß  Support or Agreement for an idea
ß  Addressing people by name
ß  Greetings / Phatics
ß  Complimenting another's idea
ß  Allusions of Physical Presence

Predictor Variables
         In addition to social presence, three correlational variables were examined to explore their relationship to
social presence and the outcome measures.

         Trust: Yamagishi's (2001) extensive work on trust in uncertain situations is consistent with our interest in
the importance of trust in student participation in online courses. Their measure of Generalized Trust consists of six
Likert scale items with internal consistency (IC) of .72 to .79 (Yamagishi & Yamagishi, 1994).        IC in the present
study was .87.

         Beliefs about Learning: Lacefield and Cole's (1973) "Educational Preference Scale" was used to measure
the teachers beliefs about learning (see also Lacefield and Mahan, 1980).  It consists of 30 bipolar items with a 7 pt
scale. IC in this study was .83.

         Intentionality: A series of seven questions asked students to rate their goals for taking the course.       The
scoring measured students' intentions related to a serious purpose for learning.

Outcome Variables
         Perceived social presence: Four, five point Likert items asked students about the warmth and friendliness
of the mentor's messages. The IC of the instrument was .85.

         Perceived warmth of the mentor:    This was measured through seven sets of bipolar items adapted from the
original set of six bipolar scales used to measure social presence (Short, Williams & Christie, 1976) with IC =.96.
In addition, four, five-point Likert items assessed satisfaction in interacting with their mentor with IC =.90.

                                                          570
         Perceived Knowledge of the mentor:       Eleven Likert scale items asked students how well they felt they
knew what their mentor was like as a person and how confident they were that the mentor did or did not possess
particular characteristics. The scale had an IC of .93.

         Student social presence:    We expected that students in the high social presence condition would interact
more with the instructor and that their messages would reflect a high level of social presence. Amount of interaction
was indexed by both the number of messages posted and the number of words per message. Level of social presence
was indexed as follows: each message was divided into idea units and each idea unit was scored as to whether or not
it included one of social presence cues identified earlier. Inter-rater reliability of social presence scoring was .82.

         Student   satisfaction: Eleven Likert  items    assessed "Student Satisfaction"   along        three dimensions:
satisfaction; benefits of the learning experience; and interest in taking another course. The IC of the scale was .96.

         Student engagement:     Thirteen items assessed four dimensions of Student Engagement: engagement in the
course; amount of effort put forth; the value placed on the effort; and the relevance to their learning goals.  The IC of
the scale was .94.

         Perceived learning:     Four items assessed the amount students felt they learned and the impact they felt that
the course had on them. The IC of the scale was .92.

         Quality of final course product: The final course products (a completed lesson plan) were assessed by two
raters using a sixteen item, four point rubric that addressed the quality of the lesson plan with regards to technology
integration and inquiry based learning. The inter-rater reliability coefficient for the rubric was .89.

Procedure
         The researchers met with students in their class to solicit participation. All other contact was web based; the
courses were not discussed in class until the work was completed. Students began by choosing and enrolling in a
course from the LTTS catalogue. They then completed the surveys which were available online.              Students started
their course when they wanted during the next week and had six weeks to complete their work.                In the course,
students had 5 to 7 tasks to complete as part of the guided problem solving approach.    During the course, mentors
provided welcoming messages, encouragement as necessary, answered questions, and provided feedback on each
task. Upon completing the course and the course evaluations, students were prompted by their mentor to complete
the post surveys, which they accessed online.

Results
         Was the manipulation of social presence perceived by the participants?       A one-tailed t test of the mean
rating of the "friendliness" of the mentor's messages yielded a significant effect (t=2.15, p<.05,). As shown in Table
1, both groups saw the messages as friendly (a score less than 3) but the high social presence participants saw them
as more friendly.  Using the square root of the pooled variance, the effect size was calculated to be .88.

         Social presence theory suggests that the friendliness of the messages should transfer to the perceived
friendliness of the mentor and even to the perception of how well they feel they know the mentor (Abdullah, 1999).
The effect of social presence on perceived friendliness of the mentor approached significance (t=1.99, p<.06). The
calculated effect size of .79 prompted us to conduct a power analysis (Rosner, 1995). Setting power at .80 and
significance at p <.05, the analysis indicated that a sample size of 20 participants would be necessary to achieve
significance. However, there was no significant effect on perception of knowing the mentor (t=1.18). Thus, there is a
tendency for the effects of social presence to generalize to the perception of the person, but it is not strong.        Since
low social presence mentors were still considered friendly perhaps a more robotic low social presence mentor would
yield a significant effect.   Despite the lack of significance, a calculated effect size of .53 indicates that a larger
sample size might help. A power analysis (Rosner, 1995), setting power at .80, significance at p <.05, indicated
that a sample size of 44 participants would be necessary to achieve significance.

                                                          571
Table 1. Mean (standard deviations) of rating of friendliness of message, nature of mentor, and "knowledge" of the
mentor for students with high and low social presence mentors on a five point scale with 1= warm and familiar.

      Condition         Perception of Message*              Nature of Mentor **           Familiarity of Mentor
      High social             1.41  (0.67)                      1.77  (.64)                      2.10 (.73)
       presence
      Low social              2.24 (1.01)                       2.50 (1.00)                      2.51 (.80)
       presence
   *p<.05    **p<.10

          We  also   expected the  high  social  presence   participants   to respond   to the messages   by being  more
interactive and friendly. There is indeed a strong effect on the length of the student messages, with messages from
participants in the high social presence condition being over twice as long as those in the low condition (X=90.4 and
38.4 words respectively). A one-tailed t test (t=2.56, p<.05) revealed this difference to be significant, with an effect
size of 1.0. Additionally, students in the high social presence condition showed a higher degree of social presence in
their messages    to the mentor.   A   scoring  of idea  units  for the presence    of  one of the social presence   cues
demonstrated that high social presence participants used social presence cues in 58% of the idea units they wrote,
compared with 44% for the low social presence condition. A one-tailed t test (t=2.21, p<.05) revealed this difference
to be significant with an effect size of .88.

          The results indicate that the social presence of the mentor was perceived by the students, somewhat
impacted their perception of the mentor, and did impact their interaction with the mentor. That is to say, the
manipulation of social presence seem to have created a more social and friendly atmosphere.         However, the critical
question is whether the increased social presence impacted the student's perception of their learning experience and
their learning outcomes.  Here we failed to find any significant effects.     One tailed t tests failed to yield significant
effects for student satisfaction with the learning experience, their perception of their engagement with the material,
or their perception of how much they learned (t<1, t=2.09; and t=1.01 respectively).       The mean ratings are presented
in Table 2 where, if anything, the low social presence students gave more favorable ratings on all three measures,
with  the effect  on engagement    reaching    significance with a   two   tailed test.  The reversal is unexpected   and
unexplained at this time.   However, most importantly, while the manipulation of social presence impacted the
atmosphere of the course, there was no effect on perceived learning, engagement, or satisfaction.

Table 2. Mean (standard deviations) of student engagement, perceived learning & satisfaction for high and low
social presence students on a five point scale with 1= positive response and mean final product score on a four point
scale with 3 = the maximum score possible.

      Condition      Student engagement         Perceived learning    Student satisfaction      Final product score
      High social         2.51   (.64)             2.27  (.73)              2.42  (.83)             2.23 (.33)
      presence
      Low social          1.84   (.78)             1.90  (.89)              2.14  (1.1)             2.14 (.42)
      presence

          Finally, we examined the actually performance of students in the courses.        The outcome for all the LTTS
courses enrolled in by the students is a lesson plan tailored to that teacher's classroom which should: be inquiry
based, address curriculum standards, integrate technology as a tool for student inquiry, and offer authentic and/or
competency based assessments. A scoring rubric was developed based on these instructional goals; the criteria used
are shown in Table 3. For each criterion the rubric included one to four specific statements. Raters graded the
products on a four point scale to determine the score for each criterion. The final product score was taken as the
average   of the  eight criteria scores. Two    raters, not involved    in the  mentoring   scored each  of  the products
independently. Initial practice and training was conducted on products from other students who completed LTTS
courses, with several rounds of training and refinement of the scoring rubric.       Inter-rater agreement on the scoring
was .89. A   t test comparing high and low social presence groups on rubric scores failed to yield a significant effect
(t<1), thus adding to the consistency of the findings that social presence supports the social climate but does not
impact outcomes, either perceived or real.

                                                            572
Table 3. Scoring rubric criteria used to grade course products.

                                            Criteria
                                            1.       Learner-Centeredness
                                            2.       Inquiry-Based
                                            3.       Engagement
                                            4.       Goals/Objectives
                                            5.       Curriculum and Standards
                                            6.       Assessment
                                            7.       Role of the Teacher
                                            8.       Use of Technology

          We will be conducting regression analyses looking at beliefs about learning, trust, and learning goals on the
outcome variables and those will be reported in June.     Preliminary data suggests that trust is an important variable,
with beliefs and goals having no relationship to performance.      The mean trust scores (measured prior to learning)
were identical for high and low social presence groups, thus indicating that any effects will be independent of the
effects of social presence. With that in mind, we used a median split to create high and low trust groups.      Analyses
indicated that the effect of trust on the perception of the friendliness of the mentor and on the perception of
"knowing" the mentor approached significance (t=1.91, p<.07 & t=1.75, p<.10 respectively). Thus, independently of
the social presence of the instructor, there is a tendency for high trust individuals to perceive the instructor as
friendlier and more familiar.   Unfortunately, the N for this study is not sufficient to look for interaction effects.
Finally, a comparison of the trust groups indicated that the difference in satisfaction with the learning experience
also approached    significance (t=   1.77, p<.10)   with mean  ratings  for  low  and high   trust being 2.58  and 1.83
respectively.

Discussion
          Social presence has been viewed as a critical factor in the success of online learning, High social presence
is thought   to create an approachable    environment    and hence  more    satisfying learning  experience   and greater
learning. Additionally, it is believed to create an atmosphere where students are more willing to ask questions and
interact, again, with the expectation that this interaction will promote learning.     Correlational studies have offered
support for these hypotheses.   However, the casual approach in this study, with the manipulation of social presence,
failed to support a causal relationship.    While social presence increased the amount written by the students and
influenced their perception of the instructor, it had no effect on perceived learning, satisfaction, engagement or the
quality of the final course product.

          One explanation of the results found is that it may be that social presence is more of a binary variable. That
is, some threshold level of social presence is important, but once the threshold is reached, there is little additional
impact. In practical terms, a learner must feel there are other people involved who are invested to some degree, but
that is all that is necessary. It is important to note that while a significant difference was found in the level of social
presence perceived between conditions; both groups did see the messages as friendly.          Thus both conditions may
have exceeded    the threshold  level of social  presence  necessary.    This interpretation, of course,  is considerably
different from   the more  general   view   that the higher the degree   of social presence   (and  thus  the bonding of
individuals) the greater will be the level of learning in an online environment.

          In reflecting on learning experiences, one might wonder why social presence would be expected to impact
learning. There are many courses which students find very friendly and even fun, but where little is learned.        It is
the intellectual demand of the course, rather than the social aspect that we may expect to be a causal factor in
learning.

          But what role might social presence play?     We suspect it may be an important causal variable in students'
persistence.  Distance education often has a very high drop out rate which is often attributed to a feeling of isolation.
There is rich research literature suggesting that the sense of academic affiliation with others is a primary variable
associated with retention of college freshman (Braxton, Milem and Sullivan, 2000).        Social presence may serve a

                                                           573
similar persistence role in   online   learning.  By  the  time of ICLS  we  will have extended  these analyses, with
expectations of replicating the study with a larger sample.   Further, we will extend both the content analysis and the
statistical analysis of the variables.

References
Abdullah, M. H. (1999). An Examination of Social Presence Cues in Online Conferences. Language Education.
           Bloomington, IN, Indiana University.
Anderson, J. (1979). Teacher immediacy as a predictor of teaching effectiveness. Communication Yearbook 3. D.
           Nimmo. New Brunswick, NJ, Transaction Books: p 543-559
Baym,   Nancy   K.    (1995). "The      Emergence   of Community     in  Computer-    Mediated  Communication".    in
           CyberSociety: Computer-Mediated Communication and Community. London: Sage,.138 - 163.
Braxton, J.M, Milem, J.F., & Sullivan, A.V.S. (2000). The influence of active learning on the college student
           departure process: Toward a revision of Tinto's theory, Journal of Higher Education 71 (5), 569-590.
Coldeway, D. O., MacRury, K. & Spencer, R. (1980). Distance Education from the learner's perspective: The results
           of individual learner tracking at Athabasca University. Edmonton, Alberta, Athabasca University
Collison, G., Elbaum, B., Haavind, S., & Tinker, R. (2000). Facilitating Online Learning: Effective Strategies for
           Moderators. Madison, WI: Atwood Publishing
Gunawardena, C. N. (1995). "Social Presence Theory and Implications for Interaction and Collaborative Learning in
           Computer Conferences." International Journal of Educational Telecommunications 1(2/3): 147-166.
Kelley, D. H., & Gorham, J. (1988). Effects of immediacy on recall of information. Communication Education,
           37(3), 198-207.
Kearney, P., Plax, T.G. & Wendt-Wasco, N. J. (1985). "Teacher immediacy for affective learning in divergent
           college classes." Communication Quarterly 33: 61-74.
Lacefield, W.E., & Cole, H.P. (1973). Starting point for curricular change: A predisposition and suitability measure
           for client groups.  Paper     presented at  the Annual   Meeting  of the   American  Educational Research
           Association, New Orleans, LA.
Lacefield, W.E.,  &   Mahan,   J.M.     (1980).  A Longitudinal    Study of  Attitude Change   and Teacher  Training.
           Educational Research Quarterly, 5(3), 2-12.
Kelly, D. H. & Gorman, J. (1988). "Effects of immediacy on recall of information." Communication Education
           37(3): 198-207.
Malopinsky, L., Kirkley, J. R., Stein, R. & Duffy, T. (October 2000). An instructional design model for online
           problem    based learning     (PBL)   environments:   The  Learning  to  Teach  with  Technology   Studio.
           Proceedings of the Association for Educational Communications and Technology. .
Perse, E. I., Burton, P., Kovner, E., Lears, M.E., & Sen, R.J.(1992). Predicting computer-mediated communication
           in a college class. Communication Research Reports, 9(2), 161-170
Picciano, A. G. (2002). "Beyond Student Perceptions: Issues of Interaction, Presence, and Performance in an Online
           Course." Journal of the Asynchronous Learning Network 6(1): 21-40.
Rice, R. & Love, G. (1987) Electronic Emotion: Socioemotional content in a computer-mediated communication
           network. Communication Research, 14 (1) 85-108.
Richardson, J.  C., &  Swan,   K. (2003).     "Examing  Social  Presence  in Online  Courses in Relation to Students'
           Perceived Learning and Satisfaction." Journal of of the Asynchronous Learning Network 7(1): 68-88.
Rosner, B. (1995). Fundamentals of Biostatistics (4th ed.). Belmont: Duxbury Press.
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison, D. R. & Archer, W. (2001). "Assessing Social Presence in Asynchronous Text-
           based Computer Conferencing." Journal of Distance Education 14(3): 51-70.
Sanders, J. & Wiseman, R. (1990). "The effects of verbal and nonverbal teacher immediacy on perceived cognitive,
           affective and behavioral learning in the multicultural classroom." Communication Education 39(4): 341-
           353.
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The Social Psychology of Telecommunications. New York: Wiley.
Solomon, Gilly (2000) E-Moderating: The key to teaching and learning online. London: Kogan Page, Ltd.
Soo, K. S. & Bonk, C. J. (1998). Interaction: What does it Mean in Online Distance Education? Proceedings of ED-
           MEDIA/ED-TELECOM              1998 Workld   Conference    on  Educational  Telecommunications,   Freiburg,
           Germany.
Swan, K. & Richardson, J. C. (2003). Developing Social Presence in Online Course Discussions.
Tu, C. H., & McIsaac, M. S. (2002). "An examination of social presence to increase interaction in online classes."
           The American Journal of Distance Education 16(2).

                                                           574
Visser, L., Plomp, Tj. Amirault, R. & W.J.A.M. Kuiper (2002). Motivating students at a distance: The case of an
         international audience. Educational Technology Research and Development. Retrieved July 24, 2003
         from http://www.learndev.org/dl/ETR&D2002-LyaEtAl
Walther, J. B. (1992). "Interpersonal effects in computer-mediated interaction:          A relational perspective."
         Communication Research 19(1): 52-90.
Yamagishi, T. (2001). Trust as a form of social intelligence. In K. S. Cook (Ed.), Trust in society (pp. 121-147).
         New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Yamagishi, T., & Yamagishi, M. (1994). Trust and commitment in the United States and Japan. Motivation and
         Emotion, 18(2), 129-166.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Carolyn Scholten for mentoring and for her contributions to the research process and Nari
Kim and Sunnie Lee for their work analyzing the social presence of the student messages.

                                                   575
