    How Does Adaptive Scaffolding Facilitate High School Students'
              Ability to Regulate Their Learning with Hypermedia?
                                                   Roger Azevedo
                University of Maryland, Dept. of Human Development, Cognition & Technology Lab
                                 3304 Benjamin Building, College Park, MD, 20742
                                         Tel: 301-405-2799, Fax: 301-405-2891
                                             Email: ra109@umail.umd.edu

Introduction

         Can high school students gain a deep conceptual understanding of conceptually challenging topics such as
the circulatory system by using hypermedia environments? Recent cognitive research has shown that providing
students with  flexible access  and   a high  degree of student  control in non-linear, random       access hypermedia
environments  rarely leads  to  deep  conceptual  understanding  of complex   systems   (e.g., Azevedo,     Cromley,      &
Seibert, in press). Learning in a hypermedia environment requires a learner to regulate his or her learning; that is, to
make decisions about what to learn, how to learn it, how much time to spend on it, how to access other instructional
materials, and to determine whether he or she understands the material. Specifically, students need to analyze the
learning situation, set meaningful learning goals, determine which strategies to use, assess whether the strategies are
effective in meeting the learning goal, evaluate their emerging understanding of the topic, and determine whether the
learning strategy is effective for a given learning goal. They need to monitor their understanding and modify their
plans, goals, strategies,  and effort in relation to contextual  conditions (e.g., cognitive,  motivational,    and task
conditions). Further, depending on the learning task, they need to reflect on the learning episode.

         Recent research   has  used  several  scaffolding methods  to support    students' learning   of   conceptually
challenging topics. In this study, we extend our previous research (e.g., Azevedo, Guthrie, & Seibert, in press) by
examining the role of different scaffolding methods in facilitating students' shift to more sophisticated mental
models as indicated by both performance and process data. High-school students (N = 53) were randomly assigned
to one of three scaffolding conditions (adaptive scaffolding [AS], fixed scaffolding [FS], and no scaffolding [NS])
and were trained to use a hypermedia environment to learn about the circulatory system. Pretest, posttest, and verbal
protocol data were collected. Findings revealed that the AS condition facilitated the shift in students' mental models
significantly more than did the other comparison conditions. Students in the AS condition regulated their learning by
activating prior knowledge, monitoring their emerging understanding by using several strategies (e.g., monitoring
progress towards goals), using several effective strategies (e.g., hypothesizing), and engaging in adaptive help-
seeking. Learners in the FS and NS conditions were less effective at regulating their learning and exhibited great
variability in self-regulation of their learning during the knowledge construction activity. Please refer to Azevedo,
Cromley, and Seibert (in press) for a complete description of the scaffolding conditions, procedure, methodological
approach, scoring of the mental models, and coding of students' SRL data. We discuss how the findings can be used
to inform the  design   of MetaCognitive   tools  (Azevedo,  2002)--hypermedia      environments     designed   to foster
students' self-regulated learning (SRL) of challenging conceptual science topics.

References
Azevedo, R. (2002). Beyond intelligent tutoring systems: Computers as MetaCognitive tools to enhance learning?
         Instructional Science, 30(1), 31-45.
Azevedo, R., Cromley, J.G., & Seibert, D. (in press). Does adaptive scaffolding facilitate students' ability to regulate
         their learning with hypermedia, Contemporary Educational Psychology.
Azevedo, R., Guthrie, J.T., & Seibert, D. (in press). The role of self-regulated learning in fostering students'
         conceptual  understanding    of complex   systems  with hypermedia,   Journal  of   Educational    Computing
         Research.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by funding from the National Science Foundation (REC#0133346). The author would
like to thank Jennifer G. Cromley, Fielding I. Winters, Daniel C. Moos for assisting in the collection, coding,
analyzing, and transcribing of the data, and the high school teachers and their students for participating in this study.

                                                         583
