              Collaborative Learning in Distributed Seismography

                                Baloian, N., Breuer, H., Hoppe, H.U., & Pino, J. A.
                        Universidad de Chile, Departamento de Ciencias de la Computación
                                       Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile
                                 Tel: +56 - 2 - 678 4363, Fax: + 56 - 2 - 689 5531
                    {nbaloian, hbreuer, jpino}@dcc.uchile.cl; hoppe@informatik.uni-duisburg.de

Distributed efforts in calculating the epicenter

         While many collaborative learning systems still artificially impose collaboration on the community of
learners our  approach  aims  to    support real collaborative      learning. Working   on  distributed    seismography
collaborative effort is essential to integrate temporal-spatial measures into shared computations and the creation of
seismic maps. Besides, persisting complexities and fuzziness in the nature and instruments of measurement as well
as dispute on theoretic approaches afford participants to specify and argue about their sometimes conflicting
research decisions and conclusions. Affordances of the field yield to potential learning goals of students moving
from peripheral participation to the epicenter of the activity.

         The need to collaborate follows from the procedure to find the epicenter. The students need a framework to
calculate the distance to the epicenter. They should also be able to share the data with all other groups also hit by the
earthquake. Finally, they must be able to share and discuss the results with the remote groups in order to learn
collaboratively.

         The environment we are presenting in this work consists of a seismograph network, a computer network
that allows the sharing of the data generated and, most important, the tools that enables students and teacher to
process  this information. This  environment     allows the      students to  learn about geophysics     by engaging in
seismographic research contents, methods and tools, develop and apply basic concepts and methods of mathematics
and physics, discover the potentials of collaboration, reflect upon the impact of scientific research and the limits of
human nature. To support these learning goals and provide a computation-augmented environment for collaborative
learning about real-world problems, tasks and solutions the following design principles were applied:

·  Orientation on expert workflow, activity structures and tools.
·  Visualization supports concept understanding and the (re-)creation of common grounds.
·  Integration of online and offline, individual and collaborative, in-class and distributed activities.
·  Flexibility to adapt the environment to the local conditions and individual constraints

Collaborative Learning with the SeismoFreeStyler
         For supporting student activities, a system was developed which consists of three different programs: a
central server with communication and data exchange functions between the groups, a locally installed client
program, and a data processing module called SeismoFreeStyler which allows the students to process the data of the
different seismographs for calculating the epicenter's location. The system provides a working area, which is meant
to support the workflow of the students' activities. A workflow is represented as a network of different types of
nodes, each one implementing a step further towards the calculation of the epicenter.

         This setting allows different kinds of collaborative learning activities: Collaboration inside one group,
collaboration among groups in the same earthquake region and collaboration among groups in different regions.
Since the sensor network is connected to the WWW, students of any part of the world may be able to do the
calculations and learn from an earthquake. Following our approach to collaborative learning, students from different
cultural backgrounds but sharing the fact of living in seismic active areas (e.g., Japan, Chile and Italy) can work
together. It is also possible to integrate students not subject to earthquakes but who are willing to learn and share
others' problems. For students living in seismic areas, this is an opportunity to understand the phenomena. It may be
a way of reducing fear and anxiety.

                                                        584
