             Equity and the Development of Technological Fluency

 Brigid Barron, Jennifer Tackman, Caitlin Martin, Emma Mercier, Aditja Johri, Zanette Johnson, Susie Wise, Marie
                                      White, Sara McPhee & Peter Worth

                                     Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305
                                    Tel: (650) 725-0194, Fax: (650) 725-7412
                                        Email: BarronBJ@Stanford.edu

Introduction
       Using computers to generate knowledge and creatively meet personal goals are aspects of what has been
called technological fluency (NRC, 1999). Although opportunities to develop technological fluency in school vary
widely, youth have other opportunities to learn to use computers in informal and out of school settings. In the
learning ecologies framework that guides the current research, the tools available, the social practices, and the
relationships formed in physical contexts where students spend time are considered crucial sources of learning
(Barron, in press). Distributed resources such as books and online tutorials are also considered to be important
resources.  The goal of this study was to investigate individual differences in experience and learning resources.

Results and Discussion
Experience    with fluency-building activities. To   look at students' history of experiences they were    asked      to
indicate the number of times they had participated in a total of 16 activities ranging from creating a multimedia
presentation to writing programming code.  To examine how students differed in their breadth of experience, we
created an experience score based on the number of fluency-building experiences students had participated in at
least once. A median split was used to define a more and less experienced group. A chi square analyses indicated no
relationship between experience level and gender, X2 = .01, df=1, p .55.

Perceived learning sources.    Students were asked to mark from a list all the ways they learn about computers.
More experienced students reported relying on five out of sixteen sources significantly more than less experienced
students. These were learning from reading books X2   = 7.34, df=1, p  .001, the use of tutorials to learn, X2     = 3.7,
df=1, p  .05, learning from a community center, X2   = 6.73, df=1, p  .02, learning from an after school club, X2     =
7.41, df=1, p  .02., and learning from their mother, X2    = 10.8, df=1, p  .001.  The relationship of gender and
experience level to the number of learning sources utilized as analyzed with a univariate ANOVA. This analysis
yielded a main effect of experience level F (3, 69) = 9.1 p    < .001.   Students with greater experience reported
significantly more sources of learning (M=4.9, SE =.48) than those with less experience (M= 7.1, SE=.51).

References
Barron (in press). Learning ecologies for technological fluency:   Gender and experience differences. Journal of
       Educational Computing Research
National Research Council. (1999). Being fluent with information technology. Washington, DC: National Academy
       Press.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a CAREER award from the National Science Foundation awarded to the first author,
REC-238524.

                                                        585
