       Designing pedagogical agents to address diversity in learning

                                             Amy L. Baylor, Ph.D.
                    Director, PALS (Pedagogical Agent Learning Systems) Research Lab
        Dept. Educational Psychology & Learning Systems, Florida State University, Tallahassee FL 32306
                                   Tel: 850-644-5203, Fax: 850-644-8776
                            Email: baylor@coe.fsu.edu            http://pals.fsu.edu

Motivating Diverse Learners
        Pedagogical agents are animated life-like characters designed to facilitate learning in computer-mediated
learning environments (Johnson, Rickel, & Lester, 2000). As a social human-computer-interface, pedagogical agents
have a unique potential to address diverse learning situations and diverse learners. Using two different research
designs, we have found that agent image can play a key role in motivating learners. The first study examined how
learners' gender and ethnicity influenced their choice of pedagogical agents how they perceived the persona of the
chosen agents (see Baylor, Shen, & Huang, 2003). 183 undergraduates from two southeast universities participated
in the study and were provided eight agents (see Table 1) to choose from, each differing by gender (male, female),
ethnicity (African American, Caucasian), and realism (realistic, cartoon).

                 Table 1. Eight pedagogical agents, differing by gender, ethnicity, and realism

Overall, perceived agent demeanor was the most cited reason for why learners chose a particular agent. The results
showed that African-American learners were significantly more likely to choose an agent with the same ethnicity
and also to have significantly more positive attitudes toward the chosen agent after learning from it. Female learners
were more likely to choose a cartoon-like (as opposed to realistic) agent than male learners. While choice in itself
may be motivating, the risk is that learners may not know what is "best" for them. Consequently, the second study
implemented a between-subjects research design and focused on agent gender and ethnicity (see Baylor & Kim,
2003). 139 students were randomly assigned to one of four conditions, where agents differed by ethnicity (African-
American, Caucasian) and gender (male, female). In every other way (voice, dialogue, affect, animation) the agents
were identical. Results indicated a main effect for agent gender, in which male agents were perceived as more
extraverted and agreeable than the female agents. Further, with respect to learning and motivation, students working
with the male agents were more satisfied with their performance and reported that the agents better facilitated self-
regulation. An interaction effect between student ethnicity and agent ethnicity revealed that students working with
agents of the same ethnicity perceived the agents to be significantly more engaging and affable.

References
Baylor, A. L., & Kim, Y. (2003). The Role of Gender and Ethnicity in Pedagogical Agent Perception. Paper
        presented at the E-Learn (World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, Government, Healthcare, &
        Higher Education), Phoenix, Arizona.
Baylor, A. L., Shen, E., & Huang, X. (2003). Which Pedagogical Agent do Learners Choose? The Effects of Gender
        and  Ethnicity. Paper presented at    the E-Learn    (World Conference       on E-Learning     in Corporate,
        Government, Healthcare, & Higher Education), Phoenix, Arizona.
Johnson, W. L., Rickel, J. W., & Lester, J. C. (2000). Animated pedagogical agents: face-to-face interaction in
        interactive learning environments. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 11, 47-78.

Acknowledgments
This work was sponsored by National Science Foundation Grant # IIS-0218692

                                                     586
