 The Impact of Spurious Correlations on Students' Problem-Solving
                          Norma M. Chang1, Kenneth R. Koedinger2 & Marsha C. Lovett1
         1Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh PA 15213
  2Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh PA 15213
                                        Tel: 412/268-8120, Fax: 412/268-2798
                       Email: nchang@andrew.cmu.edu, koedinger@cmu.edu, lovett@cmu.edu

Introduction
         Students are often susceptible to surface features when learning to solve problems in a new domain.
Providing example problems where salient surface features are spuriously correlated with the same problem type
may encourage their use (Ben-Zeev & Star, 2001), whereas increasing the variability among superficial features
during training may yield more robust knowledge (Schmidt & Bjork, 1992).        To better understand the causes and
consequences   of this phenomenon,     we   compared   the impact of   two  instructional regimens  embodying    these
extremes and articulated detailed models of students' surface and deep knowledge resulting from each training
procedure, enabling us to distinguish between weak correct knowledge and strong incorrect knowledge.

Experiment
         In this training study, undergraduate students with no statistics background underwent four consecutive
days of instruction and practice with using pie charts, histograms, boxplots, scatterplots, and contingency tables to
represent and interpret a set of data. One group ("spurious, S") solved problems containing spurious correlations
between problem type and irrelevant features, where every problem of the same type included the same surface
features (cover story  theme, question  wording,  and   types of variables).  The  other  group ("varied,  V")  solved
problems where these surface features were varied across all the problem types, so that all the pie-chart problems
used different  cover  story themes,   etc.  At test, V-participants  outperformed  S-participants  on problems   with
unfamiliar combinations of surface features, replicating the results of a previous pilot study (Chang, Koedinger, &
Lovett, 2003).  Further, the S-participants' errors reflected negative transfer in that they selected answers based on
training problems that matched in their surface features but not structure, despite the extensive explicit instruction,
scaffolding, and feedback provided, and despite stating the correct structural feature to use to solve these problems.

Model of Students' Knowledge
         Modeling   participants'  knowledge    based  on  their answer    choices revealed   that  irrelevant surface
knowledge exerted a greater impact on S-participants' answers than the correct deep knowledge. Consequently, their
errors cannot be explained merely by the fragility of their correct understanding, but arise in greater part from the
strength of their adherence   to superficial features.  In  contrast, the  V-participants generally exhibited  stronger
relevant than irrelevant knowledge, attesting to the magnitude of the manipulation's effect.        These results offer
further support for the value of providing examples with varying features and underscore the importance of gauging
the strength of students' incorrect, shallow knowledge.    Illuminating their knowledge representation may help us
anticipate how effectively particular instructional interventions would improve their problem-solving.

References
Ben-Zeev, T., & Star, J.R. (2001). Spurious correlations in mathematical thinking. Cognition and Instruction, 19,
         253-275.
Chang, N.M., Koedinger, K.R., & Lovett, M.C. (2003). Learning spurious correlations instead of deeper relations.
         In R.  Alterman &   D.  Kirsh  (Eds.), P roceedings  of the  25th Cognitive Science  Society.   Boston, MA:
         Cognitive Science Society.
Schmidt, R.A., & Bjork, R.A. (1992). New conceptualizations of practice: Common principles in three paradigms
         suggest new concepts for training. Psychological Science, 3, 207-217.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a Department of Education Jacob K. Javits fellowship and NSF grant no. 0087632.

                                                         589
