  Understanding What's Hard in Learning About Complex Systems

                              Elizabeth S. Charles* & Sylvia T. d'Apollonia**
      *College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, 801 Atlantic Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332-0280
                       Tel: 404-385-4035, Fax: 404-894-5041, echarles@cc.gatech.edu
    ** Dawson College, 3040 Sherbrooke West, Montreal, QC, H3Z 1A7, sapollonia@education.concordia.ca

        One approach to conceptual change suggests that ontological barriers may impose beliefs that contribute to
learners' misconceptions and misunderstanding of many science concepts (e.g., Chi, Slotta, and deLeeuw, 1994). If
beliefs about the nature of the world affect how one explains observations and the functioning of phenomena then it
is possible that the lack of certain types of explanations may impose substantial limitations to learning. Overcoming
problems in learning concepts such as diffusion, force, evolution, may require instruction of an ontological category
(i.e., emergent causal processes), which is unfamiliar to most novice learners. We argue that it may be possible to
accomplish this objective using complex systems thinking. This study investigated the acquisition of a set of
complex systems concepts through simulations in an attempt to identify which concepts are easier and which are
more difficult to learn and apply as an alternative causal explanation.

        Complex systems are multi-agent systems that operate under specific rules and constraints. What makes
them particularly hard to understand is that there is not simply an agent controlling outcomes, rather outcomes
emerge from feedback loops, probabilistic flows of information, selections mechanisms, and random changes. To
assess the learner's comprehension and application of this ontologically distinct causal explanatory framework
required articulating and coding their understanding into six sub-categories of emergent behaviors: Multiple Levels
of Organization, Local Interactions, and Probabilistic Behavior, Nonlinearity and Random Behavior. To identify the
development of understanding of these concepts, we studied a set of nine science students (equivalent to grades 12
to 13) as they explored simulations of complex systems that exhibited these behaviors.

Methods
        The nine cases study students with limited or no familiarity with complex systems engaged, one at a time,
in five hour-long inquiry-based instructional sessions, over a period of five weeks. Cognitive scaffolding in the form
of a coach/interviewer was used to elicit talk aloud protocols. We selected three different multi-agent computer
simulations designed with StarLogoTM, to represent different types of complex systems (Slime, modeling tightly
coupled complex system; FreeGas, modeling dissipative systems; and Wolf-Sheep, modeling the somewhat in-
between system). The sessions were as follows: session 1, Slime;           session 2, FreeGas; session 3, StarLogo
programming tutorial; session 4, interview; session 5, Wolf-Sheep). The transcribed discussions from these sessions
were coded and analyzed using the six categories described above.

Results
        Not all of the six components of our complex systems taxonomy were equally daunting for the students.
Posttest results confirmed that it was possible for all nine students to learn and use the concepts of Multiple Levels,
Local Interactions and Probabilistic Behaviors to explain novel phenomena. Although four students were capable of
adequately describing Nonlinearity and Random Behaviors, only one student acquired a sufficiently sophisticated
understanding of these concepts to apply them in a far transfer task. Hence, this implies that when using complex
systems thinking to facilitate conceptual change, the attribution of "causal determinacy" (i.e., interpreted as an
orthogonal ontological dimension to these two above) may be the major obstacle for learners. Further study of the
possible interactions between the difficulties in acquiring these target concepts (i.e., nonlinearity and random
behaviors) and limitations of the selected intervention are required.

References
Charles, E. (2003). An Ontological Approach to Conceptual Change: The role that complex systems thinking may
        play in providing the explanatory framework needed for studying contemporary sciences. Unpublished
        doctoral dissertation, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Chi, M. T. H., Slotta, J. D., & deLeeuw, N. (1994). From things to processes: a theory of conceptual change for
        learning science concepts. Learning and Instruction, 4, 27-43.

                                                 590
