  Personally-Seeded Discussions to Scaffold Online Argumentation

                                              Douglas B. Clark
               College of Education, C&I, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, 85287-0911
                                   Tel: (480) 491-7921, Fax: (413) 832-6347
                                              Email: dbc@asu.edu

        Personally-seeded discussions support learning and collaboration through an activity structure that elicits,
shares, and contrasts students' own ideas to engage them in the discourse of science argumentation and inquiry. The
context for this study is an online thermal equilibrium inquiry lab for eighth grade students. The students use a
special interface to build principles to describe the data they collect in the lab portion of the project. These principles
become the seed comments for the online discussion. The software sorts the students into discussion groups with
students who have built different principles so that each discussion group represents multiple perspectives. Students
then follow a set of guidelines to critique each other's principles. This paper explores the efficacy of this approach in
supporting argumentation structure using a coding scheme developed by Osborne, Erduran, and Simon (2002). The
Toulmin-based hierarchy rates arguments according to level of structural sophistication in terms of first order
elements including Claims, Grounds, and Rebuttals.

        The personally-seeded discussion system analyzed in this study was piloted in an online inquiry project.
Students begin the inquiry project by making predictions about the temperature of everyday objects around them in
the classroom. Students then use thermal probes to investigate the temperature of these objects and construct
principles to describe the patterns encountered. This first portion of the project attempts to cue students' conflicting
ideas, including students' sense that objects are different temperatures because "they feel that way" and students'
sense that objects in the room should be the temperature of the room because "what would make them be a different
temperature?" In the second portion of the project, the project places students in electronic discussion groups with
students who have constructed different principles explaining the data.

        Osborne et  al. cited a baseline of 2%     of typical classroom     discourse involving argumentation. In
comparison to this 2% baseline, personally-seeded discussions scaffold significantly higher levels of argumentation
with minimal teacher training. Osborne et al.'s findings suggest that altering teacher practice is more critical than
student training in terms of changing quality of argumentation in the classroom. In their study, the important
variable was the teacher's experience with the interventions. Importing curricular change into the classroom might
be more easily accomplished with technology. An interesting future question focuses on the degree to which
extended interaction with personally-seeded discussions might change teacher or student argumentation behavior in
the classroom when outside of the online scaffolds. What would be the impact over time of participating in these
online discussions? Will students internalize any    of these improved      argumentation strategies and use them
unprompted  in classroom   settings? (Download      more  about  this    work  at: http://courses.ed.asu.edu/clark/)

                                                        591
