       Using Games to Model and Evaluate Collaborative Learning

                  César A. Collazos, Luis A. Guerrero, José A. Pino, Gerry Stahl & Sergio F. Ochoa
                   Dept. Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Av. Blanco Encalada 2120, Chile
                                           Tel: +56-2-6784890
                  Email: {ccollazo, luguerre, jpino, sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl, gerry.stahl@drexel.edu

The Problem
       Quantitative research in collaborative learning is difficult because it is hard to measure collaboration for a
number of reasons. We have developed and tested a series of simple games designed to provide students an
experience of collaborative learning ­ an experience that can be quantified along key dimensions or "indexes of
collaboration." Such a game provides a useful tool for conducting controlled experiments in collaborative learning.
We provide a model that specifies the experiment's initial conditions and activity structure, allowing the researcher
to control these variables and quantify an interesting set of indicators.

The Model
       One way to increase the probability that some types of collaborative interactions will occur during an
experimental study is to carefully design the situation. Numerous independent variables have been studied in order
to determine the conditions under which collaborative learning is efficient. Our model defines a set of elements to
consider in order to specify the initial characteristics of the groups (see Figure 1).

The Games
       A game ­ called Chase the cheese ­ is played by four persons, each with a computer (see Figure 2). The
computers are physically distant and the only communication allowed is computer-mediated. This paper is part of
our larger effort, that includes, for example, studies using additional collaboration games based on the same model
(MemoMet, ColorWay, TeamQuest) and a larger theoretical context including design patterns and collaborative
scenarios as well as qualitative interaction analyses of students using scientific simulations.

                                              592
