   Designing an Online Learning Environment for New Elementary
              Science Teachers: Supports for Learning to Teach

                                Elizabeth A. Davis, Julie Smithey & Debra Petish
            University of Michigan ~ 610 E. University Ave., 1323 SEB ~ Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1259
                                   Tel: (734) 647-0594, Fax: (734) 763-1368
                                 Email: [betsyd, jsmithey, dpetish] @umich.edu

         Elementary teachers have a tremendous impact on their students' future learning. Yet because of the high
demands put on them, elementary teachers often demonstrate weak subject matter knowledge in science (Anderson
& Mitchener, 1994) and lack confidence in teaching science (Cochran & Jones, 1998). Likewise, prospective and
new science teachers face many challenges, including that they may hold little pedagogical content knowledge (van
Driel, Verloop, & de Vos, 1998). Thus new elementary science teachers need support, and it is critical to understand
how best to provide that support. In our extended white paper (available at http://www.umich.edu/~betsyd) we
present a design narrative describing CASES (Curriculum Access System for Elementary Science; available at
http://cases.soe.umich.edu). CASES,  a technology-mediated  learning    environment  supporting new          elementary
science teachers as they learn to teach inquiry-oriented science more effectively, incorporates inquiry-oriented unit
plans that are intended to be educative for teachers, as well as a personal online journal and an online teacher
community discussion space. CASES is grounded in three main design principles that we present here.

         CASES' Guidance on Demand principle states that designers of learning environments for teachers should
transform an instructional resource into a learning environment through guidance-on-demand by incorporating
educative curricula features such as hints about learners, instructional representations, science content, and science
inquiry as well as prompts for productive reflection-on-action. Providing learners with guidance on demand allows
learners to request the guidance they want at the time they want it, allowing a "just in time" approach to providing
help. Second, our Images of Inquiry design principle states that designers of learning environments for teachers
should provide useful images of inquiry by incorporating multiple representations of inquiry, in narrative, graphical,
and tabular form, and grounded in the curriculum materials themselves. It is important in any learning environment
to provide learners with multiple representations of what the learner is intended to understand, and a main goal of
CASES is for teachers to develop an improved understanding of what it means to teach through scientific inquiry.
Finally, CASES' Social Supports design principle states that designers of learning environments for teachers should
provide social supports for learning by incorporating a supportive community grounded in the study of practice and
images of role models struggling with and solving new teachers' typical problems. Teacher communities provide
opportunities for expertise development as well as identity development. When a community has access to diverse
perspectives, distributed expertise can develop. Thus social supports are essential for teacher learning.

         Our ongoing work investigates how preservice and new teachers use these supports and others, so we can
continue to refine these design  principles. Such research informs    the field's understanding of         strategies for
supporting new teachers as well as our understanding of new teachers' cognition and development more broadly.

References
Anderson, R. D., & Mitchener, C. P. (1994). Research on science teacher education. In D. L. Gabel (Ed.), Handbook
         of Research on Science Teaching and Learning. New York: Macmillan.
Cochran, K., & Jones, L. (1998). The subject matter knowledge of preservice science teachers. In B. J. Fraser & K.
         G. Tobin (Eds.), International handbook of science education (pp. 707-718). Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
         Kluwer Academic Publishers.
van Driel, J., Verloop, N., & de Vos, W. (1998). Developing science teachers' pedagogical content knowledge.
         Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(6), 673-695.

Acknowledgments
This research is funded by a PECASE Award from the National Science Foundation, REC grant #0092610. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors.

                                                     594
