        A Reflective Analysis of Instructional Practice in an Online
                                              Environment

                                       Matt DelMarcelle & Sharon Derry
        Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin, 1025 West Johnson Street, Madison, WI,
                                                       53706.
                                     Tel: 608-263-8985, E-mail: mdelmarcel@aol.com

Introduction
        We analyzed data collected during a problem-based learning (PBL) activity implemented entirely online
as part of a learning sciences course for pre-service teachers. During the activity, the first author (MD) served as the
facilitator for a collaborative group of 5 students. This study was performed in the context of the eSTEP (Elementary
and Secondary Teacher Education Project) research program. One focus of eSTEP is the reflective analysis of
instructional practice utilizing multiple analytical frameworks and methodologies. In one previous study (Derry,
Seymour, Fassnacht, & Feltovich, 2001), a novice PBL facilitator collaborated with experts to analyze her practices.
This study continued in this vein and provided us with the opportunity to "experiment" with a framework, developed
by Radinsky, Leimberer, and Gomez (2000), for analyzing patterns of student reflection in collaborative discourse.
We analyzed data collected from an educational psychology course for preservice teachers focusing on the learning
sciences. A goal of the course was to educate students to utilize the learning sciences to both analyze and design
classroom instruction. The course used the eSTEP system (Derry & STEP Research Group, 2002), a web-based
instructional environment that supports learning through video case analysis and instructional design activities. This
study focused on a video analysis discussion that MD facilitated. In this discussion, students were instructed to
utilize a small number of learning sciences concepts to interpret and analyze a video case of classroom instruction.
The video analysis discussion occurred in a threaded discussion board within eSTEP.

Methodology
        In the Radinsky (2000) framework, reflection is recognized as purposeful thought or activity               directed at
making sense of problematized situations. Reflectiveness is seen as a dispositional and enduring characteristic of an
individual that develops within an activity system. There are three "contexts," or categorical topics of reflection:
data, role, and task. The data context spans the curricular domain and content of the activity. The task context
includes the procedures and components of the activity structure. The role context refers to the relationship and
interaction that the individual has with the activity. In each context there are five subcategories referring to specific
issues or entities upon which students may reflect. Learning is recognized as a maturing reflective disposition. In
practice, this would be recognized as a student competently and fluidly reflecting upon all aspects of all three
contexts in the process of solving a complex problem.

Results
        The analytical framework of Radinsky et al. uncovered clear patterns in student reflection that we were
able to connect to the questioning and facilitation strategies of MD. These connections were triangulated with data
collected from a journal that MD kept during the activity in which he reflected upon his perceptions of how the
activity was progressing and his plans for shaping the evolution of the activity. The Radinsky et al. framework
proved to be adaptable and insightful. Through further adaptation of the framework to the context of online teacher
education, we intend to investigate how facilitation strategies, instructional activity, and online tools collectively
shape student reflection and understanding.

References
Derry, S. J. & the STEP Research Group. (2002). From ambitious vision to partially satisfying reality: An evolving socio-
        technical design supporting community and collaborative learning in teacher education. To appear in
S. Barab, R. Kling & J. Gray (Eds.), Designing Virtual Communities in the Service of Learning, Cambridge University Press.
Derry, S. J., Seymour, J. Feltovich, P., & Fassnacht, C. (2001). Tutoring and knowledge construction during
         problem-based learning: An interaction analysis. Paper presented at the Annual Conference National
        Association for Research in Science Teaching (NARST), St. Louis MO.
Radinsky, J., Leimberer, J. M., & Gomez, L. M. (2000). Reflective inquiry with complex data: A case study of dispositional
        learning. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association (New Orleans, LA,
        April 24-28, 2000).

                                                        595
