    My World: A Case Study in Adapting Scientists' Tools for Learners

                                                     Daniel C. Edelson
                  School of Education and Social Policy, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208
                                             Email: d-edelson@northwestern.edu

         In previous research, we identified strategies for adapting scientists' investigation tools to be appropriate
for use by students to support inquiry-based learning (Edelson & Gordin, 1998; Edelson, Gordin, & Pea, 1999).           The
goal is to take tools that enable scientists to conduct investigations that extend the boundary of human understanding
and adapt   them   to   create tools that enable   students to  conduct  investigations  that enable   them   to extend  the
boundaries    of their  personal  understanding.    The  challenge  is   to take a  tool designed  for experts   who   bring
substantial understanding of both the subject under study and the investigation techniques supported by the tool and
convert it into a tool for novices who will use the tool to develop understanding of subject matter and investigation
techniques.

         To achieve these goals, we have developed five strategies for adapting investigation tools for learners: (1)
Strategically    select functionality.    The goal  in this process   is to  select operations  in a  way  that  maximizes
investigation power without overwhelming learners with complexity. (2) Embed experts' tacit knowledge in the user
interface.  Scientists bring expertise in content and process to their use of tools.        Learners can be scaffolded by
making some of that knowledge explicit in the user-interface.      (3) Automate difficult but pedagogically unimportant
processes.  In any scientific investigation technique, there are steps that are necessary to do but do not contribute to
the achievement    of   any learning   objectives.  Automating   these   steps enables   learners  to devote  their time  to
activities that provide more benefit for learning.   (4) Add bridging functions.     Bridging functions are functions that
can be added to scientists' tools to help learners to understand some important aspect of them.        These are functions
that would not generally be useful to an expert but provide an important stepping stone to developing understanding
of the functions that are present in an expert tool. (5) Add inquiry support tools.    Inquiry support tools assist learners
in managing and tracking the complex process of conducting scientific investigations.         They might help to structure
the inquiry process or with managing the products of an investigation.

         Approximately      two  years ago,   we   began to  explore  the   application  of these  strategies to a  form  of
investigation tool that is widely used in the geosciences, the geographic information system (GIS).        While there have
been widespread calls for the use of GIS tools in classrooms, the difficulty of using professional tools has proven to
be a significant obstacle to its use (Kerski, 2000).     My World GISTM, the tool we are developing is designed to
provide students from middle school through college with the opportunity to conduct investigations using a wide
variety of Earth science, environmental science, geography, and social studies data.            To date, the use of these
strategies has been based on heuristic analysis.   Currently, we are initiating a program of laboratory- and classroom-
based user studies to empirically investigate obstacles faced by learners in using GIS and strategies to address them.

References
Edelson,   D.  C., &    Gordin, D.   (1998). Visualization  for learners:   A  framework    for adapting   scientists' tools.
         Computers and Geosciences, 24(7), 607-616.
Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning through
         technology and curriculum design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3&4), 391-450.
Kerski, J.  J. (2000).   The   implementation   and  effectiveness of  geographic    information   systems technology   and
         methods in secondary education. Unpublished Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Colorado.

Acknowledgments
         Eric Russell is the lead programmer on My World and has made significant contributions to the ideas in
this paper. This work has been supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants no. RED
9453715, ESI-9720687, and ITR-0085946. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
"My World GIS" and "My World" are trademarks of Northwestern University.

                                                            597
