           Numerically Driven Inferencing about Abortion: Estimation and
               Rate Feedback's Diverse Effects on Personal Policies and
                                                        Justifications
                       Jennifer Garcia de Osuna, Michael Ranney, Janek Nelson & Laura Germine
       4533 Tolman Hall, Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-1670
                                         Tel: (510) 642-1551 Fax: (510) 642-3769
         jmgdo@berkeley.edu, ranney@berkeley.edu, jamin@socrates.berkeley.edu, lgermine@berkeley.edu

         What is the legal U.S. immigration rate, as a percentage of the nation's population? We have observed
median estimates of 10% (from students at an elite college; Ranney, Cheng, Garcia de Osuna, & Nelson, 2001) or
more (from adolescents). The true value is over 30 times less­­only 0.3%! Might this datum change one's opinion
or preference on immigration­­one's policy? We often make decisions, and justify or reason about our views, based
on available evidence. The Theory of Explanatory Coherence and its models (e.g., ECHO) describe principles that
guide belief evaluation and revision. Two such principles are that we (a) weight evidence more than conjecture, and
(b) prefer propositions   explained     parsimoniously     (Ranney      &  Schank,    1998).   Thus,  true   base   rates represent
parsimonious evidence, relative to instances or anecdotes, and so should be both heavily weighted in one's thinking
and usually evaluated as believable. The present study explored aspects of this general hypothesis­­that a single,
germane, critical, and surprising number may foster conceptual change. Using a novel paradigm, Numerically
Driven Inferencing (NDI; Ranney et al., 2001), and one of its methods, EPIC­­Estimate, Prefer, Incorporate, and
Change­­we studied both estimates and the effects of numerical feedback on (UC-Berkeley) undergraduates'
abortion policies. Quantitatively and qualitatively, 92 such students offered estimates and preferences for the legal
U.S. abortion rate, explaining and justifying them. After receiving the (usually, quite surprising) true rate as
feedback, a highly minimalist intervention, they provided another (typically changed) preference-and-rationale.

         Generally, students estimated the abortion rate to be far below the true rate­­seven times lower in mean,
and 67 times lower in median. In fact, 79% of them failed to capture the true rate in their self-reported "non-surprise
intervals." Learning the true rate changed students' reasoning about abortions­­regarding both their preferences and
the points of   view   (POVs)  by    which    they  justified   their   policies. The  median    student's   estimate  and     initial
preference were, respectively, 5,000 and 100 abortions per million live births (APMLB). Following the then-current
feedback of 335,000 APMLB, the new median preference­­1,000­­represented a relatively much more stringent
abortion policy (from -98% to -99.7%; cf. Munnich, Ranney, Nelson, Garcia de Osuna, & Brazil, 2003). One of the
most dramatic results was that those who initially adopted "status quo" policies usually changed their stances after
seeing the feedback: of the 32 who initially preferred their estimated abortion rates, feedback caused 21 (66%) to
adopt a directional (non-status-quo) policy, becoming "semi-flippers." Feedback also changed the POVs that semi-
flippers used to justify their preferences: Beforehand, most semi-flippers asserted that abortions should always be
allowed; these justifications shifted markedly after feedback. Those 14 who became "decreasers-come-lately"
(DCLs) no longer claimed that abortions should always be allowed, and instead largely justified their new views by
preferring a utopian world where abortions are moot. Conversely, seven "increasers-come-lately" (ICLs) used none
of the justifications eventually used by DCLs and instead claimed (largely as before) that abortions should always
be allowed and/or that the rate ought to reflect society's greater good. So, while semi-flippers at first seemed
homogenously like-minded, feedback bifurcated them into divergent positions such that there was no overlap in the
justification types used. These and other results show both the dramatic effects of base rate feedback on policy
evaluation, and the import of having and using data when reasoning on topics that engage society. This experiment
represents a new way to study numerically-based reasoning that considers the subjective nature of social life.

References
Munnich, E.L., Ranney, M.A., Nelson,   J.M., Garcia de Osuna,   J.M., & Brazil, N.B. (2003). Policy shift through Numerically- Driven
         Inferencing: An EPIC experiment about when base rates matter. Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
         Science Society (pp. 834-839). Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum.
Ranney, M., & Schank, P. (1998). Toward an integration of the social and the scientific: Observing, modeling, and promoting the explanatory
         coherence of reasoning. In S. Read & L. Miller (Eds.), Connectionist models of social reasoning and social behavior (pp. 245-274).
         Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ranney, M., Cheng, F., Garcia de Osuna, J., & Nelson, J. (2001, November). Numerically Driven Inferencing: A New Paradigm for Examining
         Judgments, Decisions, and Policies Involving Base Rates. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Judgment and
         Decision Making, Orlando, FL.

                                                                 600
