            Developing Understanding of Basic Astronomical Concepts
                                      By Using a Virtual Solar System
                                        Elhanan Gazit, David Chen & Yoav Yair
                      The School of Education, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv             69978, ISRAEL
            Department of Life and Natural Sciences, The Open University of Israel, Tel-Aviv, ISRAEL
                                       Tel: 972+3+6408763, Fax: 972+3+6407752
                                             E-mail: gazit@post.tau.ac.il

          This study describes high-school students' conceptual development of the basic astronomical phenomena
during real-time interaction with a virtual solar system (VSS). The solar system is a highly complex abstract
scientific concept. Its dynamic nature, vast spatial dimensions and different time scales cannot be perceived directly
by the senses. In order to understand the basic astronomical concepts such as the day-night cycle, the seasonal
changes or the moon's phases, one must visualize the relative motions of the planetary objects in 3D space from
different perspectives simultaneously      (Barnett et al., 2001). Previous          studies have reported     that students hold
intuitive misconceptions of the basic astronomical phenomena such as the day-night cycle, the generation of
seasons, lunar phases, and solar and lunar eclipses    (Vosniadou & Brewer, 1994; Baxter, 1989).               The VSS is a non-
immersive 3D virtual environment based on high-resolution spacecraft images of the solar system's planetary
objects (i.e. planets, moons, asteroids etc.). The objects revolve in their orbits against the constant background of
the Milky Way and the stars) Yair et al., 2001). The learner uses the computer mouse to change his/her viewpoint
while "flying" in   3D space.     For example, the  learner  can   zoom-in          or zoom-out,  roll below     or  above while
accompanying the plants' revolution around the Sun, or he can "spin" together with the planet as a geo-centric
satellite. This offers a new visual learning experience, which has not been systematically studied yet. Nine high
school students participated in the study. Each student was given two tasks containing a set of observe-explain
questions about the Earth-Moon-Sun system without mentoring. Based on the microdevelopment approach we
designed  a systematic  examination     of the learner's  real-time interactions         and  the subsequent     qualitative and
quantitative changes in the learner's behaviors and thinking, in order to reveal the hidden patterns of learning
processes  (Gazit &   Chen, 2003).     The results  suggest  that high      interactive    performance    does   not  necessarily
contribute to the development of scientific conceptual understanding. Alternative dynamic misconceptions of the
basic astronomical phenomena emerged as a result of: (1) Cognitive difficulty in coordinating visual information
form different frames of references; (2) Misinterpreting salient features of the VSS visual representation; (3)
Ignoring the 3D nature of the Moon's relative motion, together with incorrect perception of the Moons' and the
Earth's relative size and distance, and (4) The inability to mentally shift away from the Earth's frame of reference.
The participants used the VSS as a visual thinking tool by drawing on screen the trajectories of the planets and
gravitational forces. For example, Student E.L builds a new frame of reference to show the Moon-Sun relative
motion. By imagining the Earth as the Sun, and the Moon as the Earth, he was able to draw on screen with his
mouse the apparent motion of the imaginary moon. These findings have significant bearing on our understanding of
the potential and pitfalls of learning via virtual reality environments. This study demonstrates that the conceptual
development within the VSS has an emergent nature, as the learner controls his/her own learning process. However,
interacting with a dynamic representation might cause the emergence of alternative conceptions of astronomical
concepts. Indeed, one may infer the emergence of misconceptions as a direct consequence of the lack of planned
mentoring. A well-thought interaction with a teacher or a smart agent during the session would undoubtedly reduce
them. Hence,   this kind of learning    should  be  accompanied     with     suitable     scaffolding  and     guided  reflection.
Moreover, the design of virtual environments should include navigation tools to empower the learners' perceptual
and cognitive system.

References
Barnett, M., Barab, S. A., & Hay, K. E. (2001).The virtual solar system project: Student modeling of the solar
          system. The Journal of College Science Teaching, 30 (5), 300-305.
Baxter, J.H. (1989). Children's understanding of familiar astronomical events. International Journal of Science
          Education, 11, 502-513.
Gazit, E., & Chen, D. (2003). Using the observer to analyze learning in virtual worlds. Behavior Research
          Methods, Instruments & Computers, 35, 400-407.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1994). Mental models of the day/night cycle, Cognitive Science, 18, 123-183.
Yair, Y., Mintz, R., & Litvak, S. (2001). 3D-virtual reality in science education: an implication for astronomy
          teaching, Journal of Science Education and Technology, 20, 293-305.

                                                            601
