  Learning from Category-Avoiding Instructional Examples Reduces
               Cognitive Load and Fosters Cognitive Skill Acquisition
                                                                      Peter Gerjets
                       Multimedia and Hypermedia Research Unit, Knowledge Media Research Center
                                         Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
                                              Tel: ++49-7071-979219, Fax: ++49-7071-979100
                                                                p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de

                                                                   Katharina Scheiter
              Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen
                                         Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
                                              Tel: ++49-7071-979330, Fax: ++49-7071-979100
                                                              k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de

                                                                  Richard Catrambone
                                           School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology
                                           654 Cherry Street, Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0170, USA
                                              Tel: ++1-404-894-2682, Fax: ++1- 404-894-8905
                                                                  rc7@prism.gatech.edu

         Problem-type schemata are often seen as an important prerequisite for skilled problem solving. These
schemata represent problem categories together with category-specific solution procedures and can be best acquired
by studying concrete instances of problem categories (i.e., examples). Usually instructional worked examples are
designed  in   a   molar         way  to convey      knowledge       on problem    categories (that are defined           by          multiple     structural
problem features) and category-specific solution procedures (category-focusing examples). In contrast, we propose
to design instructional examples in a modular way that focuses on the understanding of relations between individual
structural problem features and individual solution steps, i.e. relations that hold below the category level (category-
avoiding examples). We designed instructional examples (see Table 1) in the domain of calculating the probability
of complex events (e.g., at the Olympics, 7 sprinters participate in the 100m-sprint - what is the probability of
correctly guessing the winner of the gold, the silver, and the bronze medal?) Like many other topics, the calculation
of complex-event probabilities is usually taught by means of a category-specific solution formula in which multiple
steps are collapsed into a single formula that applies to all problems sharing a characteristic pattern of structural
features. Studying category-focusing examples requires to consider multiple structural problem features in parallel
in order to understand the problem's category membership. Therefore, a substantial cognitive load may result
depending on the number of relevant structural problem features. Moreover, category-focusing examples typically
result in a molar representation of solution procedures. For instance, one has to have knowledge on all defining
structural features of a problem before being able to decide on a formula needed for its solution. Therefore, relations
holding irrespective of category membership such as relations between structural problem features and individual
solution steps might be poorly understood. As a result, learners may not learn to relate individual structural problem
features to characteristics of the problem solution and thus may fail to adapt solution procedures to novel problems
beyond the known problem categories. We developed a category-avoiding example format that does not require
learners to consider multiple structural problem features simultaneously and that focuses on individual solution steps
and their relation to individual structural features across the boundaries of problem categories. Two experiments
showed a clear superiority of category-avoiding examples with regard to learning time, cognitive load, and problem-
solving performance for isomorphic as well as novel problems compared to traditional category-focusing examples.

Table 1. Category-focusing and category-avoiding instructional examples used for experimentation

CATEGORY-FOCUSING EXAMPLE SOLUTION                                              CATEGORY-AVOIDING EXAMPLE SOLUTION
Problem features: Selection of 3 sprinters out of 7,                            Rationale: Calculate probability of correctly guessing the winner of each
order of selection is important;                                                medal; each medal can be taken into account separately.
each  sprinter  can    only      be  selected  once    (without   replacement)  Step 1: 7 possible choices (sprinters), 1 acceptable (winner): 1/7
F  o  r  m     u   l   a  :            A      =        n!       /     (n-k)!    Step 2: 6 possible choices (winner can't win again), 1 acceptable: 1/6
Inserting:       n   = 7,   k      = 3  fi    A  =     7!  /  (7-3)!  =  210    Additional steps: Analogous procedure
Result: 1/210                                                                   Result: Overall probability: 1/7 * 1/6 * 1/5 = 1/210

                                                                          602
