 Interaction of Instructors and Students In a Science Class Based on
                                          Learning by Design

                                           Yu-sun Gwon & Kazuhisa Miwa
    Graduate School of Human Informatics, Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Japan
                                   Email: {gwon, miwa} @cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp

          The present study focused on hands-on activities in a university class, named Engineering Experiments of
Material  Science,  at  Nagoya   University,  Japan. Six undergraduate    students, one  professor  and  two  teaching
assistants (TAs) participated. The class consisted of 10 sessions during 16 weeks, from April to July 2003. One
session continued for around 4~5 hours. The task in the class was to design a bathtub based on understanding of
physical phenomena such as the RH degassing process and the continuous casting process in a reactor. The reason
why we investigated this class is that it was a good case exemplifying Learning by Design (Hmelo et al., 2000;
Kolodner et al., 2002) based on the inquiry approach.

          In this paper, we analyze only the discussion phase from the 1st to 3rd sessions, where students propose their
ideas and a teacher or TAs support them in deciding experimental themes. Further phases for the actual experiment
from the 4th to 10th sessions are not dealt with here. Data were collected through reports by students and videotaped
discussions on proposals of ideas. To investigate processes of on-time interaction, we categorized utterances of the
participants in discussions. Four categories were identified: (1) P: proposing an idea, (2) R: responding to questions,
(3) F: leading other participants to elaborate their ideas and pointing out poor aspects of ideas, and (4) E: explaining
theoretical  background  knowledge    related to students' idea.   To investigate outputs  obtained  as  the results of
interaction, we  analyze transference of  the students' ideas based   on their report presentation from  the  2nd to 4th
sessions.

          In the analysis   of processes of  on-time  interaction, the results showed   that instructors and  students
reciprocally played each role, such as students as active proposers, a teacher as a provider of facilitation and
theoretical explanation to students' ideas, and TAs as mediation between students and teacher. These results also
indicated that the quality of interaction was sophisticated from superficial transacts to operational transacts, that is,
the students elaborated their proposals and responses from unsatisfactory ideas without rational reasons to ones
including the related data and concrete methods, whereas the teacher adjusted his facilitation and explanation to the
students' cognitive states. In the analysis of idea transference as output of interaction, the result showed that the
students' ideas were integrated and elaborated to become the critical themes of experiments. These results indicated
that implicit interactions within the students as well as explicit interaction between instructors and students had
learning  effects, that is, students changed   their ideas while   observing   discussions on  other students'    ideas.
Constructivism in educational methods to make students study on their own through trial and error processes has
been proposed as a substitute for didactic lecture, which has been predominant as a traditional education style.
However, various limitations of constructivism have also been pointed out: e.g., students could not sufficiently study
critical concepts through spontaneous activities. This study confirms that reciprocal interaction, such as facilitation
and explanation by instructors matching cognitive states of students, allows students to promote understanding on
the task and spontaneous exploration in science class.

References
Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D. L., & Kolodner, J. L. (2000). Designing to Learn about Complex Systems. The Journal of
          Learning Sciences, 9(3).

Kolodner, J. L., Gray, J.T., & Fasse, B.B. (2002). Promoting Transfer through Case-Based Reasoning: Rituals and
          Practices in Learning by Design Calssrooms.   Cognitive Science Quarterly, 1.

                                                         603
