  Audience in Computer Learning: A Constructionist Interpretation
   Gillian R. Hayes, Anne Marie Piper, Bob Amar, Korin J. Bevis, Wendy Newstetter & Amy S. Bruckman
                                      Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332
                                      {gillian, amp12, bob, kbevis, asb }@cc.gatech.edu
                                               Wendy.Newstetter@bme.gatech.edu

Introduction
          In 1993, a group of individuals from The Computer Museum, in collaboration with MIT Media Lab,
responded to the challenge to close the "digital divide" by organizing a new type of computer center, the Computer
Clubhouse, aimed at promoting true "technological fluency," allowing participants not only to consume computer
applications but also to create, design, and implement their own ideas through technical mediation (Resnick & Rusk,
1996; Resnick, Rusk, & Cooke, 1998). The Intel Computer Clubhouse network uses a radical constructionist model,
advocating learning through working on personally meaningful projects (Harel & Papert, 1991).
          To  what   extent does      this model   work in practice?  In an  effort to explore this question, a team of  six
researchers conducted an ethnographic study of one six months at one site with follow up interviews during the next
three months; this "clubhouse" included one coordinator, two assistant coordinators, 8 mentors, and approximately
40 clubhouse members.       The team conducted 18 interviews and collected field data for 48 days during the study.

Clubhouse Activities
Typical Engagement in Clubhouse Activities Lacking an Identified Audience
          During this study, we observed clubhouse members experimenting with technology by beginning new
projects.  However, the members typically participated in these activities briefly by themselves and then dismissed
them when they seemed to anticipate that the products of their efforts would not be viewed by the members of an
audience.  Members often started a new project each day.          Finished work is rarely saved, or saved only briefly. This
discarding of work reduces the complexity of individual projects and opportunities to learn through project work.

Creation of Music and Performing for a Live Audience as a Means of Expressing Self
          A clubhouse music studio provides opportunities for youths to work cooperatively to create musical beats,
record vocals, and produce demo albums through a technical medium.                  Youth appear to complete music studio
projects with greater cooperation and iteration than other clubhouse projects. Also, the work surrounding music in
the clubhouse allows members to use clubhouse resources to receive recognition from a potentially large external
audience.  This recognition includes praise posted on music review web sites, comments left by visitors to the music
group's   web  site, and  verbal      recognition  from  friends.  The  members     working in the  music studio  appear  to
anticipate receiving praise, a powerful reinforcer for their behaviors.        It motivates them to continue learning and
developing their skills for producing music for this approving audience.

          Throughout our observations, activities that seem to foster the most sustained effort and cooperation are
those that involve participation in the greater community outside of the clubhouse.             We noticed that members
respond to the anticipation of immediate praise provided by a live audience, as evidenced by their increased levels of
motivation prior to live audience events.       Local face-to-face events held at the clubhouse appear to provide some of
the same motivational benefits.        During our period of observation a Parent Appreciation Night and a Talent Show
were planned.   Directly prior to these events, clubhouse activity increased, and youths worked together on projects.

Conclusion
          Although we cannot determine a formula for successful projects, one feature seems important: from a
radical constructionist perspective, the concept of an appreciative audience for completed work appears to play a
strong, positive role in initiating and sustaining learning.

References
Harel, I. & Papert, S. (eds.) (1991). Constructionism.  Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Piaget, J. (1962). Comments on Vygotsky's critical remarks concerning `The Language and Thought of the Child' and `Judgment
          and Reasoning in the child'.     Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Resnick, M. & Rusk, N. (1996). The computer clubhouse IBM Systems Journal, 35 (3-4), 431-440.
Resnick,  M., Rusk,  N., &  Cooke,     S.  (1998).  The computer  clubhouse.  In D. Schon, B. Sanyal, and W.  Mitchell, High
          Technology and Low-Income Communities, 266-286.      Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

                                                              605
