                    Computer-Assisted Engineering for Children:
                                a Pop-Up Design Application

                                        Susan Hendrix & Michael Eisenberg
                        Department of Computer Science and Institute of Cognitive Science
                                          University of Colorado, Boulder
                                       Tel: 303-492-8091, Fax: 303-492-2844
                              Email: hendrixs@cs.colorado.edu, duck@cs.colorado.edu

Introduction: Computationally-Enriched Children's Crafts
       We  have     argued for  the design    of computationally-enriched  craft activities [Eisenberg et       al. 2003;
Eisenberg, 2002; Eisenberg, Rubin, and Chen 1998]: activities that combine the affordances of computational media
with those of children's educational crafts. In this poster, we present and describe such an application: a system for
the design of pop-up forms in paper, geared toward use by K-12 students. Briefly, the application, Popup Workshop,
permits students to create a paper template from which a pop-up form will be created, and to see that form simulated
in a three-dimensional rendering. Once the design has been created to the child's satisfaction, the template may be
printed and cut to produce the predicted moving structure.

Popup Workshop: An Overview of the Software
       There are two main windows in the system: an Editor window in which pop-up forms may be designed,
and a Viewer in which the current forms may be observed in a simple 3D rendering. The various buttons at the top of
the Editor window are grouped according to function. At the left is a group of buttons for creating distinct types of
pop-up elements: four-sided with parallel sides, four-sided with non-parallel sides (the trapezoid-shaped icon) and
three-sided (the triangle-shaped icon). In the center group, there are three buttons for operations on current pop-up
elements: a "duplicate" button that permits the user to quickly copy a given element on both sides of the page; a
"delete" button that permits the user to erase a pop-up element; and a "change" button that allows the user to alter
current elements in a variety of (geometrically-constrained) ways. Finally, the button group at the right contains
decorative options, including fill, erase, and pen-draw controls (the text button is not yet operational at the time of
this writing). Most of the Editor window (the bottom region) is employed to show the "flat" version of the pop-up
under construction.

Directions for Future Work
       Although Popup Workshop is operational in its current state, it is still at a relatively early stage of
continuing development. Some of these planned improvements are a matter of adding functionality: for instance, our
goal is to add at least one or two (and possibly more) types of folds to the (still-minimal) basic set already present in
the program. The system has been implemented in the Java language (using classes available in both Macintosh and
PC versions of the language).

       Concurrent with our continuing development of the program itself, we have recently begun our first pilot-
tests of the system with fifth-grade children in a local elementary school. Although this work with children is early
and informal, it has been encouraging.

References
Eisenberg, M. et al. (2003). As We May Print: New Directions in Output Devices and Computational Crafts for
       Children. In Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children 2003, Preston, UK, 31-39.
Eisenberg, M. (2002). Output Devices, Computation, and the Future of Mathematical Crafts. International Journal
       of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 7(1): 1-44
Eisenberg, M.; Rubin, A.; and Chen, T. (1998). Computation and Educational Handicrafts: a Strategy for Integrative
       Design. In Proceedings of    the International Conference on the Learning Sciences, 1998, Atlanta, 84-90.

Acknowledgments
       The work described in this paper has been supported in part by National Science Foundation grant
REC0125363, and by a gift from Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL) in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

                                                        606
