  Is a Conversation with a Wall Really a Conversation? A Review of
              Gender Issues in Recent Science Education Literature

                                             Thomas Higginbotham
         Lynch School of Education, Boston College, Campion Hall Room 119E, Chestnut Hill, MA 02453
                                     Tel: 617-552-0658, Fax: 617-552-1840
                                            E-mail: higgintb@bc.edu

Introduction and Rationale
        There continues to be gender disparity in the sciences, with a disproportionately small number of females
involved in scientific research, especially the physical sciences. In a recent JRST editorial, Baker imploringly
queried, "Where are gender and equity in science education" (Baker, 2002). This manuscript describes my effort at
answering that question by looking at recent selected science education literature.

Methodology and Results
        To represent mainstream science education literature, I comprehensively searched every issue of JRST
(Journal of Research in Science Education), IJSE (International Journal of Science Education), and SE (Science
Education) from January 1998 until the present (April 2003). This report resulted from a class assignment, which
explains the short period covered by the review.

        I found 68 gender-focused articles, and there was a steady annual decline in the number of gender related
articles in the mainstream science education literature from 1998 until April 2003. In interpreting this finding, it is
important to note that 1998 was the year in which JRST devoted two full issues to gender-related topics in science
education, and that the time span of this review is quite brief. The framework that emerged for classification of
articles, borrowed largely from Rennie (1998), had six categories: In papers that are documentary (n=17), the author
seeks mainly to document and describe the gender issues in their area of study. The major difference among the next
four categories is the scope at which the gender inequity problem is perceived to lie. In the deficit (n=1) model, the
problem lies with the individual. In the non-sexist (n=11) model, the problem is usually to be addressed at a
classroom level. In the gender inclusive (n=8) model, the problem lies with the curriculum, usually perpetuated by
government or by textbook manufacturers. Finally, critical feminism (n=23), broadest in scope, looks to science
itself as the source of the problem (and thus the solution). Articles classified as other (n=8) did not fit neatly into any
of the other five categories. Critical feminist articles were the most common, though many (11 out of 23 total) of the
critical feminist articles came from two 1998 JRST issues dedicated exclusively to gender issues.

Discussion
        The   recent decline in the number  of    gender-related articles is troubling   on several  fronts. If   gender
inequities in science had been  resolved, and    there was thus  a decrease  in the   need  for the science  education
community to talk about gender issues, the decline would be understandable. However, clearly this is not the case,
as essentially all of the articles I reviewed are borne of a gender inequitable situation in science education that
presently exists. Troubling also is that I did not need to create a category for articles reviewed called "traditional
views of science." This suggests that the traditional, male-value dominated science community, so often referenced
in the literature, has politely declined to even engage in the conversation. The conversation about gender issues in
science education appears to be declining. The content of that waning conversation is complex and thoughtful, and
contains some potentially robust strategies for addressing gender inequities in science education. But until the
"other" side engages the conversation, the effect is likely to be the same as that of speaking, albeit intelligently, to a
wall.

References
Baker, D. (2002). Where is gender and equity in science education? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(8),
        659-663.
Rennie, L. J. (1998). Gender equity: toward clarification and a research direction for science teacher education.
        Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(8), 951-961.

                                                        608
