                               Searching for Steven Spielberg:
      Introducing iMovie to the High School English Classroom

                  A Closer Look at What Open-Ended Technology Project
                         Designs Can Do to Promote Engaged Learning

                                   Claudia Hindo, Ken Rose & Louis M. Gomez
            The Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools, School of Education & Social Policy,
                         Northwestern University, 2115 N Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
                                      Tel: 847-491-7494 Fax: 847-491-8999
                  chindo@northwestern.edu; rose@northwestern.edu; l-gomez@northwestern.edu

Summary of Findings

       Through the course of the iMovie projects, the students in the high school English classes we studied
demonstrated several key attributes of our engaged learning framework.      In terms of our first category of analysis,
the vision of learning, the iMovie project and software allowed the students to take ownership over the direction of
their work. With the exception of the general boundaries set up by the teacher at the beginning of the assignment,
the students were independently responsible for the scope of their iMovies and controlled most of the ongoing
project decisions themselves.

       In terms of the learning task and context, we found that the making of the movies was authentic and
challenging  for the students.  The  open-ended   storytelling    nature of the  iMovie  project  allowed   them to be
generative and creative. There was a great deal of literature content learned in the project. Indeed, the constraints of
the iMovie task and tool required them to internalize the story and understand it more completely.    Their assessment
was performance-based, generative, and seamless. Further, the students did most of the assessment themselves.

       In terms of teacher and student roles, we noticed a dramatic shift from a teacher-centered to student-
centered environment during the course of the projects.   We argue that these levels of engagement and learning by
students in this non-traditional instructional activity could not have occurred, and could not have been observed so
readily, without the use of the iMovie software tool.

Acknowledgments

       The authors of this paper would like to express their appreciation to Mr. David Rose and Mr. Stephen
Fransen for their assistance with this research.  In   addition,  they sincerely want to thank   all of the sophomore
students whose iMovies continue to interest, amaze, and inspire them as they consider how this software tool can be
used in different and exciting ways to help other students learn.

                                                         609
