       Increasing Diversity in the Information Technology Workforce:
 Implications from a Study of Factors that Predict Achievement in CS

                     Sandra Katz, David Allbritton, John Aronis, Christine Wilson & Mary Lou Soffa
                  First Author's Address: 508C LRDC, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA 15260
                                         Tel: 412-624-7054, Fax: 412-624-9149
                                                  Email: katz+@pitt.edu

Poster Summary
        The number of women and minorities earning a bachelor's degree in information technology-related fields
has been dropping steadily since the mid-1980's, in contrast with the general trends in graduation rates.    According
to the 2001-2002 Taulbee Report (http://www.cra.org/statistics/home.html), 82% of bachelor's degrees in computer
science (CS) during this period were awarded to males, compared with 18% to females.             The majority of degree
recipients were White/non-Hispanic (58%) or Asian/Pacific Islanders (22%).            In order to better understand the
factors that predict achievement and retention of women and minorities in undergraduate CS programs, the study
presented   in this  poster investigated  factors that predict performance  in undergraduate     CS courses  at a large
university, and compared male and female students, minority (African American) and majority (White and Asian
American) students with respect to these factors.      Although several studies have examined gender differences in
undergraduate CS programs in the past decade, studies that consider race are rare, largely due to the difficulty of
studying under-represented groups (sample sizes tend to be too small for statistical analysis).

        Two-hundred eight students, recruited from the first course for CS majors at the University of Pittsburgh,
participated in this study. 82% of the sample was male, 18% female.       84% were White (144 male, 31 female), 13%
were African American (22 male, 4 female), and 3% were Asian or Asian American (5 male, 2 female).            Students
completed a background survey and end-of-course surveys whose questions targeted factors that potentially predict
performance (as measured by final grade) in Introduction to CS and subsequent courses.      These factors include: year
in college, amount of prior math coursework, prior programming experience (e.g., number of CS courses taken,
informal computing activities such as building web pages and programming for fun), amount of access to computers
in high school and college, encouragement to major in CS (from parents, peers, teachers, etc.), motivation (e.g.,
performance goal in course, reason for majoring in CS), confidence (in earning an A, B, or C), awareness of CS
career options, and workload during the academic term. We also obtained students' SAT scores from the university.

        To     date, our analyses cover   only the  first two  courses in the CS    curriculum,  Intro to CS and  Data
Structures. To summarize the results of analyses that included the whole sample (irrespective of gender or race), we
found that aptitude, level of calculus completed before Intro to CS, confidence and motivation level at the end of
each course predicted performance in one or both courses.       With respect to gender, this study corroborated prior
research in finding no significant gender differences in performance (grade) in either course, nor in aptitude.   Male
students entered the course with more prior experience [e.g., the number of CS courses taken in high school (t =
2.7); informal computer activities (t = 2.3)], motivation [e.g., programming for fun (t = 8.5)], and confidence [e.g.,
in achieving a B or higher (t = 2.5)].   The most dramatic differences between males and females were visible at the
end of each course.    Mainly, we saw a drop in female motivation by several measures.      For example, at the end of
Data Structures, fewer females than males found CS interesting (t = 2.3) or thought that they would enjoy a career in
CS (t = 3.1).  Although there was an increase in the percent of males who disliked programming, it was less sharp
than the increased dislike among females.    With respect to race, we found that the main differences between White
and African American students coincided with variables that strongly predict performance--namely, aptitude and
math coursework (Calculus, t = 2.2). African American students scored lower across the board on Math SAT,
Verbal SAT, and combined score (t = 4.8, t = 3.6, t = 4.9 respectively).       In addition, African American students
earned nearly   a letter grade lower   in Introduction  to CS  than did White  students.   Hence, thus far this study
demonstrates the need for better pre-college preparation for minority students who plan to major in CS, and suggests
that the challenge for retaining female students lies in sustaining their interest. Future research should address how
to meet these challenges.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (grant number EIA 0089963).       The
data presented and views expressed are not necessarily endorsed by this agency.

                                                           612
