     Sam Goes to School: Story Listening Systems in the Classroom
        Colleen Kehoe1, Justine Cassell2, Susan Goldman1, James Dai3, Ian Gouldstone3,      Shaunna MacLeod1,
                          Traci O'Day1, Anna Pandolfo3, Kimiko Ryokai3 & Austin Wang3
              1LITD Center, 1007 W Harrison St., University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607
                                         Tel: 312-355-6515, Fax: 312-355-3930
                               2 Media, Technology & Society, Northwestern University
                          3 Gesture and Narrative Language Group, MIT Media Laboratory
                                Email: {colleenk, sgoldman , shaunna, today}@uic.edu,
                     justine@northwestern.edu, {whisper, grits, ap, kimiko, aus}@media.mit.edu

Introduction
          Long before children receive formal instruction in reading and writing, they participate in a world filled
with language. Research in emergent literacy emphasizes the importance of these early experiences with oral and
written language as a foundation for later literacy.

          A Story Listening System (Cassell, 2004) is a computer system that is consistent with these ideas from
emergent literacy and engages children in creative storytelling play with real or "virtual" peers. The goal of this
research is to develop and evaluate the effect of Story Listening Systems in promoting emergent literacy activities
and ultimately, literacy skills. This poster reports the results of our initial design studies with a Story Listening
System called "Sam".

          Sam is a virtual child whom children (ages
4-7) interact with by telling stories and playing with
real toys  (Ryokai, Vaucelle   et al., 2003). The    Sam
system has two components: a life-sized child named
Sam, who is projected on a screen and a toy house
with several wooden    figurines  (see  Figure 1).   Sam
can both tell stories, using a recorded child's voice,
and listen to the real child's stories, responding with
appropriate feedback and short comments. Sam and
the  child  take turns telling  and listening  to    each
other's stories.  Sam  and  the   child   can  pass   the
figurines back and forth between their worlds by way
of a magic room in the house (the attic).                          Figure 1. Sam greeting and gesturing with figurine.

Design Studies and Results
          A preliminary   study with   the Sam  system    showed  promising    results (Ryokai, Vaucelle et al., 2003).
Encouraged by these, we are now undertaking a larger project to investigate ways in which Sam and other Story
Listening  Systems  can   support  emergent   literacy skills in formal  and   informal  educational settings. The first
questions   that must  be addressed    concern  the   (1) integration of   the Sam  system   into ongoing educational
environments, and (2) what modifications to Sam are needed for it to be sustainable on an ongoing basis in these
contexts.

          Two design studies were conducted. One took place at a daycare center (n=16) and one at an elementary
school (n=21) in a large urban setting. These settings allowed us to examine a range of ages (4-7 yrs) and classroom
styles (informal vs. formal). A description of findings is available from:
http://litd.psch.uic.edu/research/projects/story.html

References
Cassell, J. (2004). Towards a Model of Technology and Literacy Development: Story Listening Systems. Journal of
          Applied Developmental Psychology, 25(1), 75-105.
Ryokai, K., C. Vaucelle, et al. (2003). Virtual Peers as Partners in Storytelling and Literacy Learning. Journal of
          Computer Assisted Learning, 19(2), 195-208.

                                                           613
