 Getting Your Socks Wet: Augmented Reality Environmental Science

                                            Eric Klopfer & Kurt Squire
      Teacher Education Department, MIT, Building 7-337. 77 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge , MA 02139
                                               Tel: (617) 253-2025
                                             Email: Klopfer@mit.edu
                           Curriculum & Instruction, University of Wisconsin-Madison

Mobile Computing Technologies and Learning
        As simulations go from the desktop to portable devices, we hope to harness the unique affordances of
handhelds including: (1) portability ­can take the computer to different sites and move around within a site; (2)
social interactivity ­ can exchange data and collaborate with other people face to face; (3) context sensitivity­ can
gather data unique to the current location, environment, and time; (4) connectivity ­ can connect handhelds to data
collection devices, other handhelds, and to a common network; (5) individuality ­ can provide unique scaffolding
that is customized to the individual's path of investigation. A handheld learning environment might capitalize on this
ability to bridge real and virtual worlds resulting in augmented reality simulations, simulations that layer virtual
context on top of the real world.

Approach: Situated Cognition
        Over the past decades, many learning scientists have argued for the importance of understanding cognition
in context (e.g. Barab & Kirshner, 2001). Whereas traditional cognitive models treat the workings of the mind as
somewhat independent from context, a host of emerging, complementary approaches to understanding cognition
treat cognition and context as inextricably linked (e.g. Greeno, 1998). Meaning arises from interaction within the
world and within social practice and therefore must be understood within social contexts (Lave & Wenger, 1991).
Handheld technologies afford opportunities for creating problem spaces that extend across real and virtual spaces.
This study took place within a design experiment (Cobb, et al., 2003) exploring educational augmented reality
simulations. In this series of case studies, 75 college and high school students investigated a chemical spill in a local
watershed in an activity that lasted 2 hours. The problem, co-designed by environmental engineering faculty,
requires students to combine real-world and virtual-world data to determine the cause of the spill and design are
mediation plan. Our curricular goal is to give students an experience where they must apply knowledge to devise
sampling strategies, manage resources, and experience the socially situated nature of investigations.

Results
        Across the groups, five main motifs emerged through discourse: (1) Negotiating the environment in the
investigative process; (2) Over-reliance on sampling at the expense of deskwork; (3) Interpreting the problem as
gathering information to complete a puzzle; (4) Integrating the real world, and PDA-mediated resources, and (5)
Inter-group power dynamics in determining strategies. Students had difficulty thinking across "soft" qualitative
information gained in interviews and "hard" quantitative data gathered through physical samples, suggesting that the
core problem driving the game is robust and worth further investigation. Groups of college students focused on
sampling water quality and gave little attention to interviews. In cases where students were unsure of what a reading
meant, their solution was to "dig another well" in the hopes that more "hard data" would solve the problem. A few
college groups (typically gender balanced) used both interview and "hard" data to generate effective designs. High
school students constructed the central game challenge as one of collecting interviews as one might conduct a
scavenger hunt. The difference in how Environmental Detectives was appropriated reminds us of the power of local
cultures in shaping tool use. The game was only one object in the activity system and future implementations will
investigate additions that might more consistently engage students in scientific problem solving.

References
Barab, S. A., & Kirshner, D. (2001). Methodologies for capturing learner practices occurring as part of dynamic
        learning environments. The Journal of The Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 5-15.
Cobb, P., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational research. Educational
        Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Greeno, J. G. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53, 5-26.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.

                                                     614
