Supporting the Scaling of Innovations: Guiding Teacher Adaptation of
                   Materials by Making Implicit StructuresExplicit

                                        Hsien-Ta Lin & Barry J. Fishman

                   Center for Highly Interactive Computing in Education, University of Michigan
                           610 E. University, 4023 SOE, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
                                      Tel: 734-647-4229, Fax: 734-763-1504
                                      htlin@umich.edu, fishman@umich.edu

        There is a tension between curriculum developers' need to maintain the integrity of innovations and
teachers' need for local adaptation. On one hand, reformers need to make sure that teachers' practices in classrooms
are compatible with the essential ideas in curriculum materials in order to evaluate the influence of reform. On the
other hand, teachers frequently adapt curriculum materials according to local needs not anticipated by curriculum
designers. Without understanding the intentions behind the curriculum materials, there is a danger that the essence
of the reform can be lost in the adaptation. Therefore, teachers need access to the implicit design rationale of
curriculum materials to help make wise adaptation decisions (Spillane, Reiser, & Reimer, 2002). It is insufficient to
merely provide an overview of the reform ideas behind curricula. Teachers need to see the detailed relationships
between reform ideas and each curriculum component. Our hope is that by showing teachers the way that individual
curricular components relate to standards, we will help teachers make enactment choices that preserve the essence of
the innovation.

        We propose the SPA as a tool to help teachers identify the implicit structures in curriculum materials. SPA
is an element   of Knowledge     Networks  On the Web  (KNOW;      Fishman,   2003), an online      teacher learning
environment for science teachers enacting curriculum materials developed by the Center for Learning Technologies
in Urban Schools (LeTUS; Blumenfeld, Fishman, Krajcik, Marx, & Soloway, 2000). There are two major modules
in SPA: a mapping tool, which helps teachers establish connections between academic standards and curriculum
components, and a modeling tool, which lets teachers add and remove components and/or standards in curriculum
materials and observe resulting changes in linked standards and/or components.. In addition, the mapping tool
demonstrates the interconnections and dependencies among curriculum components. Teachers use these modules as
planning supports when they enact LeTUS curriculum materials.

        There are at least four potential learning opportunities for teachers using the SPA: (1) identifying the
relationship between standards and curriculum components; (2) recognizing the connection among curriculum
components; (3) modifying a given teaching plan to meet the change in a set of standards; and (4) changing a set of
standards according to a modification in a teaching plan. Through KNOW, teachers can compare and discuss their
results with those of peer teachers, experienced teachers or curriculum designers. Differences between teachers'
choices can create  conflicts in teachers' understandings of  the essence  of curriculum materials      and provide
opportunities for conceptual change. The negotiation process provides teachers opportunities to form a consensus on
their collective understanding of the curriculum. In the process of comparison and discussion, curriculum designers
also receive teachers' feedback on their interpretation(s) of the essence of the reform ideas in the curriculum
materials. Teachers in LeTUS will begin using SPA as part of professional development workshops in Spring, 2004.
We will explore the role of SPA in helping teachers understand the relationships between standards and curriculum
components, their decision making processes in adaptation, and in their learning from each other.

References
Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, B. J., Krajcik, J., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (2000). Creating usable innovations in
        systemic reform: scaling up technology-embedded project-based science in urban schools. Educational
        Psychologist, 35(3), 149-164.
Fishman, B. (2003). Linking on-line video and curriculum to leverage community knowledge. In J. Brophy (Ed.),
        Advances in research on teaching: Using video in teacher education (Vol. 10, pp. 201-234). New York:
        Elsevier.
Spillane, J. P., Reiser, B. J., & Reimer, T. (2002). Policy implementation and cognition: Reframing and refocusing
        implementation research. Review of Educational Research, 72(3), 387-431.

                                                     617
