          A Breath of Fresh Air: Alternative Approaches to Learning
                             Surabhi Marathe, Lei Liu & Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver
            Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick NJ 08901-1183 Tel: 732-932-7496
              Email: surabhim@eden.rutgers.edu, leiliu@eden.rutgers.edu, chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu

        Biology consists of complex systems that multiple levels of organization, such as structure and function.
Interactions occur both within and between these levels (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999). Students tend to focus on the
(easily seen) structures that comprise the system and miss the (mostly implicit) functional interactions. On the other
hand, experts tend to focus on more on how a complex system works (Hmelo-Silver & Pfeffer, 2004).           Structure-
Behavior-Function (SBF) theory may provide a deep principle that is useful for thinking about complex systems
(Goel &  Chandrasekaran,  1989). SBF theory  provides a framework      that allows effective     reasoning  about the
functional and causal roles played by structural elements in a system. by describing a system's structures, their
purpose in the system (functions), and the mechanisms that enable their functions (behaviors).

        Most biology textbooks present information in a linear format that causes students to focus on the structure
and miss the connectedness that characterizes the system. The goal of our research program is to understand
different ways in which conceptual representations such as SBF can be used to support deep learning about complex
systems. We have used the SBF conceptual representation as a representational tool to design the architecture of
hypermedia that will help scaffold students learning about the human respiratory system and guide them towards
using the SBF  model  to  understanding other complex   systems.    Using   hypermedia  should      facilitate deeper
understanding by allowing students to go back and forth between different functions and behaviors of a system
without impeding the flow of the explanatory text (Jacobson & Archididou, 2000).   We use the human respiratory
system as an example domain to design an instructional hypermedia that foregrounds functions and behaviors. These
aspects of the system are difficult to understand but critical for constructing a coherent representation of a complex
system. Students  begin by understanding the  functions of    the respiratory  system. Only       after students have
recognized the need for a particular function and how it is accomplished (i.e. behaviors), they are introduced to
structures involved in performing the function. This should allow students to focus their attention on the functional
aspect of biological systems (like experts do) and increase the possibility that they will see the respiratory system as
consisting of interdependent structures, behaviors, and functions. Students can move from key function questions on
the main page to screens that explain the behaviors needed to accomplish these functions and from there to the
screens that explain the structures that perform these behaviors. Finally they can see animated diagrams that show
how the structures involved in performing a particular function work together. The poster will present the detailed
architecture of the system. This alternative (function centered) approach to learning has the potential to become a
breath of fresh air by helping students understand complex systems not as a set of structures (that have certain
behaviors and functions associated with them), but rather as a multileveled web of understanding.

References
Goel, A., & Chandrasekaran, B. (1989). Functional Representation of Designs and Redesign Problem Solving. Paper
        presented at the Eleventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-89), Detroit,
        Michigan.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex system
        from the perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. Cognitive Science, 28, 27-138
Jacobson, M. J., & Archodidou, A. (2000). The design of hypermedia tools for learning: Fostering conceptual
        change and transfer of complex scientific knowledge. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9, 145-199.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems approach to making sense of the world.
        Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8, 3-19.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by NSF CAREER Grant # 0133533. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF.

                                                   621
