                       Classroom Strategies for Simulation-Based
                                   Collaborative Inquiry Learning
                       Tom Murray, Larry Winship, Neil Stillings, Esther Shartar & Ayala Galton
                          Hampshire College School of Cognitive Science, Amherst, MA 01002
                                                    (413) 559-5001
                                               tmurray@hampshire.edu,

Introduction and Description of SimForest
         SimForest is a simulation-based learning environment in the domain of forest ecology that simulates tree
and  forest growth,   the succession  of tree species  over   time,  and the  effects of environmental      and man  made
disturbances on forest growth (see www.ddc.hampshire.edu/~simforest/). With the simulation students can set
environmental parameters such as rainfall, temperature, soil fertility, soil texture, and soil depth; they plant (or load
in from a file) a plot of trees from a list of over 30 species; and they "run" the simulation and observe the trees as
they grow and the forest evolves. A forest plot's sensitivity to natural and man-made disturbances can be evaluated,
and emergent properties such as species succession can be characterized. This short paper summarizes some of the
results of a research project involving several development and implementation phases: the development of the
SimForest learning environment, development of curriculum materials and activities surrounding the software,
software evaluation in college biology classrooms, a summer professional development institute teaching secondary
school teachers how to implement the software and curriculum, and a study following these teachers as they used the
software in   their class  over  two   semesters.  In  this   paper  we  summarize    one  aspect  of     this project: the
characterization  of   diverse  pedagogical   strategies  used  by   an  expert  teacher  to support      simulation-based
collaborative inquiry learning. We used these results to give suggestions to the participants during the teacher
training phase of the project.

Method and Results: Inquiry as Distributed Problem Solving
     We  generalized   our  observations  and    analysis from  14   sessions to produce   instructional     strategies and
pedagogical principles for leading collaborative simulation-based inquiry activities in classrooms. The majority of
the  strategies identified apply   to scientific inquiry  activities with  or without    computer simulations,     but  are
particularly useful for simulation-based inquiry learning in collaborative contexts.     We divide the strategies found
into two classes:   feedback   and control strategies,    and collaboration  strategies.  In this short     paper only  the
collaborative strategies can be described.  A list of the feedback and control strategies includes: leading questions,
Socratic dialog, encouraging commitment to a hypothesis, various types of scaffolding and fading. and encouraging
ownership through hypothesis commitment.         For the collaborative strategies, we observed teaching methods that
repeatedly brought the entire class into collaboration around an inquiry question, after individual or small group
activities. We observed the following methods for structuring collaborative problems solving (these are not mutually
exclusive strategies):

        Alternating Convergent and divergent episodes.        Every session could be described as a cycling between
         divergent individual simulation-based work   and whole-class convergent consensus-building discussion.
        Additive knowledge. The entire class is given a very open ended task, such as "run the simulation and note
         what you observe."    The class then reconvenes to share what they learned, compare, synthesize, and
         combine findings.
        Breadth search. In a related method, each group is allowed to pose their own inquiry question and
         investigate.  When they reconvene students are exposed to issues and information beyond what they would
         have had time to explore on their own.
        Two-phase search. Simulated annealing serves a an apt metaphor for a we observed a collaborative
         inquiry strategies in which students were first allowed to explore a parameter space unsystematically,
         followed by a more systematic approach as described below. In this method a certain amount of
         randomness is introduces to an otherwise systematic search to avoid the problem of local minima.
        Jigsaw method state space search. We saw several cases of the instructor dividing a search space and
         assigning components of it to groups.
        Collaborative hypothesis confirmation.     Finally, we observed several sessions where students compared
         their results, building arguments to support or refute the hypotheses.

[This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 9972486.]

                                                           623
