The Benefits & Challenges of Learning from ContrastingVideo Cases

                         Anandi Nagarajan, Cindy Hmelo-Silver, & Ellina Chernobilsky
                       Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08901.
                                   Tel: 732-932-7496 X8314, Fax: 732-932-6829
                                         Email: annagara@eden.rutgers.edu

Benefits of Learning from Contrasting Video Cases
         The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of analyzing contrasting video cases on pre-service
teachers' conceptual   understanding   of educational     psychology  concepts   and   subsequent    transfer  of   that
understanding in a new context.     Analyzing contrasting    cases increases the  ability of students   to  discern and
differentiate specific features related to certain psychological concepts (Schwartz and Bransford (1998). This well-
differentiated knowledge prepares students to learn from a lecture or a book chapter. Gentner, Loewnstein, &
Thompson   (2003)  demonstrated    how  comparing  similar   examples   can facilitate understanding     of  underlying
structures and subsequent transfer to novel problems. However, previous research demonstrating the benefits of
contrasting cases and multiple examples have been limited to paper stimuli.  We extend this work to video, which is
more complex than typical stimuli used in these studies.

Methodology
         The study was conducted with 42 preservice teachers in two 2-hour sessions.     Twenty participants saw two
video cases of teachers using different instructional methods to cover similar content.   In one, the teacher used a
traditional instructional format (mainly lectures and demonstrations) while the second showed a constructivist
classroom (questioning techniques and discussions). The control group (n=22) viewed the traditional video twice.
Both  groups  analyzed the video(s),  identified relevant   psychological concepts   and  instructional    themes,  and
designed an alternative instructional plan of the traditional classroom after doing research using an online resource.
Finally, all participants saw a novel math video case for which they completed a case analysis.

Results
         The learning outcome measures included: a) the number of educational psychology identified correctly in
the novel case as compared to the initial case analysis, and b) the quality of lesson redesign.   A one-way ANOVA
revealed no significant differences on number of concepts identified (F(1,40) =.89, p>.05) or on relevance of the
concepts identified in the transfer task (F(1,40) =1.50, p>.05). However, there were significant differences on the
quality of explanations of the identified concepts (F(1,40) =4.64, p<.05) in favor of the control group, contrary to
what we expected. The lesson redesigns coded so far show no significant differences between the groups.
Challenges of Learning from Contrasting Video Cases
         Research suggests that analyzing a set of contrasting cases prompts one to make meaningful observations
that are contextualized across multiple cases, thereby helping a learner to understand how a concept applies in
multiple contexts. This is expected to translate into flexible and fluid use of the concept in novel situations. Why,
then, would the control group outperform the treatment group on conceptual understanding given the expected
benefits of contrasting cases? Previous studies have used textual stimuli that are static representations whereas video
cases present a dynamic  situation  with many simultaneous     actions.  In paper formats,   one  can   compare   cases
simultaneously whereas video cases can only be viewed sequentially. Processing two video cases may present a
cognitive overload to the learner making it difficult for them to focus on the minute aspects of both cases. This,
coupled with the limited time frame of 4 hours to complete the task, might have made the task too complex.       Given
the complexity of the video, multiple viewings of one case by the control group may have allowed for deeper
analysis whereas only superficial understanding of the two contrasting video cases was possible in that amount of
time. These results suggest that learning from contrasting video cases is not easy and requires additional cognitive,
metacognitive, and social support.

References
Gentner,  D. Loewenstein,  J., &   Thompson,  L. (2003).    Learning  and Transfer:    A  general  role  for analogical
         encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 393-408.
Schwartz, D.L., &  Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition & Instruction, 16(4), 475-522.

                                                         624
