  Accuracy and Transfer in Associating Virtual and Embodied Toys

                                                     Sandra Okita
                  485 Lasuen Mall, School of Education, Stanford University, CA, 94305-3096
                                                  Tel: (650)497-9660,
                                                 yuudra@stanford.edu

Research Objective
          This study focuses on whether or not young children transfer what they learn about a toy character from
one setting to another (e.g. stuffed animal to computer game) and whether the interactivity of the toy and/or the age
of the child has an effect.  This study explores the following two questions: 1) How are children's abilities to
accurately link information to a toy character affected by the interactive nature of the toy? 2) Does the child's age
influence the information they generalize between media? Young children's understanding of the relation between
video and reality is far from complete (DeLouche, 1995, Melzoff, 1988), and there is high possibility that several
factors may influence the transfer of information from one setting to another (Holyoak & Spellman, 1993). Thus if
we want to prevent young children from conflating media and reality, it will be necessary to find explicit ways to
help them mark the differences.

Methods, Measures and Procedure
          Fifty-six children Fifty-six children (33 to 67 months) have participated in this study. Children are divided
into two groups: younger (33 to 51 months), and older (52 to 67 months). This study includes a two-by-two mixed
model  design.  The within-subject  comparison      is environment   (static versus dynamic), and  between-subject
comparisons are age (younger versus older) and toy type (interactive versus non-interactive). The children are
assigned to one of two conditions: interactive or non-interactive. The children learn facts about a toy dog presented
through varying levels of technology and interactivity (e.g. video game, stuffed animal, picture books). They then
meet a similar dog character in a new medium (e.g. as a stuffed animal if first sees the dog as video character). The
child plays in two different mediums (static and dynamic) and is given a different toy in each medium. During the
interview, the researcher shows the first toy and asks a total of 8 questions (4 facts from the first toy, and 4 facts
from the second toy) while showing the first toy (e.g. name). Next, the researcher brings out the second toy, and
again asks  the 8 questions. The  questions overlap    in content.  The two   dependent measures  are accuracy and
transfer. The accuracy measure evaluates the child's memory in relation to a specific toy. The transfer measure sees
if children take information from one toy and apply it to another. This enables us to ensure that the lack of transfer is
not due to a lack of memory. Accuracy is obtained by the sum of correctly remembered facts associated with the
right toy. The transfer score is obtained by the number of facts associated with the wrong toy. Thus, a child who
remembers all 8 facts for toy 1 and all 8 facts for toy 2, will set an accuracy score of 8(2 toys x 4 facts), but also a
transfer score of 8. For Toy 1, if a child only answers the 4 questions, associated with that toy, and for toy 2, the
child only answers the 4 questions associated with that toy, the child would receive an 8 for accuracy and a zero for
transfer.

Results
          There is a significant Age by score (accuracy vs. transfer) interaction (F = 13.2, p < .05). Older children
have a higher accuracy and a lower transfer score.     Little difference is found between the two measures in younger
children. Results indicate a significant relationship between children's accuracy scores and age (r = .281, p< .05).
However, there was little correlation between age and transfer (r = -0.7). The older children did not confuse the two
toys, showing lower transfer scores. Younger children remember less and may have less to transfer. Younger
children either perceived the two toys as being equal or had difficulty distinguishing between the two toys.   This
study found that younger children are more likely to assume a similarity across contexts than older children, and that
the specific media did not change this pattern.

References
DeLouche, J. S.(1995). Early symbol understanding and use of symbols. In D.Medin (Ed.), The psychology of
          learning and motivation Vol.33, (pp.65-114). New York: Academic Press.
Holyoak, K. J. & Spellman, B.A. (1993). Thinking. Annual Review of Psychology, 44, 265-315.
Melzoff, A. N.(1988). Imitation of televised models by infants. Child Development, 59, 1221-1229.

                                                          625
