              Making Connections: The Discourse of Collaboration

                                                    Trena M. Paulus
                       A515 Claxton Complex, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996
                                      Ph: (865)974-8144, Fax: (865)974-0155
                                               Email: tpaulus@utk.edu

        A  goal of distance  educators   is to  lower  high attrition rates by connecting   learners through  Internet
communication tools. However, structuring and evaluating online discussions for effective learning continues to be a
challenge for educators. Gunawardena et al. (1997) created an interaction analysis framework to examine the "social
construction of knowledge in collaborative learning environments facilitated by computer conferencing" (p. 397): 1)
sharing and comparing of information; 2) discovery and exploration of cognitive dissonance; 3) negotiation of
meaning/co-construction   of  knowledge;     4) testing  and  modification    of   proposed co-construction;  and   5)
agreement/applications of newly constructed meaning (p. 414). Gunawardena et al. (1997) found mainly sharing and
comparing of information, speculating that either greater facilitation or a different communication mode was needed
to support movement    into the   second phase  of  the model   (discovery  of  cognitive dissonance).  In  this study
discussion transcripts of ten groups working to complete course assignments at a distance were examined to see
whether  and  how  the  participants created  new   knowledge   together.   A computer-mediated   discourse  analysis
approach (Herring, In press) was used to code the 2,552 functional moves exchanged by the groups according to the
Gunawardena et al. model (1997.) Interrater reliability of over 80% was achieved. Sixty-five percent of the moves
were coded as Phase 1, 15% as Phase 2, 7% as Phase 3, 1% as Phase 4 and 2% as Phase 5; findings similar to those
of the previous researchers. However,    the   lack of fit between  the theoretical  model  and  the actual  discourse
warranted a closer look at the functional moves actually used by the participants. According to the model, for a
functional move to be in Phase 2, areas of inconsistency or disagreement must be stated and arguments advanced to
support one's position. Negotiation   of meaning    in Phase  3 then  involves   a resolution of conflicting concepts
identified in Phase 2, implying certainty of one' own position with justification of that position with evidence. If
group members did not display such explicit disagreement or certainty, a move could not be coded as Phase 2.
However, in this study it became clear that initial uncertainty was as important as certainty. Members expressed
their uncertainty about an issue or simply identified the possibility of different viewpoints, utilizing functional
moves such as eliciting feedback, asking questions and responding to questions. Members valued such expressions
of different opinions and diverse perspectives. Thus, the manner in which members socially constructed knowledge
did not fit the Gunawardena et al. (1997) model. The emphasis is not on creating arguments and justifying one's own
position; rather, together through interaction groups sought connection with each other, consistent with models
proposed by Herring (1996) and Belenky et al. (1986). The Gunawardena et al. (1997) model is consistent with other
challenge and argumentation frameworks (e.g. Duffy, Dueber & Hawley, 1998) which seek to create scaffold
structures for effective online discussions in educational environments; these challenge models stand in contrast to
an equally viable process of reaching new understanding, the model of connection. Rather than dismissing online
discussions as less effective because the discourse does not match the challenge model, a closer look should be taken
in light of the connection model.

References
Belenky, M.F., Clinchy, B.M., Goldberger, N.R. & Tarule, J.M. (1986). Women's Ways of Knowing: The
        development of self, voice and mind. Basic Books, Inc.
Duffy, T.M., Dueber, B., & Hawley, C.L. (1998). Critical thinking in a distributed environment: A pedagogical base
        for the design of conferencing systems. Center for Research on Learning and Technology, Technical
        Report No. 5-98. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University.
Gunawardena, C. N., Lowe, C. A., & Anderson, T. (1997). Analysis of a global online debate and the development
        of an interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in computer conferencing.
        Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 397-431.
Herring, S. C. (In press). Computer-Mediated Discourse Analysis: An Approach to Researching Online Behavior. In
        Barab, S.A. & R. Kling & J. H. Gray (Eds.), Designing for virtual communities in the service of learning.
        New York: Cambridge University Press.
Herring, S. C. (1996b). Two variants of an electronic message schema. In S. C. Herring (Ed.), Computer-mediated
        communication:    Linguistic,  social   and cross-cultural  perspectives   (pp. 81-106).  Amsterdam:     John
        Benjamins.

                                                         626
