         The Community Practice Of Teasing Among Latino Children
                                       Lucinda Pease-Alvarez & Cathy Angelillo
             University of California, Education Dept., Crown Faculty Services, Santa Cruz, CA     95064
                                       Tel: 831-459-3369, Fax:  831-459-4618
                                Email:    brainleft@aol.com, cangelillo@comcast.net

         In recent years, much research and media attention has focused on negative aspects of teasing, involving
primarily teasers bullying teasees (e.g., Irvin, Walker, Noell, Singer, Irvine, Marquez, & Britz, 1992; Walker, Irvin,
Noell, & Singer, 1992; Ma, 2001).  Consequently, much effort has been directed towards eradicating teasing in local
schools and communities through, for example, the development of intervention programs that aim to reduce the
incidents of  teasing  among  youth.    However,   these negative perspectives  on     teasing may   reflect dominant
mainstream cultural interpretations and functions of teasing ­ without necessarily recognizing cultural variations in
teasing practices.  They may also relate to theoretical and empirical work that conceptualizes teasing and other
metaphorical  activity as   text-based in nature.  From  such  approaches, words       and sentences are  regarded as
encapsulating definitive "meanings" that are understood by all and are transferable across contexts (Bialystok &
Hakuta, 1994; Gibbs, 1994).

         Contrasting traditional text-based perspectives on metaphorical activity, sociocultural research considers
participants' constructions of meanings ­ such as teasing ­ to be an emergent interpretive process culturally defined
by community values, beliefs, and goals of development through participants' transforming involvement with others
in cultural activity (Heath, 1983; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rogoff, 1998, 2003).   Building on sociocultural research on
teasing (Eisenberg, 1986; Miller, 1986; Schieffelin, 1986), the present study examined the social organization of
teasing among Latino children participating in a summer youth program.     Teasing is defined as figurative activity
involving   actions (verbal and nonverbal)   that are playful and ambiguous    with    multiple literal and  nonliteral
meanings/interpretations, which may include criticisms, insults, anger, affection, wit, humor, and annoyance, such as
name calling, joking, taunting, mocking, playful aggressive acts, and sarcasm/irony, and making faces, gestures, and
noises.

Method
         The present analyses focused on the videotaped naturalistic observations of eight Latino children, ranging
from 3 to 12 years of age. These children, along with 17 additional Latino (2- to 15-year-old) children participated in
a neighborhood summer youth program, under the guidance of two Latino male staff members in Santa Cruz,
California. The program ran weekdays from 11:00am to 3:30pm from the middle of June 2000 until the end of
August 2000.

         Coding involved identifying teasing events in terms of the types of teasing, the participants involved,
whether the teasing was elaborated in form, and the socio-emotional aspects of the teasing events.

Results/Discussion
         Across the videotaped sessions involving the eight target children, teasing was found to be common.
Participants engaged in these teasing events included children, adult staff (i.e., site coordinator and site assistant),
and community members (e.g., Popsicle vendor, parents).

         The Latino children demonstrated skillful use of various types of teasing to accomplish many purposes.
Their teasing was often elaborated, with participants building on one another's contributions.     Teasing interactions
tended to be multiparty (beyond dyad) engagements involving teasers, teasees, and those who observed or listened
in on the teasing events. Most of the time teasees and teasers both appeared to be content when engaging in teasing
­ even in the cases of teasing events that involved name calling, taunts, or insults. There were only a few occasions
when participants in teasing appeared to be upset or disturbed. The complex, dynamic nature of teasing involving
the Latino children points out the importance of understanding the communicative practice of teasing in cultural
context.

References
References upon request.

                                                         627
