      The Digital IdeaKeeper: Combining Digital Library Services with
                                      Support for Online Inquiry

                                            Chris Quintana & Meilan Zhang
            University of Michigan, School of Education, 610 E. University Ave., Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                        Tel: 734-615-0287, Fax: 734-763-1368
                                             Email: quintana@umich.edu

Background: Addressing Online Inquiry Challenges for Learners
         Major science education standards call on students to engage in inquiry-based science learning where they
pose driving questions and collect, analyze, and synthesize information (National Research Council, 1996).         Along
these lines, we are developing the Digital IdeaKeeper, a scaffolded work environment integrating digital libraries
with services and scaffolds to address the challenges learners face in online inquiry.    The IdeaKeeper incorporates
three overarching areas of support for middle-school learners by providing them with an integrated online inquiry
environment that incorporates support for analyzing and synthesizing information they find in digital libraries.

         Providing an  integrated     online inquiry environment.    Open-ended    online inquiry can be challenging,
demanding a range of skills to plan the inquiry and search for, make sense of, and synthesize information. The
IdeaKeeper can integrate libraries from the National Science Foundation's National Science Digital Library (e.g.,
the Digital Library for Earth System Education at http://dlese.org) with workspaces for inquiry planning, library
searching, information analysis, and information synthesis to connect digital libraries with the inquiry process.

         Supporting information analysis. Digital libraries support information seeking, but lack the information
analysis support learners need for productive reading (Wallace, Kupperman, Krajcik, & Soloway, 2000).                The
IdeaKeeper supports information analysis by displaying library resources (e.g., websites) in a "digital notecard",
which is a browser window framing the website with a scaffolded "Skim-Read-Summarize" notepad containing
prompted text areas informed by general reading and comprehension strategies (e.g., Brozo & Simpson, 2002).

         Facilitating information     synthesis. Students often fail to  integrate multiple  resources in a  coherent
argument, instead relying on a single resource for their argument (Oliver & Hannafin, 2000). The IdeaKeeper
incorporates services for learners to compare, contrast, and summarize their notes across different digital notecards
so they can consider multiple sources for their argument. The IdeaKeeper can also integrate different argumentation
tools so students can link their digital notecards and develop a textual argument addressing their driving question.

Future Plans and Concluding Remarks
         We have completed the initial IdeaKeeper design and pilot testing with middle school science students.
Upcoming   classroom   testing   will focus  more  closely on   how  students use  the IdeaKeeper   and  the different
scaffolding features to engage in online inquiry activities, especially focusing on information analysis and synthesis.

References
Brozo, W. G., & Simpson, M. L. (2002). Readers, Teachers, Learners: Expanding Literacy Across the Content
         Areas (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill Prentice Hall.
National Research Council. (1996). National Science Education Standards: National Academy Press.
Oliver, K., & Hannafin, M. J. (2000). Student management of Web-based hypermedia resources during open-ended
         problem solving. Journal of Educational Research, 94(2), 75-92.
Wallace, R., Kupperman, J., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2000). Science on the Web: Students online in a sixth-grade
         classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(1), 75-104.

Acknowledgements
         This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DUE-
0226241. Any opinions and findings expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of  the National Science    Foundation.    We also  thank Srikaran  Reddy,   Minyoung   Song,  Yvonne       Pappas,
Elizabeth Moje,  and  the DLESE       team, especially Mary   Marlino,  Mike  Wright,  and  John  Weatherly  for     their
assistance with this project.

                                                          628
