                     Improving Personal Home Pages to Support
                          Learning as Becoming and Belonging

                                          Jochen Rick & Mark Guzdial
                       College of Computing / GVU Center, Georgia Institute of Technology
                                     Tel: 404-385-1105, Fax: 404-894-2970
                                   Email: {jochen.rick, guzdial}@cc.gatech.edu

Towards Collaborative Personal Home Pages
        While (in theory) personal home pages have the potential to support an academic community of practice by
enabling learning as becoming and belonging, (in practice) conventional personal home pages fail to serve this
function for the vast majority of users. Browsing home pages, we find that few academicians use their personal
home page for more than posting contact information and distributing publications. While this kind of use does have
a significant role in academia, it only scratches the surface of the potential that personal home pages can have. To go
beyond this surface level, we must understand the reasons why the use of personal home pages normally stops there
and what the potential is when users get beyond this surface. In particular, from a research perspective, it is
important to be able to link those reasons to issues of becoming and belonging. We believe that the reasons for the
lack of adoption are largely technological--they are based on the features of current tools rather than the underlying
concepts.   Since we  are concerned with  studying the underlying concepts,     we   should  try to eliminate these
technological reasons. This approach falls squarely within the design experiments framework for learning sciences
research. In this study, we concern ourselves with the current state of personal home pages and finding a trajectory
for improving that state by removing the purely technological problems.

        To investigate the current state of personal home pages supporting a community of practice and establish a
trajectory for how that state can be improved, we surveyed 24 Ph.D. students at the end of their first year. At this
point in their program, these students are still on similar trajectories from the periphery to the core. Analyzing the
surveys by adoption rate, the study revealed four important findings. (1) Personal home pages were primarily used to
participate in the  academic community   of practice. (2) Regardless     of adoption  rate, audience  awareness for
conventional home page users was low. (3) Non-adopters and adopters alike wished that the publication cycle was
easier. (4) In contrast, only adopters showed significant preference for adding collaborative features to their personal
home pages. So, it is doubtful that collaboration can be a method to entice non-adopters to adopt. Yet, there is
evidence that collaboration is actually something that adopters would want as part of that medium. Based on this
work, we    created AniAniWeb   (a system for creating  collaborative    personal   home    pages) to address these
technological shortcomings. We believe that the possibilities for learning as becoming and belonging will emerge
for a larger group of users with AniAniWeb than standard home pages. So, we will also have the opportunity to see
why users do not adopt home pages for social rather than technological reasons. More about this project and this
study can be found at the first author's AniAniWeb: http://home.cc.gatech.edu/je77.

References
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge University Press.

                                                      631
