       Comparing Conflicting Perspectives on a Diffused Technology

                                             Tom Satwicz & Reed Stevens
                                   Box 353600, Miller Hall, Seattle, WA 98195-3600
                                tommysat@u.washington.edu, reedstev@u.washington.edu

         In this poster we explore the question of why, over time, a "learning technology" diffused and acquired
new   users in a university    community   (Rogers, 1995).   Our approach    contrasts two  types of explanations     for
diffusion. The first one--largely implicit in much learning sciences research--is the view that diffusion happens
because new users recognize the demonstrable ability of a technology to support new and valued learning. The
alternative view we present sees diffusion as a more multi-dimensional process, one that in the case study we present
is largely independent of demonstrable evidence for a tool's educational value. Based on this case study, we propose
an alternative approach to understanding the diffusion of educational technologies.

A brief explanation of the tool
         Reflector, is a web-based tool that allows students to collect and annotate electronic "artifacts". Students
can then create multiple electronic portfolios from their artifacts. Instructors have the ability to set up a "portfolio
project" as a framework for students to use. Feedback can be given through the tool on portions of a portfolio.
Within a portfolio most text, which is not in an artifact, is called a "reflection".    An artifact might be used in
multiple portfolios (or even multiple pages within a portfolio), but a reflection is generally unique to that portfolio
and page.   Portfolio projects, set up by instructors or counselors, contain questions or instructions often called
"prompts" meaning they prompt students to select an artifact or compose a reflection.

Two perspectives: A case of diffusion and then the students' view
         On the campus of a large west coast university Reflector is introduced at the beginning of an academic
year.  Its release has been anticipated and immediately a variety of groups across campus begin using it (academic,
career  counseling, academic      planning, etc.).  For months   a   team of  researchers,  developers, and program
coordinators plan its introduction into a freshman seminar.  Prior to its release it is the focus of a monthly forum on
educational technology where designers and developers present the tool to the university community.       A dean, in
front of a large group of instructors, enthusiastically endorses it. Thousands of students and hundreds of instructors
quickly make Reflector a part of their academic activities.   By the end of the school year it has been taken up by
more groups, and it is the focus of a yearly forum on educational technology.    Many of the groups plan to continue
using the technology. In short, the tool is well on its way to successfully diffusing into the educational community.

         We get a different perspective if we look at students in a freshman seminar designed to help introduce them
to university life. They are given a weekly assignment to use Reflector.  While some students use the tool's features
to their own benefit, most are ambivalent about its utility. They complete the tasks because they are assigned, but
see little value in the tool. Many consider using the tool to be "busywork" and put little time or concerted effort into
it. Some had even stronger views: "Do not use this next year. I do not want the upcoming freshmen to have to deal
with this nonsense like I [sic] did."

         Our   analysis of    diffusion follows various representations   of the tool  that have  emerged throughout
Reflector's development.      These representations serve at least two roles: (1) to project an ideal, as yet unrealized use
for the tool and thereby to enroll allies to its cause (Latour, 1996) and (2) to serve as precursors to the material form
that Reflector will take. The sort of analysis we are pursuing is common in Science & Technology Studies focused
on how programs of research and scientific technologies diffuse. We argue that an analogous approach is useful here
for examining the complex ways that educational technologies find their way into widening use.

Latour, B. (1996). Aramis, or the love of technology (C. Porter, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of Innovations (Fourth ed.). New York: The Free Press.

                                                         632
