            Preparing Tomorrow's Teachers to Use Technology:
  Analysis of Pre-service Elementary and Middle School Teachers'
        Interactions With Computer Modeling and Simulation Tools

                                   Christina Schwarz, Jason Meyer & Ajay Sharma
            Teacher Education, Michigan State University, 332 Erickson Hall, East Lansing, MI 48824
                                     Tel: (517) 432-4851, Fax: (517) 432-5092
                          cschwarz@msu.edu, meyerja4@msu.edu, sharmaaj@msu.edu

        Tomorrow's teachers need to be prepared to use technology in their classrooms. However, student teachers
have little knowledge about what kind of computer software to use, where to find good examples of such software,
or how to use it with their own students. It is the premise of this paper that computer modeling and simulation
software can play a pivotal role in helping pre-service elementary and middle school teachers learn about robust uses
of technology in the science classroom as well as helping them learn about important issues of science pedagogy and
epistemology. Computer modeling and simulation software, or software that represents data or phenomena in a way
that can help predict and explain those phenomena often by visually representing abstract components and causal
relationships over time, lies at the core of scientific practice and has revolutionized science and engineering. Further,
educational versions of such software enable students and teachers to visualize and develop reasoning about abstract
scientific concepts and phenomena, access cutting-edge scientific research, engage in authentic practices of science,
and do so in interesting ways.

        In order to prepare pre-service elementary and middle school teachers to use technology in their future
science classrooms while learning about scientific pedagogy and epistemology, the authors designed an intervention
in the first author's one-semester elementary science methods class at a large state university in the Midwest in
which the twenty-five student teachers used and studied computer modeling and simulation software within their
own science learning and teaching. The intervention included three core components.       First, the student teachers
read about, discussed, and debated the use of computer software and the role of modeling in science. Second, they
learned and used two simulation tools in the course within science explorations on solar motion and light. Third,
they conducted an in-depth investigation with a partner of one of five modeling tools chosen from our website
http://ott.educ.msu.edu/2002pt3/INDEX.HTM.      As part of  this investigation, student    teachers evaluated  their
modeling tool, wrote a lesson plan using the tool, and taught another pair of students about the tool they had learned.
What did student teachers learn about modeling and simulation software from this intervention, and how did the
intervention impact their views of science pedagogy and understanding of scientific epistemology?

        Several results emerged from analysis of written pre/post assessments, weekly student journals, videotapes
of classroom conversations, and interviews with half the class after the semester ended. First, student teachers
expanded their understanding of the role technology can play in the classroom and their understanding of the kind of
software available for science teaching. Second, we found that strengths of the modeling software were misaligned
with student teachers' goals for computer software use. Student teachers valued software that was fun, easy to use,
aesthetically pleasing, and provided a source of scientific information. As a result, they responded most favorably to
the commercially produced computer simulations, and remained highly skeptical of the value of research-based
modeling tools--particularly the ones that did not impart direct scientific information. The dissonance between
student teachers' goals and    the purposes of the software provided  a platform   for    fruitful pedagogical and
epistemological discussions. Third, we found evidence that student teachers struggled with the notion and purpose of
scientific modeling and had difficulty conceiving of science and science learning as a process of creating and
revising models using scientific tools within a learning community. Given that pedagogical and epistemological
change is difficult and requires long-term exposure in multiple settings, this result is not entirely surprising. Finally,
we found that institutional factors such as few samples of discipline-specific modeling software for elementary
school science, no prior exposure to such an approach within other discipline-specific courses, and lack of time
within the course played a role in the impact of this approach. Nonetheless, overall results suggest that computer
modeling and simulation tools can be used to expand and challenge student teachers' understanding of the role that
technology can play in the science classroom as well as their views of science pedagogy and epistemology. As a
result, such teachers may be better prepared to use technology in tomorrow's classroom.

                                                      633
