      Using Coordination Classes to Interpret Conceptual Change in
                                        Astronomical Thinking

                                         Brett E. Shelton & Reed R. Stevens
             Instructional Technology, Utah State University; Cognitive Studies, University of Washington
                                   brett.shelton@usu.edu; reedstev@u.washington.edu

          Students traditionally have difficulty learning Earth-Sun relationships. Although many have investigated
why this is the case, the fact remains that traditional 2D methods of instruction have drawbacks when presenting 3D
spatial content. This research project investigated augmented reality (AR), an interface technology that augments the
real environment with virtual 3D objects. It allows the user to manipulate the orientation and position of virtual 3D
objects through a first-person view of the environment. It normally consists of a display (worn as a visor in this
case), a tracking system, and accompanying hardware and software. Students manipulate the virtual objects by
changing the position of a square piece of foam core.     Using previous work as instructional design resources, a
learning activity was designed and implemented to teach students the reasons for the seasons. The learning activity
included students' interaction with six virtual models. The investigator instructed students to ask questions while
they explored the virtual content.

          Our research involved analyzing interactions through videotaped recordings of students' AR activities. To
analyze the specific interactions and how the interactions related to students' learning, we identified and followed
visual and physical actions of students. We inductively generated inferences about patterns from multiple sets of
observations of students' videotaped activity. By tracing specific student actions and building codes over multiple
sets of students, we created a system of connections. How did students learn about Earth-Sun relationships? What
kinds of things did they learn? Our work builds on a perspective on conceptual change and knowledge in-use that
suggests any single "answer" to a problem (such as in physics) will be generated by the activation of an ensemble of
knowledge elements called a coordination class (diSessa & Sherin, 1998).      Coordination classes supply inferences
that link perception  to understanding    and  inference, thereby   characterizing a systemic   model   of individual
knowledge organization. The hypothesis behind the characterization of a coordination class is that one is able to
explain how one "sees something" in the world, whether it is an object, process, event, or idea (cf. Stevens & Hall,
1998). Using the coordination class approach helped us identify how students "see" Earth-Sun relationships without
relying on their ability to define vocabulary terms of the field. We analyzed students' changes in understanding of
3D events without relying on their abilities to translate 3D mental images to 2D text and diagrams. This was relevant
because students often have difficulty representing their understanding of spatial relationships using language and
writing.

          With the idea of coordination classes as a basis for tracking changes in understanding, we identified
specific changes during the AR activity of 43 students who took part in the learning exercise by delineating when
students used familiar readout strategies in new ways or created new readout strategies. Similarly, we identified
instances of conceptual change by identifying when students used existing causal nets in new ways or when they
created new ones. Some readout strategies found across the student sample included simple left, right, up, and down
movements    of the virtual objects  to change  viewing   perspectives. Students   used  a strategy of inspecting   the
continents on the rotating virtual objects to determine which parts of the Earth received more light. Students also
expressed  a number   of "new"     inferences they acquired during   their AR  activity, each inference  indicating   a
modification to their causal net. For example, students inferred the approximate circular shape of Earth's orbit and
that the Earth's angle remains consistent for each of the four positions of solstice and equinox through their
inspection of Model #2. Students' re-inspection of Model #2 led to an inference about the "big picture" for the
position of the Earth as it revolves around the Sun. Another inference was that seasonal variation of light and
temperature is due to the way the Earth moves relative to the Sun, combined with its consistent angle of rotation.

          In summary, the coordination class approach holds general promise for exploring conceptual change and
learning.

                                                        634
