        Preservice Elementary Science Teachers' Identity Development:
                            Identifying with Images of Inquiry

                                            Julie Smithey & Elizabeth A. Davis
             University of Michigan ~ 610 E. University Ave., 1323 SEB ~ Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1259
                                    Tel: (734) 615-3405, Fax: (734) 763-1368
                                     Email: [jsmithey, betsyd] @umich.edu

        Preservice elementary science teachers are in the process of developing identities as teachers; fostering
positive identities as science teachers is an important goal of teacher education (Danielewicz, 2001).        Elementary
science teachers often do not  have  strong identities   as  science  teachers, but teachers   who  do      have positive
perceptions of themselves as science teachers are more likely to focus on their students and their learning and less
likely to limit the number and kinds of science teaching practices they use (Appleton & Kindt, 2002). Therefore, it is
critical that elementary teacher educators help their students learn to see themselves as science teachers.

        This study (discussed in more depth in a paper available at http://www.umich.edu/~betsyd) explores using
written models of teaching to foster this identity development.    As a part of a science methods class, preservice
elementary science teachers were asked to react to reading two models of inquiry-oriented science teaching, or
images of inquiry.  These images were narratives describing teachers teaching particular lessons.    One image was
based on the preservice teachers' experience; Emily was a preservice teacher teaching her first science lessons.
Another was designed to be a more experienced model, though still in preservice teachers' zones of proximal
development  (Vygotsky,  1978); Nancy   was a     fourth year teacher.   Both Emily  and     Nancy were     described as
focusing on attending carefully to kids' science ideas in their teaching and planning.  Preservice teachers read the
images  of inquiry and were asked  with whom      they identified and why.   The preservice teachers' rationales for
identifying with one of the models are analyzed.

        These rationales fell into three categories: judgment of the image teachers' decisions (e.g. I relate to Nancy
because I agree with what she did in this lesson), relating in some way to the image teacher (e.g. I relate to Emily
because I would have done the same thing), and sharing common circumstances with the image teacher (e.g. I relate
to Emily because we're both preservice teachers).

        Half of the preservice teachers studied reported agreement with instructional decisions of the image teacher
as the only rationale for identifying with them.  The other half also considered issues of similarity of circumstance
and whether or not they could relate to the image teacher. All but one of those who identified with Emily because
she was  a  preservice teacher also identified    with   her for  other reasons.  However,    simply sharing      similar
circumstances does not seem to be enough for most preservice teachers to identify with an image teacher.

        Providing models of teaching that show exemplary teaching in the face of instructional dilemmas can help
preservice teachers relate to the images of inquiry-oriented teaching. The results indicate that models of teaching
should be crafted in such a way that encourages preservice teachers to relate to the models and agree with the
decisions that they make as well as keeping the models situated for the preservice teachers.

Acknowledgments
        This research is funded by a PECASE Award from the National Science Foundation, REC grant #0092610.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors.

Reference
Appleton, K., & Kindt, I. (2002). Beginning elementary teachers' development as teachers of science. Journal of
        Science Teacher Education, 13(1), 43-61.
Danielewicz, J. (2001). Teaching Selves: Identity, Pedagogy, and Teacher Education. Albany: State University of
        New York Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in Society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.

                                                         635
