 Berta's Tower: Understanding Physics Through Virtual Engineering
                                Gina Svarovsky & David Williamson Shaffer
                              1025 W. Johnson, Room 1069; Madison, WI       53706
                                     Tel: 608-262-0831, Fax: 608-262-0843
                           Email: mnsvarovsky@wisc.edu, dws@education.wisc.edu

Introduction
        Learning environments based on engineering design challenges can provide effective contexts for the
development of scientific understanding in middle and high school students (Kolodner, Crismond, Gray, Holbrook,
& Puntambekar, 1998).   In many such environments, however, students solve engineering design problems with
physical materials, which can limit the number of iterations of the design cycle in which students can engage.
Computational microworlds (diSessa, 2000; Papert, 1980) allow students to develop mathematical and scientific
knowledge by programming the behavior of objects in a virtual world. The relative ease of revision in these virtual
worlds lets students (a) engage in bircolage, a design process marked by repeated iteration and testing of a design
rather than explicit planning, and (b) work expressively, incorporating personal choices into their designs (Papert,
1980). Direct manipulation environments (Stevenson, 2002) are microworlds without programming, and this poster
examines the role of iterativity and expressivity when students developed their conceptual understanding of center of
mass engage through solving virtual engineering design challenges in a DME.

Methods
       The Berta's Tower project consisted of 2 weekend workshops with a total of 12 middle school students
participating. During these workshops, students solved virtual engineering design challenges in SodaConstructor
(www.sodaplay.com), a dynamic Java-based spring and mass modeling DME.             The tool allowed students to build
two-dimensional structures in a drag and drop interface and subsequently test the stability of their designs under the
simulated effects of gravity. Clinical pre- and post-interviews of students' (a) understanding of center of mass and
(b) experiences in the workshops (post interview only) were transcribed and coded within a grounded theory
framework (Strauss & Corbin, 1998).

Results
        Students learned about center of mass: Correct references to center of mass increased from pre- to post-
interviews (mean pre=0.42; mean post=11.92; p<0.01). Students gave more correct justifications for answers to
conceptual textbook physics problems in post interviews (mean pre=0.92; mean post=5.92, p<0.01).
        Properties of the tool helped students learn: When asked about features of SodaConstructor that were
important in their design work, 75% of the students (9/12) indicated the ability to test their structures against gravity
helped them learn the most; 67% of the students (8/12) identified the ability to incorporate personal design choices
into their work (or expressivity) as a favorite property of the tool; and 58% of the students (7/12) identified the
combination of testing and expressivity as the "most fun part" of SodaConstructor.

Discussion
       These data suggest the students of the Berta's Tower workshops were able to develop their conceptual
understanding of center of mass by solving design challenges in the SodaConstructor DME.      The ability to create
and revise structures by directly placing spring and mass elements into the design space made it possible for students
to learn through bricolage, a process that students were motivated to undertake in part because of their ability to
incorporate personal choices into their work. The combination of the high iterativity and high expressivity in this
DME thus provided an effective context for these students to develop their conceptual understanding of physics.

References
diSessa, A. (2000). Changing Minds: Computers, Learning, and Literacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kolodner, J. L., Crismond, D., Gray, J. T., Holbrook, J., & Puntambekar, S. (1998). Learning by Design from theory
        to practice. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Atlanta, GA.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Basic Books.
Stevenson, I. (2002). Microworlds and direct manipulation environments: The case of Newtonian mechanics.
        Journal of Educational Computing Research, 27(1&2), 167-183.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research (second ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
        Inc.

                                                   639
