                    Negotiating the Meaning of Representations
                                in the Mathematics Classroom

                                    Jennifer A. Tackman & Shelley V. Goldman
                   Stanford University School of Education, 485 Lasuen Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
                                       Tel: (650) 723-8422, Fax: (650) 725-7412
                                           Email: jtackman@stanford.edu

Project Background and Presentation Focus
        Multiple representations of mathematical concepts are used in the classroom to access existing conceptions
of ideas, build on  or challenge  developing   ideas,   and  to communicate  through  traditional      and  standardized
mathematical symbols. Complexities in the dynamic environments of classrooms and the competing and sometimes
conflicting meanings   students and  their teachers   assign to representations can obfuscate       seamless translation
between representations and impact student understandings.       This poster presentation illustrates the dynamics of
student and teacher negotiation and interpretation of representations present during a four-day series of geometric-
based fraction lessons in a fifth grade classroom.

Theoretical Perspectives
        Learning mathematics depends partly on the representations that are created, shared, and used as tools of
comprehension and communication in the discipline. Most educators support learners in developing and using a
repertoire of mathematical representations and foster meaningful discourse in learning environments. Even though
representations are standard in mathematical practice, capturing the richness of these multiple and often-complex
forms of representation pose special challenges. These forms may differ from the internal, personal, and invented
forms of  representation on the   part of the learner  (Meira,  1995; Goldin &   Shteingold,       2001).  Mathematical
discourse has a register that is unique to its users. It is often vague, which challenges those engaging in it to link
various referents and develop understanding of the patterns and styles of linguistic communication present in
dialogue (Steinbring, et. al., 1998; Cobb et. al., 2000). Developing expertise in the content requires making sense of
the math amidst many forms of representations, the social norms of the classroom, and the cues provided in various
utterances that link all of these with existing preconceptions and the goals of the task at hand.

Research Questions, Methods, and Findings
        Through the analysis of video, teacher notes, student work, and discourse samples, we highlight four ways
that representational work in the classroom is shown to be complex for both teachers and students. The analysis: (1)
explores the range and dynamics of student interpretations and uses of representations; (2) highlights the "noise" of
negotiated, shared understandings around them; (3) identifies the need for reading, interpreting, and moving among
representations as being dependent on emergent cues embedded in layers of classroom contexts; and, (4) shows the
ways in which the teacher's response to the complexity of work with representations is considered, planned,
employed, yet unable to provide clarity.   Findings suggest that misunderstandings around representations are not
necessarily due to the representation alone. Instead of abandoning specific representations when conflicts arise, the
situations may provide critical moments to elucidate important issues in the teaching and learning of mathematics.

References
Cobb, P., Yackel, E., and McClain, K. (Eds), (2000).  Symbolizing and communicating in mathematics classrooms:
        Perspectives on discourse, tools, and instructional design. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
        Associates.
Goldin, G. & Shteingold, N. (2001). Systems of representations and the development of mathematical concepts.        In
        Cuoco, A. (Ed.) The Roles of representation in school mathematics: 2001 yearbook of the National Council
        of Teachers of Mathematics.    Reston, Virginia.
Meira, L. (1995). The microevolution of mathematical representations in children's activity.      In Cognition and
        Instruction, 13, 269-313.
Steinbring, S., Bartolini Bussi, M., & Sierpinska, A. (Eds.). (1998). Language and communication in the
        mathematics classroom.    Reston, Virginia: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

                                                         640
