                                Inquiry Practices As Systems:
                   Characterizing Important Elements of Reasoning

                                            Carrie T. Tzou & Brian J. Reiser
    Northwestern University School of Education and Social Policy, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
                                         Tel: 206-523-6437, Fax: 847-491-8999
                             Email: tzouct@northwestern.edu, reiser@northwestern.edu

        Reform in science education has focused on inquiry as a way of teaching students complex scientific
practices in the context of open-ended investigations. Yet students have difficulties making strategic decisions about
the direction of their investigations and drawing on content knowledge to make sense of data (Edelson, Gordin, &
Pea, 1999). Furthermore, the inquiry practices called for in reforms are quite broadly specified. Implementing these
practices requires engaging students in specific tasks, and interactions. How do teachers and students put general
ideas like hypothesis testing, building explanations, and defending models into practice in classrooms?

        The question we ask in this analysis is: what are elements of reasoning in which teachers engage students
when supporting them in complex inquiry practices? We look at two teachers enacting an inquiry-based, middle-
school curriculum   focusing on ecosystems     and natural selection.   The curriculum, entitled Struggle  in Natural
Environments: What Will Survive? includes an investigation of the effects of invasive species on ecosystems. Major
content goals include structure/function relationships, competition, and food web interactions. Students also engage
in inquiry skills such as modeling and developing explanations. Students use what they learn throughout the unit to
propose and defend a plan to rid the Great Lakes of the sea lamprey, an invasive species. Because of the ambitious
nature of this investigation, we wanted to understand how teachers supported students in engaging in inquiry
practices during the course of the unit.

        We present examples of two classroom sequences conducted over eight weeks that comprise the inquiry
practices of understanding and applying a model and developing a scientific explanation. We use Collins and
Ferguson's (1993) theory of epistemic forms (types of knowledge) and epistemic games (reasoning that builds or
applies the knowledge structure) to characterize the specific kinds of tasks that combine to form the overall inquiry
practice. We see that teachers build a system of interrelated tasks to engage students in a complex practice such as
understanding a model. For example, teachers had students first identify the elements of the model, then predict the
results of changes to the model, and finally apply the model to a new situation.  These reasoning tasks were part of
the overall modeling inquiry practice. This analysis suggests how teachers might translate broadly stated inquiry
practices into specific reasoning tasks for students in classrooms.

References
Collins, A. & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and strategies to guide
        inquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28(1), 25-42.
Edelson, D.C., Gordin, D.N., & Pea, R.D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning through
        technology and curriculum design. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3&4), 391-450.

Acknowledgements
This project is funded by the National Science Foundation under Grant F005626/ESI-0101780 and by the Center for
Curriculum Materials in Science under Grant ESI-022755 to support the design and enactment of project-based
science curricula. Opinions expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NSF or CCMS.

                                                        642
