          Insights Into the Complexity of Designing for Professional
      Development Networks in Educational Technologies: Tensions
                                Between Structure and Agency
                          Susan Yoon, Eric Klopfer, Ginger Richardson & James Taylor
             Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA, 02139
                                     Tel: (617) 452-4977, Fax: (501) 642-7378
                                                 syoon@mit.edu

   Background and Objectives
         The preliminary results reported here are part of a larger research program aimed at identifying ways in
which a specific educational computer application called StarLogo improves both student understanding of complex
dynamic systems and more broadly, technology use and skills. The intent of the smaller study was to identify
successes and barriers in the design and delivery of professional development activities with the explicit goal of
building network capacity. Drawing on three major bodies of literature: professional development in education (cf.
Howe & Stubbs), social network theory (cf. Rogers, 1995), and design research (Collins, 1999), we implemented a
professional development model with the following four design features: flexibility--addressing the dynamic nature
of teaching environments and individual goals; adaptiveness--attending to the situatedness of individual teaching
contexts  and responding    to  system-wide  needs;   building social   network capacity--providing       avenues    for
communication, collaboration and peer facilitation; and self-organization--encouraging self-reflexive metacognitive
behavior with a view to enhancing teacher autonomy and empowerment.

   Conceptual Framework and Methodology
         Computer-based tools that enable students to work effectively with conceptual artifacts, deal with complex
decision-making, manage    emergent   and often disparate  information  and  coordinate    efforts   to collaboratively
construct knowledge    have increasingly  gained momentum      in educational  research.    While    the  potential  for
technology to revolutionize educational practice looms high on the horizon, a critical factor in achieving substantial,
large-scale, enduring and self-regulated change is how to appropriately in-service teachers. The dominant in-service
model of  presenting   "teacher proof" materials that  are unconnected    to classroom     life  has  largely failed     in
transforming  teaching  practices. To address this dilemma,    we employed    an     iterative, mixed   methods design
approach with the following organizational components: (a) A ten-day teacher workshop; (b) Access to local expert
facilitators; (c) Bi-monthly whole-group meetings; (d) Communication on a shared on-line bulletin board; (e)
Construction, articulation and on-going revision of participant goals and timelines.

Results, Discussion and Implications
         The results reported here are based on data generated from 24 teacher participants recruited from school
districts in a mixed urban-rural area in the southwestern part of the U.S. 18 public middle and high schools were
represented, three of which were private and one charter. While further analyses are forthcoming, we found that the
successes and barriers in the design and implementation of our professional development model in this first phase
hinged on a meta theme focusing on the tensions between structure and agency. Using multiple data sources the
following six critical developments emerged throughout the intervention: (a) Centralization of resources: Innovators
vs. status quo; (b) Organizing for self-organization; (c) Harnessing individual network capacities; (d) Authentic use
of communication tools; (e) Transforming self-efficacy beliefs; and (f) Working within pre-existing systems. Each
of these developments were subsequently used as starting points for revision of future design efforts. With an
emphasis on constructing a robust social network understanding, through our design partnership with investigators,
facilitators and participants, we intend to continually modify our own professional development practices and hope
that this insight will also inform those doing similar research in the diffusion of innovative educational technologies.

References
Collins, A. (1999). The changing infrastructure of education research. In E. C. Lagemann & L.S. Shulman
         (Eds.) Issues in Education Research: Problems and Possibilities. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Inc.,
         Publishers.
Howe, A. & Stubbs, H. (1996). Empowering science teachers: A model for professional development. Journal
         of Science Teacher Education, 8(3), 167-182.
Rogers, E. (1995). Diffusion of Innovations. New York: The Free Press.

                                                       644
