        Using Museum Resources to Engage High School Students in
                                          Historical Thinking
                                 Meilan Zhang, Robert B. Bain & Stephen Mucher
            University of Michigan, School of Education, 610 E. University Ave., Ann Arbor, MI, 48109
                                      Tel: 734-615-1530, Fax: 734-763-1368
                                            Email: meilanz@umich.edu

Theoretical Framework
    Researchers have documented the benefits associated with using multiple primary sources in history classroom
(Stahl, Hynd,    Britton, McNish,  &  Bosquet,  1996;  Wineburg,    1991). For  example,    understanding     multiple
perspectives on a particular event can help students build a richer and more detailed mental model of that event, thus
enhancing content knowledge. Moreover, reading multiple sources can increase opportunities for students to develop
the disciplinary knowledge that historians demonstrate. Wineburg (1991) found that historians use different reading
strategies than do students when reading multiple sources to solve historical problems. Historians use strategies such
as sourcing (consider   the source of the  document), corroboration   (compare  and  contrast  documents      with one
another), and contextualization (situate a text in a specific time and place) to gain a deep understanding about a
historical problem (Wineburg, 1991). However, reading multiple documents is a challenging task. Students require
inquiry skills and representational abilities to read historical documents, evaluate them, and construct their own
interpretation  of the described events.  Simply giving  students  a selection of documents    and expecting     them
automatically to come up with thoughtful historical inquiry is not realistic. Without support, students have difficulty
integrating information from different sources (Bain, 2000).

Response to challenges
    Our research group has developed a set of curriculum materials with specially designed technology to respond
to the challenges associated with using primary sources in history classrooms. A software tool-- the Virtual Curator
(VC)--is designed to help high school students develop historical thinking skill by using multiple primary sources.
VC aims to help students develop strategies to read multiple documents and differentiate historical facts from
historical interpretation. Given our learning objectives, we designed an activity in which students draw a floor plan
of a sharecropper's home that has been relocated to the Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village. The house and
many    related documents   are digitally represented in VC,    enabling students to compare    and  contrast      their
interpretations with the curator's and corroborate the curator's decisions against other evidence. Through this
activity, students have opportunities to experience how different historical claims are created based on the same
original sources. Since historical inquiry is complicated intellectual work for high school students, scaffolding is
needed for students to engage in the demanding work of historical inquiry. In VC, there are specially designed tools
to scaffold students as they use, manage, and analyze historical documents. For example, a sourcing tool helps
students to decide how and why an author knows something about the historical event being studied. A comparing
tool helps student compare and contrast contradictory evidence by putting sources side by side for analysis.

Initial assessment
    We conducted a focus group usability test to evaluate VC's functionality and clarity. Participants were five
tenth-grade students from a Detroit-area public school. Generally, most students were highly engaged in the activity
we designed in the program. The floor plan activity also revealed controversial aspects of historical interpretation,
and made students start to think about criteria of evaluating historical claims. Further research will be conducted to
understand how students learn with VC in real classroom settings along with the curriculum.

References
Bain, R. B. (2000). Into the breach: Using research and theory to shape history instruction. In P. Stearns, P.
            Seixas & S. Wineburg (Eds.), Knowing, teaching & learning history: National and international
            perspectives (pp. 331-353). New York: New York University Press
Stahl, S. A., Hynd, C. R., Britton, B. K., McNish, M. M., & Bosquet, D. (1996). What happens when students
            read multiple source documents in history. Reading Research Quarterly, 31(4), 430-456.
Wineburg, S. S. (1991). Historical Problem Solving: A study of the cognitive processes used in the evaluation
            of documentary and pictorial evidence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83(1), 73-87.

                                                       645
