             A Case Study of a Family's Digital Technology Use

                                        Heather Toomey Zimmerman
               University of Washington, 211F Miller Hall, Box 353600, Seattle, WA 98195
                                    Tel: 206-221-4116, Fax: 206-221-3296
                                     Email: htoomey@u.washington.edu

        Teenagers in the United States are rapidly adopting emerging digital technologies, around which
they create complex social practices, such as instant messaging, text messaging, and online video gaming
(Kaiser Family Foundation & San Jose Mercury News, 2003; Lenhart, Rainie, & Lewis, 2001). Embedded
in these online social practices are technologically-mediated conversations in which teens explore their
identities, gain information, develop cybercultures, create communication styles and patterns, and learn
socialization skills.

           The goal of this paper is to illuminate how one mother and her teenaged children view their
digital-mediated  communication     practices. It is   situated in  a larger qualitative     study    which seeks to
understand to understand how teens' online social practices change the way teens communicate, how teens
interact and form relationships with peers and family members, and the types of skills they learn as they
create these social practices surrounding the technology. This is not a study of the technology itself but of
youths' complex social, cultural, and learning practices mediated through technology.

        This case study includes two qualitative methods: interviews and observations. Semi-structured
questions are asked to explore teens' practices and perceptions surrounding instant messaging and to learn
about family communication. I also conduct observations of the teens as they are instant messaging.

           To understand teen instant messaging, their online social practice is examined through the
lenses of situated learning and learning as participating in a community of practice (Wenger & Lave, 1991).
Other concepts I employ to analyze teen instant messaging and family communication include: a) identity
and online identity; b) cyberculture and cyberspace; and c) social aspects of learning.

        This case study suggests instant messaging contains communication that is crucial, from teens'
perspectives, to maintaining intimate friendship bonds with peers as well as to developing new friendships
and romantic relationships. Instant messaging allows for teens to explore their identity and to participate in
a space where they come to see and be seen. Technology use that is perceived as important to some family
members may not be important to other members of the family as illustrated by the differing views of
cellular phone technologies. Another finding is that cellular phones provide this parent opportunities to
support her teens in a new timeframe and in places where she does not have access, such as school time.
Using her cell phone, the mother is able to meet her need to enhance her parental involvement.

Partial Bibliography
Green, N. (2002). On   the move: Technology, mobility, and the mediation of social    time and space. The Information
    Society, 18, 281-292.
Kaiser Family Foundation, & San Jose Mercury News. (2003). Growing Up Wired: Survey on Youth and the Internet in
    the Silicon Valley. Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser Family Foundation,.
Katz, J. E., & Rice, R. E. (2002). Interaction and Expression: Self, Identity, and Homepages. In Social Consequences of
    Internet Use: Access, Involvement, and Interaction (pp. 265-283). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
    University Press.
Lenhart, A., Rainie, L., & Lewis, O. (2001). Teenage Life Online: The Rise of the Instant-Message Generation and the
    Internet's Impact on Friendships and Family Relationships. Washington, D.C.: Pew Internet & American Life
    Project.
Subrahmanyam, K., Greenfield, P., Kraut, R., & Gross, E. (2001). The Impact of Computer Use on Children's and
    Adolescents' Development. Applied Developmental Psychology, 22, 7-30.
Turkle, S. (1995). Aspects of the Self. In Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet (pp. 177-209). New
    York: Simon & Schuster.

                                                       646
