       Implications of Computer-Based Projects in Electronics on
       Fostering Independent Learning, Creativity and Teamwork

       Moshe Barak, Science and Technology Education Program, Ben-Gurion, University of the Negev
                                               & Beer Sheva, Israel
                                  Tel: (972) 8 6461987, Fax: (972) 8 6477487
                                      Email: mbarak@bgumail.bgu.ac.il

        Abstract: This research aimed to explore the impact of computer-based projects, within the
        framework of high school electronics studies, on pupils' learning. Technology studies provide
        a sophisticated learning environment in which computers are simultaneously part of the subject
        matter learned and a means for teaching and learning. In the beginning stages, pupils highly
        depend on teachers' instructions and help. Pupils working on non-computerized projects in
        electronics  are  likely to  progress   along  a  conventional   path:  planning,    constructing,
        troubleshooting and improving. In contrast, pupils working on computer-based projects tend to
        modify their systems, drift away from the initial design suggested by the teacher, take risks,
        improvise and make progress through trial and error. Computerized projects impart flexibility,
        freedom   of action  and  independence   to  the pupils  beyond  that  usually  found   at school.
        Computerized   projects   encourage    cooperation   and teamwork    among    pupils   through the
        Internet. Under   "Internet  culture,"  pupils quickly   zip between    sources   of   information,
        download   programs   from   different sources   and exchange    ideas with   friends. New   ideas,
        especially regarding computer programming, are distributed among the pupils, developed and
        refined, and become common property. Computerized projects encourage pupils to cross the
        line from fully teacher-guided work and become confident and independent learners.

Introduction
        In recent years, educators expected that computers and communication technologies would encourage
schools to shift from traditional teaching to methods emphasizing higher-order learning and developing the
pupils' intellectual capabilities. Technology education encompasses such areas as design, problem-solving,
robotics, control systems, and communication systems (ITEA, 2000; Dugger, 2001). Technological studies deal
with the development of artifacts and systems that realize people's aspirations, beyond fulfilling basic needs such
as food, housing and transport (Dasgupta, 1996). Thus, technology education provides an especially suitable
framework for implementing pedagogical ideas that promote significant learning and foster the development of
higher cognitive skills, such as problem-solving abilities, critical thinking and creativity (Johnson, 1997).

        Electronics  studies  in Israeli comprehensive    high   schools are   highly developed.   Computers        and
communication technologies are at the same time part of the subject learned in electronics studies and a means
for teaching and learning, as seen in other areas of education. The integration of computers into electronics
studies and pupils projects has a history of over three decades. Since the mid-1970s, the electronics curriculum
has included the teaching of the fundamentals of numeric systems, such as binary codes, number systems,
switching algebra and digital hardware. During the 1980s, the study of microprocessors and the Assembler
programming language become a central part of electronics studies. During the 1990s, personal computers,
mainly IBM   and  Apple,  spread   widely  throughout    the school  system  and   encouraged    the use      of higher
programming languages such as Turbo Pascal and C for pupils projects.

        In recent  years, more   and more   projects are  involving  the use   of digital hardware   and      advanced
programming  tools,  such  as C++    and Visual  Basic,  for  real-time  measurement   and   control.  Most      of the
electronics laboratories are equipped with computers permanently connected to the Internet. Since teachers and
pupils dealing with electronics studies have almost unlimited access to computerized means, they are among the
heaviest users of computers and the Internet in their schools. Electronics studies thus enable examining the
impact of computer technologies on learning in an area that is fundamentally rich, refined and challenging.

                                                     66
How do computers affect pupils' work on their projects? To what extent have the expectations that technological
means contribute to meaningful, in-depth learning been realized? This study examined these questions by
following electronics studies in six high schools during one year.

Theoretical Framework
          A major goal of modern education is to develop pupils' higher-order thinking skills, such as the ability
to synthesize information,    solve problems, combine   facts,     generalize, hypothesize  and   arrive at   logical
conclusions. Over the past few decades, science and technology education has been influenced significantly by
constructivist learning theories emphasizing that learning is a process of knowledge construction, not of passive
acquisition of facts and roles (Von Glasersfeld, 1989; Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt, 1997).
Learners actively construct their knowledge based on their prior knowledge and experience. The idea of situated
learning (Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989) means that meaningful learning is closely related to the situation or
the context in which it takes place. Learning occurs when pupils address subjects meaningful for them in a real-
world setting. The importance of active experience with objects as a means of developing thinking was stressed
by Dewey (1963). Constructionism is a theory that expands on the concept of constructivism by placing critical
emphasis on the construction of knowledge through designing and building artifacts and systems that are
personally meaningful and that can be shared with others (Kafai & Resnick, 1996; Papert, 1991). In technology
studies, this can be, for instance, a mini robot, a model of a computerized house or a sophisticated alarm system.

          Information and communication technologies, mainly computers and the Internet, can contribute to
deeper learning and the development of thinking skills (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996; Salomon, Perkins &
Globerson, 1991; Salomon, 1998). Computer technologies are knowledge-building tools, and not just a means
for knowledge-transfer. The novel technologies encourage open learning and confront the learner with enormous
knowledge   resources    when facing  challenging problems,  and     are not   just tools for structured  teaching.
Communication    technologies  present  opportunities for shared     thinking,  cooperation   and joint  knowledge
construction by individuals distant from one another. Computer technologies promote meaningful learning only
when learners are engaged in knowledge construction, conversation, articulation, collaboration, authentication
and reflection (Jonassen et al., 2000; Krajcik et al, 1998). Technology studies constitute an adequate framework
for the realization of these ideas, mainly through project-based learning. Technological projects present pupils
with the opportunity to confront real-world complexities, work collaboratively, develop problem solving skills,
and reflect on their own learning (Johnson, 1997; Barak & Doppelt, 2000).

          Creativity is often defined as the production of an idea, an action or an object that is new (unusual,
original, novel, unexpected)    and  valued (useful,  adaptive      and  appropriate)  (Csikszentmihalyi,     1996).
Encouraging creative thinking in science and technology studies is particularly difficult as teachers emphasize
that mathematical-logical thinking is the only valuable thinking, and they reward pupils for giving the `right
answer' rather than for their originality or richness of ideas. Fostering creative thinking in school requires an
atmosphere of openness to experience, tolerance of ambiguity, freedom and safety (Harman & Rheingold, 1984).
Creativity is promoted more by intrinsic than by extrinsic rewards (Hennessy & Ambile, 1988; Sternberg, 1999).
Pupils are unlikely to take on the challenge of complex tasks, take risks or experiment with the unknown when
teachers emphasize competition, exams and grades. According to Solomon (2000), technology studies that
comprise practical work seem to offer some measure of creativity. Quite unlike science lessons, all pupils
complete their technology studies with their own individual artifacts. Variety and creativity are the essence of
this sort of learning

          Project-based learning has been common in electronics studies prior to the extensive use of computers,
and computers are a natural component in the world of electronics. Questions then arise as to the benefit of
integrating computers into pupils' projects and the extent to which computers affect learning. The present study
examines the influence of computers on the ways high school pupils work on final projects that involve both
hardware and software. The emphasis is on the development of independent learning, the encouragement of
creative thinking and problem-solving skills, as well as the quality of the teamwork exhibited by the pupils.

The Research
          This study closely followed the work of 50 Grade 12 pupils from six schools, who worked in pairs on
25 projects over a period of 10 months ­ about four hours a week during school hours and during their free time

                                                    67
in the afternoons at school or at home (Barak, 2002). Approximately half of the projects combined hardware and
software, while the others were based solely on hardware. A final project in electronics is optional but awards
additional credit points for the matriculation certificate, which provides the pupils with the option to enroll into
higher Israeli academic studies. The study adopted a qualitative research methodology (Guba & Lincoln, 1994).
It aimed to collect as much information as possible on teachers' and pupils' activities regarding the integration of
computers into electronics projects by visiting each school three to four times during one year. During every
visit, the researcher interviewed each pair of pupils working in the electronics laboratory for about fifteen
minutes, observed the electronic system they built, their computer files and the portfolios they prepared. Each
school visit comprised informal talks with the teachers during and after the meetings with the pupils Data
analysis aimed to organize the findings, to break them down into meaningful units and to synthesize them so that
critical themes would emerge (Bogdan & Bilken, 1992; Patton, 1990). Every finding or conclusion was re-
evaluated through repeated conversations with the research subjects themselves ­ the teachers and the pupils ­
forming a cyclic process.

Findings
Getting Started: Pupils' Dependence on their Teachers
        Conversations held with the pupils and teachers in the schools revealed that the teachers play a central
role during the first two to three months of the pupils' work on their projects. The process starts when the teacher
presents the pupils with a list of optional subjects for their projects, each accompanied by a short explanation.
Most of the topics are based on the teachers' experience with pupils' projects and rely on components that
currently exist in the school. These include, for example, Lego or Fischer-Technik sets consisting of building
blocks, mechanical components, motors and sensors. The teachers present the pupils with the available kits or
examples of projects from previous years. Many of the topics, such as a "robotic arm," "traffic lights," an
"elevator," a "glass house" or a "computerized parking lot" reappear from year to year and from school to school
in slightly different versions. All of the projects involved the design and construction of hardware electronics,
such as analog   circuits (consisting of transistors,  operational amplifiers or oscillators) or  digital    circuits
(consisting of logic gates, counters or micro-controllers). About half of the projects involved computerized
control. The hardware circuits were connected to the computer through the printer port, or special I/O cards
installed inside the computer. Pupils used programming languages such as Assembler, Visual Basic, Pascal or C.

        Only a few pupils from the dozens participating in this study proposed their own topic for their final
project. The pupils admitted that they had accepted the teachers' suggestions or chosen a topic for their project in
a random manner. After deciding their project, the pupils soon planed their system structure and immediately
approached the design of electronic circuits, the construction of mechanical models and the preparation of
computer  programs.  During   the early  stages of their  work,  the pupils depended    greatly on the teacher's
instructions and got most of the information they needed from the teacher. It was rare to find pupils who
seriously searched for multiple ideas, compared several solutions or used pre-defined criteria for decision-
making.

Moving towards Original Design
     During the initial stages of the projects, the pupils relied mostly on knowledge that they had acquired and
practiced in their electronics  studies,  mainly   the   design of analog   and digital electronic  circuits   and
programming. At a certain point of working on the project, after the pupils realized that the systems they had
designed worked, a difference was discernable in the work of pupils dealing with hardware-based projects and
those working on computerized projects. Most of the pupils who were involved in non-computerized projects
continued to work on the systems they had built and made only minor changes or improvements to them. In
contrast, most of the pupils who were working on computerized projects tried to refine or enrich their systems.
Pupils' progress was not linear, but seemed at times to be an improvisation, a patchwork of solutions. At least ten
pupils spontaneously raised new ideas to refine their system. Pupils described this work process as follows:

   ·    "Our first programs were quite simple. After everything worked together, we started to improve our
        system, expand on it, and make it more interesting and elegant."
   ·    "We write programs and immediately see the results. This challenges us."
   ·    "The computer gives you the possibility of trying out your ideas... you sees the results and can
        decide."

                                                      68
    ·   "We see what our friends are doing. We learn from them and help each other. There are no secrets."

     In some cases, the pupils were not certain that the solution they had chosen would work. They worked
intuitively and performed a large number of experiments. This was, in their eyes, a legitimate way to work. The
computerized environment enabled them to perform such experiments relatively easily. In comparison to changes
made in hardware, changes made in software are easier to check, adopt or remove. The work method adopted by
the pupils is similar to the rapid "zapping" between television stations or to surfing on Internet websites,
checking out a site for a moment and deciding whether to keep it or try something else.

     The following example demonstrates how the flexibility of computerized systems promoted independent
learning and teamwork. In one of the schools, two groups worked separately on different projects: a robotic arm
and a conveyor, both controlled by computers. The robot consisted of two axes controlled by electric motors and
a pneumatic gripper. The conveyor also comprised a light sensor detecting the presence of an object, a weight
sensor and a metal sensor. The teacher helped each group a great deal with the construction of their electronic
system, programming and troubleshooting, up to the point whereby each project just about worked properly. At a
fairly late stage, the teacher suggested that the two groups link their systems by connecting the two computers
via the serial ports. At that point, the teacher became much less involved, leaving the pupils to make their own
decisions. The pupils invested great efforts and changed significant parts of their original programs in order to
synchronize the robot and the conveyor, and program the robot to pick out objects from the conveyor and sort
them according to weight or material.

Collaboration through the Internet
        All the pupils started their programming with segments similar to those they had learned in their
electronics lessons. Pupils gradually developed their original solutions for specific applications in their system,
such as algorithms for reading data from sensors through the computer input port, controlling the system through
the output port and screen graphics.    The communication abilities, mainly the         ICQ (peer-to-peer  instant
messaging system) and e-mail, encouraged collaboration between pupils from different schools. For example,
some pupils used stepper motors in their projects digitally controlled by transmitting pulses to four coils in a
cyclic sequence A, B, C, D, A, B... Each electronic pulse moves the rotor shaft one "step," i.e. 1.8o (200 pulses
per revolution). The total angle of the mechanical move is determined by the number of pulses transmitted to the
motor, and the rotation speed depends upon the pulse frequency. One of the pupils developed an efficient
algorithm for controlling two motors in parallel. Another pupil suggested increasing the motor resolution by
providing "half a step" each time, using the sequence A, AB, B, BC, C, CD, D, DA, A... These kinds of ideas
spread quickly among the pupils, and were found in pupils' projects in different schools. Some of the pupils
modified or enhanced the programming solutions they received from friends; others just copied parts of the
programs into their work. The borders between carrying out original work and copying ideas from others are not
always clearly defined. Pupils and teachers often see the exchange of files through the Internet as being more
legitimate than, for example, duplicating models of mechanical systems or copying electronic circuits.

Using Computer Simulation
        Observing pupils working on their projects revealed a problematic aspect of using simulation software
in electronics. While working on their projects, pupils were expected to build a prototype of their circuit on a
board and exam it using conventional instrumentation, such as an ammeter, voltmeter or oscilloscope. In the
world of electronics, a variety of design packages exist, such as Spectrum Software (2003), Pspice (2003),
Circuit Maker (2003) and Electronic Work Bench (EWB) (2003). These professional programs were developed
primarily for engineers but are also used extensively in high schools and institutes of higher education. Aside
from the educational potential of using simulation for teaching and learning (Milrad, 2002), Israeli pupils tend to
use the simulation as a substitute for practical lab tests. In the interviews with the pupils, most of them quickly
"built" a circuit using the simulation, which involved locating components on the screen, connecting them to
each other, adding measuring devices and "running" the circuit. On the other hand, the pupils had much greater
difficulties building their circuit on an actual electronic board. Some made wrong connections, used the power
supply improperly or encountered problems when using the measuring instruments. This reflected the fact that
during their previous years in school (Grades 10 and 11), the pupils had used simulation for circuit analysis
instead of carrying out practical lab experiments. Many teachers complained that "the simulation draws the
pupils away from the real electronics world." In their projects, all the pupils started their work by drawing their
circuits using the simulation and carrying out preliminary checks. However, later on they spent most of their time

                                                  69
constructing the real circuits, troubleshooting and programming. The simulation became a marginal tool, mainly
for documentation. All the pupils included professional drawings of their circuits made by the simulation tool in
their portfolios.

Using the Internet as a Source for Technical Data, or Cover for Superficial Activities
         Teachers and pupils dealing with electronics have just about free access to the Internet in their schools,
and almost all of them have Internet at home. The web comprises a large selection of sited on electronics and
physics, such as analog circuits, digital circuits, principals of communication, or theory of control systems.
Manufacturers like Motorola, Intel, Philips or Hewlett-Packard provide data sheets of their products. Almost all
the pupils demonstrated good experience on finding technical information on the Internet, but could not give
specific examples of how the Internet helps them to increase their understanding of electronics phenomena or to
design electronic circuits.

         In some cases, the use of the Internet became as a pseudo symbol of serious learning and investment of
efforts by the pupils. In examining twenty five project portfolios, it was found that those pupils who had prepared
original or complicated projects had devoted most of their portfolios to presenting their design, the problems they
had encountered and how they had solved them. On the other hand, pupils who had worked on simple projects
placed pictures, graphs or tables in their portfolios they had retrieved from the Internet, some of which were
specifically unrelated to their work. For example, one pupil constructed a simple model of a robotic arm using
Fisher-Technick    building  blocks  controlled   by a computer.   He   included in his booklet    figures of robots,
mentioned that he had retrieved the figures from the Internet, but did not refer to these items in his work. While
teachers appraised high-achievers for their efforts in system design and problem-solving, they praised the lower
achievers for using the Internet to prepare their portfolios.

Discussion
         This study examined the impact of computer-based projects in electronics on learning. Electronics
studies in  high   schools, being  an   elective subject for   pupils majoring  in technology,  provide    a rich and
sophisticated learning environment in which pupils work in teams on the design and construction of artifacts and
systems relevant to their daily lives. Pupils' projects integrate mechanical elements, sensors, analog electronics,
digital electronics and programming. The main question is how computers affect pupils' work on their projects,
and to what extent the project work promotes the development of independent learning, creative thinking and
teamwork. While pupils who work on hardware-based projects tend to progress in a conventional path of
planning,   construction,   troubleshooting   and  improving,    pupils dealing  with  computerized   projects  work
differently in    three aspects. First, computer-based    projects  afford the  pupils flexibility and a   wealth  of
possibilities to  change  or improve    their systems, or expand    on  them layer  by  layer. Pupils who    work  on
computerized projects have a greater tendency to suggest and examine new ideas spontaneously, take risks,
improvise, make progress through trial and error, and move rapidly from one solution to another. Second,
computerized projects provide the pupils with freedom of action and independence, beyond those that usually
exist in school. Teachers fulfill a central role during the initial stages of the projects, primarily in the selection of
the project topics and in securing the technical means. Pupils inexperienced in the design and construction of
complex systems depend greatly on the teacher's initial guidance. Projects based solely on hardware or analog
electronics inhibit pupils from modifying or improving their system, and they usually continue along the course
outlined by the teacher. Those pupils working on computerized projects, on the other hand, are much less
dependent on the teacher's guidance and tend to take their own initiative, drift away from the initial design
suggested by the teacher and develop their projects in unpredictable directions. Third, working on computerized
projects produces unique patterns of cooperation and teamwork among pupils: information and knowledge are
transferred rapidly from one to the other; new ideas, especially regarding computer programs, are distributed
among the pupils, developed and refined, and become their common property. The "Internet culture" influences
the ways pupils work on their projects: they quickly zip between sources of information, download programs
from different sources and exchange information with friends.

Concluding Remark
         Design    and  the search for  efficient solutions   to engineering problems   require  a balance   between
openness, flexibility, playing with ideas and the use of intuition, on the one hand, and an aspiration towards
profundity, logical-mathematical thinking, systematic investigation, discipline and hard work, on the other.

                                                       70
Tough systematic design characterizes novice engineers and pupils, whereas experts tend more to ignore rules
and act intuitively, automatically adjusting their behavior to the perceived constraints (Dreyfus and Dreyfus,
1986). When pupils cross the line from fully teacher-guided work to free initiatives and trials, it does not imply
they have become experts, rather it indicates that they have developed into confident and independent learners.

References
Barak, M., & Doppelt, Y. (2000). Using portfolio to enhance creative thinking. The Journal of Technology
        Studies, 26(2), 16-25.
Barak, M. (2002). Learning good electronics, or coping with challenging tasks? Priorities of excellent students.
        Journal of Technology Education, 14(2), 20-34.
Bogdan,  R. C.,  &   Bilken, S. K. (1992). Qualitative research  for  education: an introduction to  theory     and
        methods (2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Brown, J., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning.      Educational
        Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Circuit Maker. Available at: http://www.microcode.com/ Accessed: November, 2003.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1997). The jasper project: Lessons in curriculum, instruction,
        assessment, and professional development. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention. New York: Harper
        Collins.
Dasgupta, D. (1996). Technology and creativity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dewey, J. (1963). The child and the curriculum. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dreyfus, H. L., & Dreyfus, S. E. (1986). Mind over machine: The power of human intuition and expertise in the
        era of the computer. New York: The Free Press.
Dugger, W. E (2001) Standards for technological literacy. Phi Delta Kapan 82(7), March, 513-517.
Electronic Workbench. Available at: http://www.interactiv.com/ Accessed: November, 2003.
Guba, E. & Lincoln, Y. S. (1994). Competing paradigms in qualitative research. In: N. K. Denzin, & Y. S.
        Lincoln (Ed), Handbook of qualitative research, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 105¯117.
Harman, W. & Rheingold, H. (1984). Higher creativity. Los Angeles: JP Tarcher
Hennessey,  B.   A., &  Amabile,   T. M.   (1998). Reward,  intrinsic   motivation, and  creativity. American
        Psychologist, 53, 674-675.
International Technology Education Association (ITEA) (2000). Standards for technological literacy: Content
        for the study of technology, Reston, VA: Author.
Johnson, S. D. (1997). Learning technological concepts and developing intellectual skills. International Journal
        of Technology and Design Education, 7, 161-180.
Jonassen, D., Peck, K., & Wilson, B. (2000). Learning with technology: A constructivist approach. Upper Saddle
        River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kafai, Y.B. & Resnick, M. (1996) Introduction. In Y. B. Kafai, & M. Resnick, (eds) Constructionism in practice
        ­ designing, thinking and learning in a digital world. Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 1-8.
Krajcik, J. S., Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (1994). A Collaborative model for helping middle-
        grade science teachers learn project-based instruction. The Elementary School Journal, 94, 483-497.
Milrad, M.  (2002).  Using   construction kits, modeling  tools and   system dynamics   simulations  to support
        collaborative discovery learning, Educational Technology & Society 5(4).
Papert, S. (1991). Situating constructionism. In I. Harel, & S. Papert (Ed.) Constructionism. Norwood, N.J.:
        Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Patton, M.Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Pspice. Available at: http://www.orcadpcb.com/pspice/ Accessed: November, 2003.
Salomon, G. (1998). Novel constructivist learning environments and novel technologies: Some issues to be
        considered. Research Dialog in Learning and Instruction, 1(1), 3-12.
Salomon, G., Perkins, D.N. & Globerson, T. (1991). Partners in cognition: Extending human intelligence with
        intelligent technologies. Educational Researcher, 20(3), 2-9.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Engaging students in a knowledge society. Educational Leadership, 54,
        6-10.
Solomon, J. (2000). The Changing perspectives of constructivism: Science wars and children creativity, in: D. C.
        Philips, (Ed.), Constructivism in education, opinions and second opinions on controversial issues, The

                                                    71
       Ninety-ninth Yearbook of The National Society for the Study of Education, Part I, Chicago: The
       University of Chicago Press, 283-307.
Spectrum Software. Available at: http://www.spectrum-soft.com/index.shtm. Accessed: November, 2003.
Sternberg, R.J. (Ed) (1999). Handbook of creativity. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press,
Von Glaserfeldt, E. (1989) Constructivism    in education. In:  T. Husen, &  N. Postlethwaite      (Ed.), the
       International Encyclopedia of Education, (pp.162-163). Oxford, UK: Pergamon, 11-12.

                                                  72
