                      Design Theories of Interest, Motivation, and
                          Engagement for the Learning Sciences

                                           Organizer: Daniel T. Hickey
                        University of Georgia Learning & Performance Support Laboratory
                                       611 Aderhold Hall, Athens, GA      30345
                                       Tel: 706-542-3157; Fax: 706-542-4321
                                           Email: dhickey@coe.uga.edu

       Abstract:    The   study  of motivation and  interest appears     to be at a crucial juncture.  While
       motivation and interest research continue to be major foci of educational psychologists, these
       topics    have been   according  relatively little attention in   the learning  sciences community.
       Meanwhile, accountability-oriented reforms ignore research showing that such reforms lead to
       disengagement      of "at risk"  students.  Additionally, it  is  unclear  how   conventional  "grand
       theories" of interest and motivation fit within contemporary models of educational research that
       focus more on developing intermediate-level theory in the context of efforts to refine practices.
       Our symposium features five researchers in the learning sciences community who are studying
       interest,  engagement,    and  motivation.  Each   presenter  will   summarize   his or her work  and
       consider the implications of that work for diversity, learning environments, research methods,
       and educational policy.

       In the last decade, research on motivation and interest has gradually moved beyond a narrow focus on the
individual toward an increased focus on contexts of learning.    Unfortunately, these developments have done little
to help connect "mainstream" motivation research with other important developments in educational research.
The 1990s    saw  the emergence    of  important  new socially-oriented     perspectives  on teaching,  learning, and
assessment.   Motivation theorists generally view these developments favorably, and proponents reference the
"motivational" appeal of these new approaches.     But these developments have largely occurred in isolation from
contemporary    motivation   research.  Likewise,  the    1990s also saw     the  emergence  of new   "design-based"
approaches to educational research that focus more directly on improving practice.        Rather than refining "grand"
theories in well-controlled experimental settings, these approaches iteratively refine more immediately useful
"local" theories in the context of efforts to refine classroom practice. A review of the recent collections of design-
based research reveals few references to motivation and almost no references to motivation research.       One goal of
our symposium is illustrating how researchers in the learning sciences community are crafting new ways of
thinking about the enduring issues of motivation and interest, and connecting this work with other promising
developments.

       Perhaps the most dramatic evidence of the marginalization of motivational scholarship are the sweeping
accountability-oriented reforms in the US and elsewhere.        Arguably, such policies represented simple-minded
application of behaviorism to complex challenges.     While neglecting to reference any psychological theories of
motivation   or learning, policies such as No  Child  Left  Behind  appeal    directly to market-oriented  notions of
competition.    Inarguably, this legislation ignores the wealth of research showing that such policies will actually
cause at-risk students to be "left behind" by suppressing engagement and persistence. Such policies also ignore
related evidence that the ostensibly formative goal of most educational assessment (i.e., improving teaching and
learning) is undermined   by excessively   summative   testing  practices.   Notably,  these policies rely heavily on
multiple-choice achievement tests and conventional measurement theory, both of which embody conventional
behavioral/empiricist assumptions about knowing and learning.     Meanwhile, the seemingly intractable debate over
competition and extrinsic rewards places many of the less formal motivational practices of teachers and parents in
stark opposition to the core principles that motivational scholars have advanced.

                                                       8
Symposium Overview
       Our    symposium   features  five researchers    from  the    learning sciences  community    whose  research
explicitly concerns motivation, interest, and engagement.    While this body of research is certainly informed by
"mainstream" research, it differs in key respects. Whereas mainstream researchers started with constructs such as
motivation  and interest, these efforts  generally   started from    efforts  to design   and/or understand learning
environments. Each presenter will review their research, describing how it is similar and how it is different, from
both mainstream research and from the other presenters.      Each presenter will then describe the implications for
their work and the insights that followed, for the following issues:

       Diversity:    What  are  the implications    of this  work    for addressing   the needs  of diverse learners,
particularly those who are economically disadvantaged and/or from racial and ethnic minorities?             Learning
Environments:   What  are the implications  of this  work    for designing    learning environments  (classroom and
otherwise)? What are specific examples of how learning environments would be different?           Research Methods:
What are the implications of this work for newer design-based approaches to educational research.        What is the
role of interest and motivation when one is developing "local" theory while iteratively designing and refining
learning environments?  What role do interpretive and ethnographic approaches play in this work? How do we
operationalize and study engagement in classroom-based learning activities and in a topic or discipline over
longer periods of time?   Current Policy Issues:    What are the implications of this work for the new focus on
accountability, achievement testing, and market-oriented models of educational reform?           How does this work
address the motivational issues that these policies create for teaching and learning?

       Discussants Ann Renninger and Allan Collins will highlight relevant contrasts and connections among
the presenters, and between these presenters and other researchers.

Presentations

An Initial Contribution to the Development of a Design Theory of Mathematical Interests: The
Case of Statistical Data Analysis
Paul Cobb, Lynn Hodge
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA
paul.cobb@vanderbilt.edu

       Our focus is cultivating students' interests so that they come to view mathematics as an activity worthy
of their engagement. We first clarify the notion of interests, in the process developing a perspective in which they
are seen to be generative, to evolve, and to be deeply cultural. In considering design issues, we draw heavily on
the work of Dewey, who argued that attention to students' interests should not be restricted to the starting points
for instruction. Instead, it should also encompass the cultivation of students' interests in engaging in the activities
of particular disciplines as an explicit goal of instructional design and teaching. We operationalize this notion of
mathematical interests by defining them as patterns of engagement in collective and individual activity.        We
illustrate this perspective by presenting an analysis of a classroom design experiment that documents both the
process by which the students' interests evolved and the means by which these developments were supported. The
experiment was conducted in a seventh-grade classroom in the United States and focused on statistical data
analysis. In the analysis, we document a two-step approach that involved first cultivating students' pragmatic
interests in an issue under investigation (e.g. AIDS, salary differences), and then secondly cultivating students'
statistical interests in which the statistical issues that arose while comparing different analyses became objects of
interest in their own right. In the final part of the paper, we frame the analysis as a case in which to tease out the
implications for a nascent design theory of mathematical interests and in doing so, consider the implications for
instructional design in mathematics education more generally, and for equity in students' access to significant
mathematical ideas.

                                                       9
Learning in Informal and School-based settings: A Multi-context View of the Development of
Interest
Brigid Barron
Stanford University
barronbj@stanford.edu
          A better understanding of the development of interest is crucial if we hope to increase the diversity of
those who pursue technological design fields.     Data will be presented that suggest the importance of a multiple
context or "learning ecologies" framework for understanding trajectories of interest and participation in learning
about information technology.    In particular, relationships between the cultivation of interest through activities
that take place in informal learning environments (home, peer group, community centers, distributed resources)
and the pursuit of learning in formal school-based environments will be explored. In addition, examples will be
provided   of how  school   environments    can lead  to the  pursuit of self-sustained   informal learning  through
distributed resources such as books, and internet-mediated resources.    It will be argued that a better understanding
of the relationship between experience and interest is needed, especially because categorical variables like gender
or SES are often confounded with experience. In order to provide a broad portrait of relationships between
interest, experience, and   pursuit  of learning, survey  responses   from a    large sample  of adolescents in two
communities that differ with respect to socio-economic status and patterns of parental employment will be
summarized.    Interview and observational data will also be presented to highlight particular examples of cross-
context   learning trajectories resulting  from   the  initiation of interest both    formal and informal contexts.
Implications for the design of informal and formal learning environments will be discussed.
Designing Learning Environments to Support Engaged Participation
in Domain Knowledge Practices
Daniel T. Hickey
Learning and Performance Support Laboratory & Department of Educational Psychology
University of Georgia
dhickey@coe.uga.edu
          Sociocultural views of cognition and instruction have clearly begun to influence the study of motivation
and interest. Most educational researchers who study interest and motivation now pay significant attention to the
influence of sociocultural contexts on the motivational beliefs and values of individuals.      A smaller number of
researchers   have started from  an  explicitly sociocultural  approach.   This  presentation  explores a stridently
sociocultural  approach  to interest and   motivation.   This approach   starts from  the fundamental  sociocultural
assumption that participation in knowledgeable activity transforms that knowledge and any associated goals and
values.   Furthermore, it assumes that knowledge is socially defined, so that all such participation (with or without
actual collaboration) transforms that knowledge and associated values (and therefore contributes to it).    Taken in
full, this analysis argues that the values and goals that support engagement in learning are defined by and resident
in the practices that define knowledgeable communities, rather than the hearts and minds of individuals.        This
leads to the notions of "engaged participation" and "maladaptive non-participation" as alternatives to intrinsic and
extrinsic motivation. This also raises the complex issue of reconciliation between the individual and the social
context. This issue is considered by contrasting the prevailing "aggregative" approach that follows logically from
behavioral and cognitive views with a "dialectical" approach that follows from sociocultural view.      Data from a
three year study of African American students' engagement in introductory genetics is used to further explore
these tensions and potential resolutions.
What Does it Mean to Be Interested in a Practice?
Flávio S. Azevedo
Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley
flavio@socrates.berkeley.edu
          Progress in our theoretical and pragmatic treatment of student engagement has been hampered, in part,
by our limited understanding of constructs such as motivation and interests. For instance, although the literature
on personal (Renninger, 1992) and situational (Hidi, 1997) interests is quite extensive, little is known about how
interests develop and how practice structure and organization foster practitioners' continued engagement. In order
to begin addressing these issues I study individuals' extended engagement in a hobby practice. Hobbies are
paradigmatic of self-motivated, self-directed, open-ended practices. In this regard, although a hobby practice may
provide a number of structuring resources that help sustain practitioners' engagement, one's ultimate path within

                                                       10
the practice rests largely within her control. This provides a relatively good window into how one's interests and
goals shape her practice. My way into such a window is a theoretical construct I call lines of practice. A line of
practice is a self-established, recurrent pattern of engagement of a practitioner with the subject matter (broadly
construed) of her hobby. In other words, lines of practice are what a practitioner chooses to do in immediate
connection to the subject matter of the practice. In practical terms, lines of practice define themes around which a
hobbyist organizes her practice. These themes reflect a particular configuration of a hobbyist's interests and goals
in the practice. I instantiate these ideas in a study of model rocketry practice. Based on ethnographic records of
model rocketry practitioners' activities over a period of three years, I show (1) how a number of interests and
concerns come to play in the make up of one's practice lines, and (2) how seemingly identical interests manifest
themselves differently across lines. I then focus on stable lines of practice--i.e., those that stand the test of
time--as a way of inquiring about the dynamics of long-term, self-directed and self-motivated engagement. I
present some of the dynamics of stable lines and show that, far from being static, stable lines go through constant
(albeit slow) micro-changes. Patterns in micro-changes across a practitioner's lines of practice inform us about the
ways  interests seemingly operate   in  sustaining one's  engagement    with the  hobby.   Finally,  by  identifying
differences and similarities in patterns of sustained practice across subjects of very different backgrounds, I draw
some implications of this work to the study of engagement in diverse student populations.
Making Motivation-centered Design Practical:
A Tool for Analyzing and Guiding Design
Diana Joseph
Center for School Improvement, University of Chicago
djoseph@csi.uchicago.edu
Daniel Edelson
School of Education and Social Policy, Northwestern University
d-edelson@northwestern.edu
        Edelson   &   Joseph (2002) reframed    a  subset of motivation   psychology   literature   from a   learning
environment design perspective, and created the Interest-Driven Learning Framework.        The framework focuses
learner interest, based in a perception of usefulness, as a high-value motivator of learning, and therefore an
important consideration   in the  development     of the  specific content  and   activities involved    in  learning
environments.   The framework further highlights motivators embedded in the learning environment context ­ the
social groupings, classroom geography, reward mechanisms, available choices and challenges ­ as powerful tools
to support learning under circumstances where interest may be insufficient or inaccessible.   In this talk, Joseph &
Edelson propose an analytical tool that identifies and evaluates motivational affordances in learning environment
designs, based on the IDLF.    This pilot tool  is intended  for use in the course of  the   design process,  and in
evaluating relatively complete designs. We describe the development of the tool through its application to two
enacted learning environment designs:   The MultiMedia Studio (Joseph & Nacu, 2003), a web design curriculum
for 5th-8th graders, and the Information Infrastructure System Project ­ a suite of learning and performance tools
intended to support adult school professionals. We highlight the differences between these environments in terms
of the intentionality of motivational   consideration  in  their designs,  and reflect on    directions  for current
improvement   of  the analytical tool  and future    mechanisms    for evaluating learner    motivation  in  enacted
environments.
References
Hidi, S. (1990). Interest and its contribution as a mental resource for learning. Review of Educational Research,
        60, 549-571.
Joseph, D., & Edelson, D. (2002). Engineering motivation:     Using research knowledge about motivation in the
        design of learning environments. Proceedings of the International Conference on the Learning Sciences,
        Seattle, WA.
Joseph, D., & Nacu, D. C. (2003). Designing interesting learning environments when the medium isn't enough.
        Convergence:   The Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 9(2), 84-115.
Renninger, K. A. (1992). Individual interest and development: Implications for theory and practice. In K. A.
        Renninger, S. Hidi, & A. Krapp (Eds.), The role of interest in learning and development, (pp. 361-376).
        Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

                                                      11
