              Help-seeking in Interactive Learning Environments:
                     Effectiveness of Help and Learner-related
                                  Factors in a Dyadic Setting

                               Tobias Bartholomé, Elmar Stahl & Rainer Bromme
         Psychological Institute III, University of Muenster, Fliednerstr. 21, 48149 Muenster, Germany
                            Tel: ++49 (0) 251 8339415, Fax: ++49 (0) 251 8339196
                                         Email: tbartho@uni-muenster.de

         Abstract: Offering help functions is a standard feature of computer-based interactive learning
         environments (ILE). Nevertheless, the effectiveness of learners' use of help facilities has been
         subject to extensive debate. Recent research indicates an inefficient use or even ignorance of
         help functions. In this paper the issues of effectiveness of help and the impact of learner-related
         factors are addressed in an ILE for plant identification. We report first explorative data from a
         regular university course in plant identification. Students worked in a dyadic setting. The
         effects of two different types of help facilities (context-sensitive help and glossary function) on
         task performance in plant identification are analyzed. In addition, a broad set of potential
         learner-related factors  is explored  with respect to their  effects on   help-seeking in    dyads,
         including prior knowledge, motivational orientation, interest, self-estimated competence, and
         epistemological beliefs. Results yield a positive effect of help-seeking on task performance. In
         addition, most  learner-related  factors affect help-seeking   behavior   and   performance.    The
         results are discussed with respect to their implications for future research on help-seeking in
         ILE.

Introduction
Help-seeking and Interactive Learning Environments
         Help-seeking  constitutes   an essential  component   of  self-regulated  learning  which    is particularly
important in computer-based interactive learning environments (ILE). The use of ILE has become widespread in
all fields of educational practice (e.g., Dillon & Gabbard, 1998). One of the greatest assets of ILE is seen in the
supply of various help functions. This help may be in the form of specific hints, glossary functions or linked
hypertext pages offering additional relevant information. Although it seems immediately plausible that such help
functions have a great potential for learning, recent research casts doubts on the effectiveness of learners' use of
help facilities (e.g., Aleven & Koedinger, 2000; Mandl, Gräsel, & Fischer, 2000). Use of help functions seems to
be rare and often ineffective. For example, Aleven and Koedinger (2000) reported that learners only spent very
little time on actual help use. They especially ignored hints on how to solve mathematical problems and instead
looked directly for answers. More abstract information such as definitions given in a glossary was also virtually
ignored. Nevertheless,   there is also  first evidence that help  facilities can  foster  learning if they   are used
effectively (Renkl, 2002;  Wood      & Wood,   1999).  All in all there is   very little empirical evidence   on  the
interaction between help functions in ILE and learning processes (Aleven, Stahl, Schworm, Fischer, & Wallace,
2003). The lack of empirical findings calls for further research on the effectiveness of help-seeking in ILE. Yet to
date most research on help-seeking is restricted to classroom learning settings (see Aleven et al., 2003). As there
are considerable differences in the help-seeking process in traditional classroom settings and in ILE, concerning
for example the amount and type of help available or the social presence of the source of help, a simple
extrapolation of these findings would be inappropriate (Aleven et al., 2003). Thus, there is a need to establish
research on help-seeking in ILE as a field in its own right. A major challenge for researchers should be in the
identification of variables that have an influence on the effectiveness of help and encourage learners to actually
use help. Extensive analyses of learner-related factors, system-related factors and their interplay are required to
improve help-seeking in ILE. In this paper we report on an initial explorative study on the effect of help on task
performance in an ILE from the domain of botany. The aim was to find first hints as to the effects of different
learner-related factors on help-seeking and performance with the ILE.

                                                      81
The Learning Environment "Plant Identification Online"
         We analyzed help-seeking behavior in the ILE "Plant Identification Online" (PIO; Stahl & Bromme,
2002; see http://www.bestimmen-online.uni-muenster.de/). Plant identification is a complex skill that is taught in
compulsory university courses in biology and related fields. Students learn how to identify plants by determining
living plant material within these courses. Due to the huge number of required botanical concepts (about 10 000
plant features in the common German flora) and the large degree of phenotypic variability within these concepts
learning by   rote is not  possible.  Therefore,  plant  identification is usually learned in  a case-based  manner
employing so-called keys for identification. These keys take the form of complex structured decision trees that
guide learners through a sequence of decision steps to the identification of the species. Decision steps constitute
the basic element of a key and consist of a contrastive description of two sets of plant features. At each step
learners have to decide whether one or the other set of features applies to the plant at hand. Having made their
decision, they are guided to the next decision step until they arrive at the final taxon. Case-based learning with
such keys has a long tradition in plant identification and is widely accepted as the best method for enabling
students to identify a broad variety of plants on their own, even plants from taxonomic groups they are not
familiar with. The design of PIO starts from this common practice. Therefore, it also incorporates a key, but
differs from   traditional   book keys  by  making   available   various   help functions, including  about  80  000
instructional  illustrations and  different types of text-based   help.  From   a theoretical perspective these  help
functions can be conceptualized as scaffolds since they allow students to deal with the complex problem of plant
identification by giving hints and additional information (for an overview see Reiser, 2002). In this study, two
types of help are examined: firstly, context-sensitive help materials that are tailored to the specific decision task
at hand are offered at each decision step. In these help materials the relevant botanical concepts are explained by
means   of  a combination    of texts and   high-quality  line  drawings,  including tips  for handling  difficulties.
Secondly, all basic botanical terms are explained in a glossary that is permanently available throughout the
decision process. These glossary definitions provide more general explanations that are not context-sensitive. We
assume that the appropriate use of these help functions has a strong effect on performance with PIO.

         An important characteristic of courses in plant identification is that students traditionally learn how to
identify plants in dyads. Learning in dyads is an organizational condition of the courses that is considered to be
crucial for   learning and   performance    in plant identification.  We   expect  that  help-seeking   behavior and
performance will be influenced by individuals' learner-related factors within these dyads. Therefore, the effects
of several learner-related factors described below are examined. Though the use of dyads as a necessary level of
analysis hinders the examination of individual effects, it offers the opportunity to explore the interaction between
students differing in their values on learner-related factors.

Research Issues
Effectiveness of Help
         As explained above, there is little evidence on the effects of help-seeking behavior in ILEs. Therefore,
we first of all wanted to know if our students would actually use the context-sensitive help and the glossary
within the ILE, and whether the use of this kind of help would result in better performance.

Potential Factors Affecting Help-seeking
         Moreover, we wanted to explore how different learner-related factors affect the use of PIO. Based on a
comprehensive review of research (Aleven et al., 2003) we included the following variables as potential impact
factors on help-seeking behavior:

Prior Knowledge
         In several studies prior knowledge has been shown to substantially influence learning (e.g., Dochy &
Alexander, 1995). Wood and Wood (1999) found significant interactions between level of prior knowledge,
performance and frequency of help-seeking in an ILE. In their studies learners with high prior knowledge exerted
the most effective help-seeking behavior. They tended to seek help after making an error much more frequently
than learners with low prior knowledge. One could conclude from Wood and Wood (1999) that learners high in
prior knowledge made more accurate judgments about their need for help. Studies on help-seeking in computer-
based   and in traditional   classroom  settings  (e.g., Puustinen,  1998)   both  agree that  learners low in  prior
knowledge ­ those who need help the most ­ are least effective in making use of it.

                                                         82
Motivational Orientation
        Results from traditional classroom settings suggest an important role for motivational orientation in
help-seeking (e.g., Arbreton, 1998; Ryan & Pintrich, 1997). Most studies agree that motivational orientation
towards gaining high competence (learning goal orientation, Arbreton, 1998; task orientation, Nicholls, 1984) is
beneficial in learning. Arbreton (1998) could also prove an effect on help-seeking strategies. In his study learning
or task orientated students asked for instrumental help such as hints much more frequently, whereas performance
orientated students tended to ask for executive help, e.g. correct answers. Another factor likely to affect help-
seeking is the tendency to try to avoid effort (work avoidance, Nicholls, 1984), which should be associated with
reduced help-seeking behavior. In our study we examined the effects of task orientation and work avoidance on
the use of instrumental help given in the form of context-sensitive help materials and the use of the glossary. As
far as we know, this is the first analysis of the effect of motivational orientation on help-seeking in an ILE (see
Aleven et al., 2003).

Interest and Self-estimated Competence
        As a further motivational variable, interest in a domain or topic has been shown to have an effect on
learning and comprehension (e.g., Boscolo & Mason, 2003; Schiefele, 1996). We assume that interest is also
likely to affect students' help-seeking in ILE. As Schiefele (1996) demonstrated, high interest is associated with
deeper level understanding. It is expected that highly interested learners access more help in an ILE than learners
with low interest, in order to gain a deeper understanding. In contrast to general motivational orientations,
interest is measured on a domain-specific level. In addition, there is evidence that self-estimated competence
affects learning processes (Schwarzer & Jerusalem, 1999). Therefore, we examined the effects of self-estimated
competence on help-seeking.

Epistemological Beliefs
        Epistemological beliefs can be defined as beliefs about the nature of knowledge and knowing. It is
widely agreed that epistemological beliefs should be described as a multidimensional construct (e.g., Schommer,
1990). Nevertheless, the assumed number and type of these dimensions is still controversial. All researchers
include beliefs about complexity and certainty of knowledge, but differ with regard to further dimensions. A
large body of research corroborates the influence of peoples' epistemological beliefs on their learning processes
and outcomes in classroom settings (e.g., Kardash & Howell, 2000; Schommer, 1990, 1993). Yet only a few
works exist on the influence of epistemological beliefs on learning in ILE. Jacobson and Spiro (1995) for
example found that learners with more sophisticated epistemological beliefs yielded better learning outcomes
and were   better able  to apply  their knowledge after using a hypertext system than students with simpler
epistemological beliefs. We suppose that epistemological beliefs also play a significant role in help-seeking. It
seems reasonable to assume that if one believes knowledge in a domain is simple and certain, this would lead to
fewer and more superficial help requests than believing that knowledge is complex and uncertain. As most
instruments proposed for the measurement of epistemological beliefs fail to replicate their factor structure (e.g.,
Clarebout, Elen, Luyten, & Bamps, 2001) the new instrument CAEB was employed in this study. We suppose
that the instability of previous questionnaires is at least in part due to confounding denotative and connotative
aspects of beliefs    (Stahl &  Bromme,   submitted). CAEB   avoids this problem by explicitly focusing the
connotative aspects of epistemological beliefs in a semantic differential. In this study we used the factors
"texture of knowledge" and "variability of knowledge" from the CAEB.

Method
Participants
        Thirty-two students of biology ­ 11 males, 20 females (one participant did not report her gender) ­ took
part in this study. The age of participants ranged from 19 to 27 years with an average of 20.9. Students were
enrolled in a regular plant identification course (2nd semester) at a German university. Students worked in 16
dyads.

Materials
        Participants identified plants from the families Cyperaceae, Juncaceae, and Poaceae with the ILE
"Plant Identification Online". Botanical prior knowledge was assessed via a questionnaire including multiple
choice-items, feature listing items as well as graphical marking items. Motivational orientation was measured via
the scales "task orientation" and "work avoidance" from the German version of the motivational orientation
scales (MOS-D, Balke & Stiensmeier-Pelster, 1995; Nicholls, 1984). Interests and self-estimated competence in

                                                    83
the domain of plant identification were surveyed in the 17 item-IAPI-questionnaire (Interests and Attitudes in
Plant Identification) consisting of two scales ("domain interest"; "self-estimated competence"). Epistemological
beliefs were assessed on a domain-specific level using the semantic differential CAEB. The two dimensions
"texture of knowledge" (e.g., structured-unstructured) and "variability of knowledge" (e.g., dynamic-static)
consist of 11 adjective pairs. Indicators of help-seeking (context-sensitive help access, glossary access) as well as
the proportion   of wrong decisions (errors) as a measure of task  performance         were  assessed via log-files.
Students' acceptance of PIO and its different features was surveyed in an additional questionnaire.

Procedure
         The study took place in a regular course in plant identification. Students worked with PIO in dyads over
a period of four course sessions. In each session they spent 2 hours identifying the supplied plants at their own
pace. The first two sessions were to familiarize students with PIO. In sessions 3 and 4 help-seeking behavior was
assessed via log-file analysis. Questionnaire data on the different learner-related factors were collected two
weeks before the first session. Acceptance data were collected after the last session.

Data analyses and Results
         We defined a  .05 as significant and a  .15 as a tendency. It should be kept in mind that this is a first
exploration of the effects of help-seeking and potential learner-related factors. For this purpose we report several
ANOVAs without a-adjustments instead of MANOVAs, which will be considered in more advanced stages of
research. As some students did not complete all questionnaire items we replaced missing values by the respective
sample mean. This was to avoid a further reduction of sample size in the analyses.

Preparation of Questionnaire Data for Subsequent Analyses
         A sum score of correct item solutions in the prior knowledge test was calculated for each participant.
The data from MOS-D, IAPI, and CAEB were factor analyzed. Factor analyses were run with students of the
computer-based course as well as participants of traditional courses (n = 121). The two factors from the MOS-D
(Balke & Stiensmeier-Pelster, 1995), "task orientation" (6 items, Cronbach's _ = .61) and "work avoidance" (5
items, Cronbach's _ = .80), were confirmed with moderate to high internal consistencies. The factors accounted
for 45.48% of the variance. The factor structure of IAPI could also be confirmed. The two factors "domain
interest" (10 items) and "self-estimated competence" (7 items) explained 51.43% of the variance and yielded
high inter-item consistencies (Cronbach's _ = .89 and .83). The factor analysis of CAEB yielded the assumed
two factors with a total of 49.23% of the variance explained and moderate to high internal consistencies (texture
of knowledge: 7 items, Cronbach's _ = .80; variability of knowledge: 4 items, Cronbach's _ = .66). For the
factors of MOS-D, IAPI, and CAEB factor sum scores were calculated.

         As we wanted to explore help-seeking in a real course setting we decided to use the unobtrusive method
of log-file analysis instead of more qualitative data analyses which would have required a laboratory setting. The
individual questionnaire data were adapted to the level of dyads for the subsequent data analyses. Therefore, for
each of the variables, students were divided into two groups via median split: one group having low values on
that variable and another group with high values. Based on these median splits, dyads were assigned to one of
three types: dyads with both participants having low values on a variable (low-value-dyads), dyads with one
participant having a high value and the other a low one (mixed dyads) and dyads with both participants having
high values (high-value-dyads). Group differences in help-seeking and performance between low-value-, mixed,
and high-value-dyads on a specific variable provide information about the impact of that variable. Thus, in the
analyses of impact factors on help-seeking and performance, dyad types were used as independent variables.
Learner-related factors produced sufficient variance in the assignment of dyads to the three types to make these
analyses viable.

Descriptive Data
Acceptance
         We begin by presenting students' acceptance data concerning PIO. Acceptance of PIO as a new learning
medium is assumed to be a pre-requisite for proficient help use. As these data are solely descriptive and not
analyzed with respect to dyads' help-seeking, they are reported on an individual level (n = 23). Students agreed
that PIO was helpful in learning plant identification (M = 4.52; SD = 0.51; five-point-scale) as well as supportive
in  task performance   (M = 4.43; SD  = 0.59; five-point-scale). Moreover, PIO          as a whole, as  well as its
components were evaluated on a 16-point German school grade scale (0 = "very poor" to 15 = "very good") and

                                                   84
yielded  "good"  ratings  (PIO  overall: M    = 10.83;     SD = 2.08; context-sensitive help: M  = 11.10; SD = 2.14;
glossary: M  = 9.21;  SD  =  2.15).  Thus,    the overall  acceptance  of PIO as   a new  learning  medium  in plant
identification was high.

Help-seeking
         As the following analyses deal directly with help-seeking, we refer to dyads (n = 16) from now on.
Throughout the two logged courses students processed an average of 287.56 decision steps (SD = 63.51). On an
average  of 30.65%   (SD    = 12.23) of these     decision steps context-sensitive help   was accessed. The average
percentage of glossary use per decision step was much lower (M = 0.76%, SD = 1.36). As context-sensitive help
directly refers to a specific decision step the relative frequencies of accessed context-sensitive help materials per
decision  step were   used  as an   indicator     of help-seeking. In  contrast, glossary  items  could be accessed
independently of specific decision steps. Therefore, the total number of glossary accesses was used as a variable.

Performance
         In addition,   the relative proportion      of wrong  decisions  (errors) was  defined   as an indicator  of
performance in the plant identification process. The mean rate of errors was at 7.66% (SD = 1.82).

Help-seeking and Performance
         The indicators of help-seeking (context-sensitive help access, glossary access) and task performance
(error rate) were subjected to a correlation analysis. The correlations between help access and performance
indicators yielded a substantial significant negative correlation with errors (r = -.55, p = .03). Students accessing
help materials at a high rate committed fewer errors. Thus, the use of context-sensitive help was effective in
improving task performance. Glossary access was not significantly related to the error rate (r = .14, n.s.). These
correlation data as well as the frequencies of access suggest completely different uses of glossary function and
context-sensitive help.

Potential Impact Factors on Help-seeking and Performance
         We examined the effects of dyads differing in their learner-related factors on the relative number of
errors (as a measure for performance) and the relative number of context-sensitive help functions accessed (as a
measure of help-seeking). The use of the glossary was only calculated in those cases in which the dyad types
differed in their use to a reasonable extent.

Prior Knowledge
         We compared 5 dyads with low prior knowledge, 5 dyads with high prior knowledge and 6 mixed
dyads. An ANOVA revealed significant differences between the three groups concerning their help-seeking
(F(2,16) = 5.3, p = .02) and their relative number of errors (F(2,16) = 4.9, p = .03). The mixed dyads made
significantly fewer errors than those dyads with low prior knowledge (Tukey-HSD, mean diff. = -.03, p = .03)
and showed a tendency to make fewer errors than those dyads with high prior knowledge (Tukey-HSD, mean
diff. = -.02, p = .07). The mixed dyads also searched more often for help. This was significant compared to those
dyads with high prior knowledge (Tukey-HSD, mean diff. = .06, p = .02). It can be concluded that the mixed
dyads searched most frequently for help and made the least number of errors.

Motivational Orientation (Work Avoidance and Task Orientation)
         We compared 6 dyads with low work avoidance, 4 dyads with high work avoidance and 6 mixed dyads.
ANOVAs      revealed  no  significant differences      for help-seeking   (F(2,16) = 0.7, n.s.) or number  of  errors
(F(2,16) = 1.9, n.s.). We compared 3 dyads with low task orientation, 3 dyads with high task orientation and 10
mixed dyads. ANOVAs revealed no significant differences for help-seeking (F(2,16) = 0.5, n.s.), but a trend for
number of errors (F(2,16) = 3.2, p = .07). Dyads with high task orientation made more errors than dyads with
low task orientation (Tukey-HSD, mean diff. = -.03, p = .06). Therefore, we found the counter-intuitive result
that dyads with high task orientation showed low performance.

Interest and Self-estimated Competence
         We compared 4 dyads with low interest, 4 dyads with high interest and 8 mixed dyads. ANOVAs
revealed no significant differences for help-seeking (F(2,16) = 0.3, n.s.) or number of errors (F(2,16) = 0.2, n.s.).
We compared 5 dyads with low self-estimated competence, 5 dyads with high self-estimated competence and 6
mixed dyads. For these groups we found differences in glossary use and included this factor in our analysis.
ANOVAs      revealed  no  significant differences      for help-seeking   (F(2,16) = 0.3, n.s.) or number  of  errors

                                                         85
(F(2,16) = 1.9, n.s.), but a tendency for use of the glossary (F(2,16) = 2.2, p = .15). Those dyads with high self-
estimated competence used the glossary the most and showed a tendency to use the glossary more often than
dyads with low self-estimated competence (Tukey-HSD, mean diff. = 1.8, p = .14). It can be concluded that the
use of the glossary was affected by self-estimated competence.

Epistemological Beliefs
        We compared 5 dyads who believed botanical knowledge to be certain and structured, 5 dyads believing
that botanical knowledge is more uncertain and unstructured and 6 mixed dyads (factor "texture of knowledge").
ANOVAs revealed no significant differences for help-seeking (F(2,16) = 1.4, n.s.), but a tendency for number of
errors (F(2,16) = 2.4, p = .13). Dyads with beliefs that knowledge in plant identification is certain und structured
made more errors than those that believed it to be more uncertain and unstructured (Tukey-HSD, mean diff. = -
.02, p = .13). We compared 6 dyads who believed botanical knowledge to be dynamic and flexible, 6 dyads
believing that botanical knowledge is more static and inflexible and 4 mixed dyads (factor "variability of
knowledge"). For this comparison we found differences in glossary use and included this factor in our analysis.
ANOVAs     revealed  no  significant differences    for help-seeking  (F(2,16) = 0.5,   n.s.) or number   of  errors
(F(2,16) = 0.3, n.s.), but a  tendency    for use of the  glossary (F(2,16) = 3.6, p  = .06). Dyads believing   that
knowledge in plant identification is dynamic and flexible used the glossary more often than mixed dyads (Tukey-
HSD, mean diff. = 3.7, p = .11) or dyads with belief in static and inflexible knowledge (Tukey-HSD, mean
diff. = 3.5, p = .09). It can be concluded that use of the glossary and the number of errors were affected by
epistemological beliefs about the texture and variability of knowledge.

Discussion
        This research gives exploratory insights into the issues of effectiveness of help-seeking and potential
impact factors. In the following, the results of our study on these two issues will be discussed. Due to the small
sample  size, the discussion  of results   necessarily  remains  somewhat   speculative.  Nevertheless,   there are
promising implications for theoretical debate and future research on help-seeking.

Effectiveness of Help
        First of all, it is important to stress that PIO in general as well as the two help functions were accepted
by the participants. This is a major pre-requisite to introducing a new learning medium into a traditional domain
like plant identification. In addition,   the  commonly   observed  phenomenon     of marginal   help  use or even
ignorance of help did not emerge in this study, at least with respect to context-sensitive help. The average
amount of context-sensitive help use per decision step was substantial and seems appropriate for novice learners.
Additionally, help-seeking had a significant effect on performance. Extensive help-seeking was associated with a
low error rate. Thus, context-sensitive help supports successful decision-making processes. In contrast, the
glossary function was rarely used or even ignored and was not related to performance. The patterns of use of
context-sensitive help and glossary function were completely different. This may be due to the fact that context-
sensitive help materials are tailored to the specific demands at a decision step whereas the glossary contains more
general information, which may not be seen as particularly useful in actual task performance. With respect to the
design of help functions the different patterns of use call for fitting help to task requirements. If learners
experience the usefulness of help in task completion immediately they may be more likely to use it. However,
while adapting help to learners' needs might possibly help to cure avoidance, there is also a risk of misuse. If
help is perfectly suited to task requirements learners may be successful in performance, but hindered in deep
processing and learning. On the other hand, glossary functions, which supply more general information, may be
expected   to foster deeper   understanding    if they  are used appropriately. Conflicting    effects of  help on
performance and learning are documented in the literature (see Aleven et al., 2003). A major problem is the
avoidance of more abstract help that is assumed to foster learning. Future research on help-seeking should
examine more systematically which factors influence the effect of help on performance and learning. From such
research, design guidelines for help functions could be derived in order to tailor help to performance or learning
respectively.

Impact Factors and Help-seeking
        A major issue of our study was to acquire first insights into the effects of several learner-related factors
that are discussed in the literature on help-seeking and performance. Despite the small sample size we found
effects for most of the analyzed factors.

                                                       86
Prior Knowledge
         The prominent role of prior knowledge in help-seeking and performance could be confirmed by the
results. However, there is no simple increase in help-seeking and performance as prior knowledge increases. The
mixed dyads consisting of one student with high and one with low prior knowledge performed better and did
more help-seeking than the low-knowledge and the high-knowledge dyads. This effect may seem surprising at
first and is not consistent with prior research. Yet there is a possible explanation for it: low-knowledge dyads
may not become aware of difficulties in the plant identification process due to their low knowledge. For this
reason they may not be able to accurately judge their need for help, which would result in reduced help-seeking
and a high error rate. In contrast, high-knowledge dyads may be overconfident with respect to their decisions in
the identification process. Thus, they might underestimate their need for help and produce a higher error rate.
These negative effects may in turn be cancelled out in mixed dyads. The overconfidence of the student with high
knowledge may be reduced when explaining his decision to a student with lower knowledge in a mixed dyad. In
this case, both students would benefit from the mixed-dyad composition. From a didactic perspective it can be
concluded from this result that learners should be grouped in mixed-knowledge dyads in order to gain best help-
seeking and performance effects.

Motivational Orientations
         The results yielded no effect of students' orientation towards work avoidance on help-seeking and
performance. Nevertheless, this may be due to the small sample sizes. With respect to task orientation results
indicate that dyads with a high orientation towards learning and gaining competence performed worse than dyads
low in task orientation. This result contradicts the expectations derived from the literature and is hard to interpret.
As the current data are restricted to quantitative log-files nothing is known about interactions in dyads that may
have produced this result. Thus, future research on motivational orientations in help-seeking and performance
should  include  process data  like think-alouds, so  as to  get a  finer-grained  insight into the  effect of task
orientation on performance.

Interest and Self-estimated Competence
         Interest in the domain had no effect on help-seeking and performance. This result is noteworthy as the
lecturers holding traditional courses report that there is a large group of students with low interest in the domain
who are reluctant to participate actively in courses. Obviously reduced interest did not lead to less help-seeking
or worse   performance.   Thus,  the  implementation     of PIO  in   regular courses   is potentially capable   of
compensating for differences in interest. In addition, self-estimated competence affected the use of the glossary
function. Dyads whose members judged their competence in plant identification to be high accessed the glossary
more often. Maybe self-estimated competence is a promising factor in the use of abstract help functions in
general. It should therefore be more systematically analyzed with respect to the use of glossaries and related help
functions. It is especially interesting that objective knowledge had no effect on glossary use. Therefore, the
common phenomenon of differences between subjective self-estimations and objective data was also observed in
our study.

Epistemological Beliefs
         The  results confirm  that  epistemological  beliefs  play a  significant role in  help-seeking and   task
performance. The effects showed a reasonable pattern indicating that more sophisticated beliefs in knowledge
being unstructured and flexible resulted in a higher amount of help-seeking and better performance. Believing
that botanical knowledge is unstructured and uncertain (low values on "texture of knowledge") led to a lower
rate of  errors. This effect may be  explained  in terms    of better meta-cognitive  monitoring    throughout  the
identification process by dyads believing in higher complexity of domain knowledge. Those students who
believe that they are performing a task in an unstructured domain may have a better awareness of potential
difficulties and may consequently make fewer errors. A similar explanation applies to the effect that students
believing in high flexibility of knowledge (high values on "variability of knowledge") use the glossary more
frequently. If students believe that the task domain is not stable and liable to change over time they may be
encouraged to consult the glossary for additional information. Moreover, it is remarkable that epistemological
beliefs are associated with glossary use, but not with context-sensitive help access. Maybe the use of more
abstract help functions  in  general is highly dependent    on  specific person   variables such  as sophisticated
epistemological beliefs or self-estimated competence.

                                                      87
Conclusion
            Given the growing use of computers in education there is a need for extensive research on help-seeking
in ILE. This paper presents an example of effective help-seeking in ILE and proposes some promising variables
for further research. In more advanced stages of research finer-grained analyses employing complementing data
sources such as log-files, verbal protocols and observational data as well as larger sample sizes are required to
shed light on the interplay of the different learner-related factors in help-seeking. Especially the quantitative
process data should be augmented with qualitative analyses. Currently we are collecting data from five university
courses in plant identification to validate our explorative findings with a larger sample size.

References
Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. R. (2000). Limitations of student control: Do students know when they need help? In C. F. G. Gauthier & K.
            VanLehn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, ITS 2000 (pp. 292-303). Berlin:
            Springer Verlag.
Aleven, V., Stahl, E., Schworm, S., Fischer, F., & Wallace, R. (2003). Help-seeking and help design in interactive learning environments.
            Review of Educational Research, 77(3), 277-320.
Arbreton, A. (1998). Student goal orientation and help-seeking strategy use. In S. A. Karabenick (Ed.), Strategic help-seeking. Implications
            for learning and teaching (pp. 95-116). Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Balke, S.,  & Stiensmeier-Pelster,  J.  (1995). Die  Erfassung   der motivationalen   Orientierung     ­  eine deutsche  Form   der Motivational
            Orientation Scales (MOS-D) [The assessment of motivational orientation ­ a German version of the Motivational Orientation
            Scales (MOS-D)]. Diagnostica, 41, 80-94.
Boscolo, P., & Mason, L. (2003). Topic knowledge, text coherence, and interest: How they interact in learning from instructional texts.
            Journal of Experimental Education, 71(2), 126-148.
Clarebout, G., Elen, J., Luyten, L., & Bamps, H. (2001). Assessing epistemological beliefs: Schommer's questionnaire revisited. Educational
            Research and Evaluation, 7(1), 53-77.
Dillon, A., & Gabbard, R. (1998). Hypermedia as an educational technology: A review of the quantitative research literature on learner
            comprehension, control, and style. Review of Educational Research, 68, 322-349.
Dochy, F. J. R. C., & Alexander, P. A. (1995). Mapping prior knowledge: A framework for discussion among researchers. European Journal
            of Psychology of Education, 10(3), 225-242.
Dutke, S., & Reimer, T. (2000). Evaluation of two types of online help information for application software: Operative and function-oriented
            help. Journal of Computer-Assisted Learning., 16, 307-315.
Hannover, B., & Bettge, S. (1993). Mädchen und Technik [Girls and technology]. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Kardash, C. M., & Howell, K. L. (2000). Effects of epistemological beliefs and topic-specific beliefs on undergraduates' cognitive and
            strategic processing of dual-positional text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(3), 524-535.
Luckin, R., & du Boulay, B. (1999). Ecolab: The development and evaluation of a Vygotskian design framework. International Journal of
            Artificial Intelligence and Education, 10, 198-220.
Mandl, H., Gräsel, C., & Fischer, F. (2000). Problem-oriented learning: Facilitating the use of domain-specific and control strategies through
            modeling by an expert. In W. J. Perrig & A. Grob (Eds.), Control of Human Behavior, Mental Processes and Consciousness (pp.
            165-182). Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Nicholls, J. G. (1984). Achievement motivation: Conceptions of ability, subjective experience, task choice, and performance. Psychological
            Review, 91(3), 328-346.
Puustinen,  M.   (1998). Help-seeking   behavior  in a problem-solving    situation: Development      of  self-regulation. European   Journal  of
            Psychology of Education, 13(2), 271-282.
Reiser, B. (2002). Why scaffolding should sometimes make tasks more difficult for learners. In G. Stahl, Computer support for collaborative
            learning: Foundations for a CSCL community. Proceedings of the CSCL 2002, Boulder, USA. (pp. 255-264). Hillsdale, NJ:
            Erlbaum.
Renkl, A. (2002). Learning from worked-out examples: Instructional explanations supplement self-explanations. Learning & Instruction, 12,
            529-556.
Ryan, A. M., Gheen, M. H., & Midgley, C. (1998). Why do some students avoid asking for help? An examination of the interplay among
            students' academic efficacy, teachers' social-emotional role, and the classroom goal structure. Journal of Educational Psychology,
            90(3), 528-535.
Ryan, A. M., & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). "Should I ask for help?" The role of motivation and attitudes in adolescents' help-seeking in math
            class. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89(2), 329-341.
Schiefele, U. (1996). Topic interest, text representation, and quality of experience. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 21, 19­42.
Schwarzer,  R.,  & Jerusalem,  M. (Eds.) (1999).  Skalen  zur   Erfassung von Lehrer-  und      Schülermerkmalen  [Scales  for  the assessment of
            teacher-related and student-related factors]. Berlin: Freie Universität Berlin.
Stahl,  E.,  &   Bromme,     R.  (2002).  Entwicklung     einer   Online-Lernumgebung           für  das  Einführungspraktikum       "Botanische
            Bestimmungsübungen"     [Development   of  an online  learning environment      for practical courses in plant identification]. In U.
            Becker   &   W.  Sommer    (Eds.),  Learntec   2002.    10.  Europäischer       Kongress     und   Fachmesse    für  Bildungs-   und
            Informationstechnologie (pp. 573-579). Karlsruhe: Schriftenreiche der Karlsruher Messe- und Kongress-GmbH.
Stahl, E., & Bromme, R. (submitted). CAEB. An instrument to measure connotative aspects of epistemological beliefs.
Schommer, M. (1990). Effects of beliefs about the nature of knowledge on comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82(3), 498-
            504.
Schommer,   M.   (1993).  Epistemological development     and   academic  performance  among        secondary  students. Journal of  Educational
            Psychology, 85(3), 406-411.
Wood, H., & Wood, D. (1999). Help-seeking, learning and contingent tutoring. Computers and Education, 33, 153-169.

                                                                  88
