                                 Self-Explaining Science Texts:
                      Strategies, Knowledge, and Reading Skill

                               Rachel Best, Yasuhiro Ozuru, & Danielle S. McNamara
                     202 Psychology Building, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN         38152
                                        Tel: 901 678 2144, Fax: 901 678 2579
                                    Email: d.mcnamara@mail.psyc.memphis.edu

         Abstract: Self-explanation refers to explaining text to oneself while reading. We examined the
         quality of middle-school students' self-explanations of a science text which were collected
         while they were engaged with iSTART, an interactive computer program that teaches reading
         strategies.  Our analysis    included an  examination   of  how the quality  of paraphrases  (i.e.,
         restating the sentence) and elaborations (i.e., drawing on prior knowledge) were mediated by
         individual difference measures (reading comprehension skill and prior science knowledge) and
         sentence difficulty     (based on information  density).   Reading  comprehension    skill was an
         important determinant in the production of paraphrases and elaborations. In addition, reading
         skill affected the quality of self-explanations produced; that is, skilled readers produced better
         quality elaborations (e.g., elaborations that helped build a global understanding of the text).
         Prior knowledge was also important, with high-knowledge students providing more `distant'
         paraphrases.  Finally,   the   production of elaborations   and paraphrases   was influenced   by
         sentence    difficulty. Fewer   accurate  elaborations  were   produced  for  the more     difficult
         sentences. Implications for individual differences and sentence difficulty in the production of
         self-explanations are discussed.

Introduction
         Previous research has shown that actively processing difficult texts improves comprehension (Chi, de
Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994; Einstein, McDaniel, Owen & Cote, 1990). Further, there is evidence that
explaining the text while reading, is an effective way of promoting active processing of the text, and thus,
facilitating comprehension of the texts (e.g., Chi & Bassok, 1989). This is because self-explaining a text involves
cognitive processes necessary for the deeper processing of the texts. These processes include monitoring of
comprehension, linking separate ideas in the text, and relating the ideas to pre-existing knowledge. As a result,
readers who explain text while reading understand more about the text and construct better mental models of the
content (e.g., Chi & VanLehn, 1991).

         Building on these theoretical foundations, McNamara and Scott (1999) developed a reading strategy
intervention called Self-Explanation Reading Training (SERT). SERT aims to improve the quality of self-
explanations, and hence, to promote active reading. SERT does this by teaching the importance of using reading
strategies (e.g., paraphrasing and elaboration) and training students to these strategies while self-explaining a
text. Teaching these   strategies   generally improves  the quality  of students' self-explanations  and   facilitates
reading comprehension (McNamara, submitted; McNamara & Scott, 1999). However, we do not have a detailed
understanding of the ways in which different types of individuals benefit from using different SERT strategies in
different reading situations.

         Whereas  particular     reader characteristics (e.g., prior knowledge)   may    help students  self-explain
sentences (e.g., make inferences about the meanings of unknown words), it is possible that reader attributes
effectively facilitate text comprehension in one type of sentence, but not others. This is because the type of
problems  that readers  need     to solve  to understand   the sentence  would  differ as  a  function  of    sentence
characteristics. These include information density, syntactic complexity, word frequency, and the cohesion with
preceding sentences (McNamara, 2001; McNamara, Lowerse, & Graesser, 2002). Consistent with this argument,
evidence indicates that text comprehension is mediated by complex interactions between individual differences

                                                        89
(e.g., prior knowledge,    reading  skill) and  text-related factors  (McNamara   &    Kintsch, 1996,  O'Reilly &
McNamara, 2002).

         Given   that  individual  difference  factors  and  sentence  characteristics are   important for reading
comprehension, we expect that they also affect reading strategy use while self-explaining texts. The present
paper examines the effects of individual differences and text-related factors on students' use of reading strategies
while self-explaining expository texts. We focus on two measures of individual differences: level of prior
knowledge and reading comprehension ability, and on one sentence characteristic: sentence difficulty, which is
operationalized by the information density of individual sentences.

         Self-explanation protocols analyzed in this investigation were collected during computerized reading
strategy training, in which students typed their self-explanations to exposi tory texts. The computerized trainer,
called iSTART (Interactive Strategy Trainer for Active Reading and Thinking), is an automated SERT training
program developed by McNamara, Levinstein and Boonthum (2003). iSTART was found to be an effective
trainer in teaching   reading strategies,  with its  teaching performance    matching  human    training (O'Reilly,
McNamara, & Sinclair, 2004). This study does not examine the effectiveness of training, but rather focuses on
how the explanations to sentences that are generated during training vary in quality as a function of readers'
aptitudes and sentence difficulty.

Method
Participants
         The sample consisted of 42 eighth and ninth grade children from an east coast suburban school. The
students were enrolled in a learning program, called Learning Bridge, designed to motivate students from under-
privileged backgrounds.

Design and Materials
         Individual differences were measured with two tests; a modified version of the Gates-MacGinitie
Reading    Skill Test  and a  Prior  Knowledge      Test. The  Gates-MacGinite    test is  a standardized  reading
comprehension test, designed for grades 10-12. The test consisted of 40 multiple-choice questions designed to
assess student comprehension on several short text passages (Cronbach's Alpha a=.91).      Due to time constraints,
the vocabulary section of the test was not administered, and the time limit for the comprehension question
section was reduced to 15 minutes. The prior knowledge test consisted of 35 multiple-choice items, which tap
knowledge of different science domains, including biology, scientific methods, mathematics, earth science,
physics, mathematics, and chemistry (Cronbach's Alpha a=.81).

         The iSTART system (see McNamara et al., 2003), in which the self-explanations were collected,
consists of three phases. First, the Introduction provides information about self-explanation and five reading
strategies (comprehension monitoring, paraphrasing, prediction, elaboration and bridging). The Demonstration
provides examples of the self-explanation strategies taught in the introduction. Finally, during the Practice phase,
students' type self-explanations to science texts.

         In the practice section, students are presented with science texts one sentence at a time on the computer
screen. For each sentence, they are asked to type a self-explanation. The quality of the self-explanation is
assessed by iSTART, and students are provided feedback, presented by the pedagogical agent, Merlin. The
feedback is essentially based on the degree of argument overlap between the students' self-explanation and the
target sentence. The program is designed so that it encourages students to use information that is not in the target
sentence (e.g., elaboration based on commonsense and previous sections of the text). For example, Merlin might
respond with "Try adding some more information that explains what the sentence means" if a students' self-
explanation  tends  to have  large  overlap  with  only   current sentence. Thus, feedback   differs for each user,
depending on the quality of self-explanations produced. The self explanations analyzed in this paper are the final
versions that a given student provided for a given sentence. Thus, they have been affected by the feedback of the
system. For example, students providing poor self-explanations were prompted to supply more information.
Thus, the final self-explanations reflect better quality protocols than would otherwise have been provided under
spontaneous circumstances. However, it should be noted that, as the example indicates, the system tends to
reduce potential differences between high and low quality self explanations produced by skilled and less skilled

                                                       90
readers or for easy and difficult sentences rather than magnifying these differences. In this sense, we are
confident that the effects of individual difference and the sentence difficulty reported in this paper are not solely
artifacts of the system's feedback.

        Students self-explained two texts in the practice phase. The texts were entitled "Stages of Thunderstorm
Development" and "Origin of Coal." The present analysis focuses on self explanations for the thunderstorm text.
The thunderstorm text, comprising 13 sentences and 197 words, was extracted from a school textbook. It has a
Flesch Kincaid Grade level of 9.364.

Procedure
        Individual difference measures were collected shortly before iSTART training. Students completed the
prior knowledge    test first, followed by  the Gates-MacGinite      reading  test. They  were   given 15   minutes to
complete each assessment.

Coding
        Students   typed  their   self-explanations,   which  were   automatically  recorded  in the database   of the
iSTART program. Two independent coders analyzed the self-explanations in terms of the following seven
dimensions: 1) presence of comprehension monitoring; 2) presence of paraphrasing (none, topic identification,
repetition, and  paraphrasing);    4) distance  of  paraphrasing     from the target  sentence;  3)  accuracy   of  the
paraphrasing;  4)  presence    of elaborations; 5)  source    of the information    used in elaborations;   6) how  an
elaboration contributes to the comprehension of the text; and 7) accuracy of elaboration.

        Coding    of  comprehension     monitoring     was based   on  whether    self-explanations  incorporated  the
monitoring of students' understanding. Explanations were categorized as either containing or not containing
evidence   of comprehension     monitoring   (e.g., `I don't  understand  X';  `I  understand  Y').  The  presence  of
paraphrasing was judged based on the nature of a statement referring to the target sentence. An explanation was
categorized as containing one of the following: 1) a paraphrase that was a restatement of the sentence using
different words, 2) a repetition of the sentence that was lexically too similar to the target sentence, 3) a simple
topic identification (e.g., `this is about storms'), and 4) no paraphrase, repetition, or topic identification. Note that
explanations given the fourth category might include an elaboration or comprehension monitoring.          The primary
goal of this classification was to identify successful paraphrases (i.e., as opposed to mere repetition or topic
identification).  If the explanation   was  categorized    as a  paraphrase,  the paraphrase  was   further coded   for
accuracy and distance from the target sentences. Accuracy had three levels (inaccurate, partially accurate, and
accurate); and distance had two levels (distant and close).   Close paraphrases were closely aligned to the original
sentence in terms of sentence structure and/or content words. Distant paraphrases contained the same semantic
content as the target sentence but did not have the same sentence structure or content words.        Distance coding
was intended to capture depth of processing involved in the paraphrasing.

        Coding of the elaborations was based on whether the self-explanations included any ideas that were not
explicitly present in the target sentence. Once a self-explanation was found to contain an elaboration, it was
further coded for the source of the information, the nature of its contribution,     and its accuracy.  The source of
elaboration was classified into three categories:   1) previous sections of the text, 2) domain specific knowledge,
and 3) domain-general knowledge, including personal experience, common sense, and general knowledge. The
nature of its contribution was also classified into three categories: 1) relevant to the comprehension of neither the
current sentence  nor   the overall  text; 2) relevant  and   contributes to  the comprehension   of   only the  target
sentence; and 3) relevant and contributes to a global level of comprehension that goes beyond the current
sentence (e.g., actively building the large picture depicted by overall text). Finally, elaborations that were
classified as relevant to either current sentence or more global level of comprehension were coded for accuracy.
Accuracy was judged as either accurate or inaccurate, based on the extent to which the self-explanation was
scientifically correct. It should be noted that the accuracy of elaborations was coded on two levels (correct or
incorrect), as opposed to three levels used in the accuracy of paraphrasing coding (inaccurate, partially accurate
or accurate). This is because accuracy of elaborations was based on scientific correctness, as opposed to a `model
sentence'.

        As these descriptions indicate, a particular self-explanation can contain all reading strategies varying in
their qualities. Reliability of the coding was evaluated using Cohen's Kappa and simple agreement analysis

                                                        91
(when the coding is binary). Reliability between the coders was 85% or above for all coding dimensions.
Disagreements were resolved via a discussion between the coders.

Results
        As  mentioned  earlier,    our  analysis focuses   on the   influence of  two  individual differences  (prior
knowledge and reading comprehension skill) and sentence difficulty. As for the examination of the effects of
individual differences, we adopted median split method, dividing students into high and low-knowledge groups,
or high and low reading comprehension skill groups, using the median scores. For the sentence difficulty
analysis, we classified the 13 sentences of the thunderstorm text into "high difficulty" and "low difficulty"
sentences based on the information density of each sentence. Two independent coders' identified the number of
distinct concepts contained in each sentence. Both coders classified sentences 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 and 11 as low
difficulty sentences (easy sentences) and sentences 6, 7, 8, 9, 12 and 13 as high difficulty sentences (difficult
sentences), and thus were in agreement about which sentences were low difficulty and high difficulty.

        Several statistical techniques were used to analyze the data. We used analysis of variance (ANOVA) to
analyze the frequency of strategy use. We conducted a series 2x2 mixed design ANOVAs, which comprised
sentence difficulty (easy or difficult) as the within-subjects factor and either reading comprehension skill (high or
low) or prior knowledge (high or low) as the between-subjects factor. However, in addition to the analysis of
how often a particular type of self explanation was produced (e.g., accurate paraphrase), we often wanted to
analyze how the distribution of different types of self-explanation differed (source of information contained in
the elaborations) between different types of students. In such cases, we used Chi-square to capture the difference
in the overall frequency distributions.

        Our data indicated that students' often attempted to paraphrase (91.0%). Of these attempts, 94% were
successful (i.e., not repetitions or topic identifications). Overall, 84% of all self-explanations produced included
successful paraphrases. Also, self-explanations quite frequently contained elaborations (41%). However, only
4% of  the  self-explanations  contained    comprehension   monitoring.  Therefore,    we  focus on   the analysis on
paraphrasing and elaboration.

Paraphrasing
        The  analysis indicated     proportion   of successful paraphrases    (as  opposed  to repetition  and topic
identification) produced was associated with sentence difficulty and reading skill. Two sets of 2x2 mixed design
ANOVAs were performed on the proportion of successful paraphrases. The analysis indicated a marginally
significant main effect of sentence difficulty, F(1, 39) = 3.117, MSE = .0079, p = .08, and a main effect of
reading comprehension skill, F(1,39) = 3.722, MSE = .015, p = .06. There were no other reliable main effects or
interactions. Successful paraphrases are marginally more likely to be produced for easy sentences (M = .95, SD =
.08) than difficult sentences (M = .92, SD = .13). They are also marginally more likely to be produced by skilled
readers (M = .96, SD = .09) than less skilled readers (M = .91, SD - .12).

        While reading comprehension skill was important for the quantity of paraphrases, prior knowledge
played  a more  significant   role in  the  quality of paraphrases   produced.  Specifically,  prior knowledge  was
associated with the distance   of  the  paraphrase. Two  sets of mixed   model    2x2 ANOVAs     on  the frequency of
distant paraphrases indicated that distant paraphrases occurred more frequently for high-knowledge students (M
= 0.63, SD = 0.22) than low-knowledge students (M = 0.44, SD = 0.24), F(1, 39) = 7.531, MSE = .103, p < .01.
Also the main effect of reading comprehension skill approached statistical significance, with more distant
paraphrases produced by skilled readers (M = 0.61, SD = 0.29) than by less skilled readers (M = 0.47, SD =
0.24), F(1, 39) = 3.361, MSE       =  .113, p <  .08.  Interactions between   the sentence difficulty and  individual
differences were not significant.

        We also examined how individual differences and/or sentence difficulty influenced the accuracy of the
paraphrases. In this analysis, a score of 0, 0.5 and 1.0 was assigned for inaccurate, partially accurate, and
accurate paraphrases, respectively. The two sets of    2x2 mixed model ANOVAs on the accuracy scores indicated
a main effect of sentence difficulty, F(1, 39) = 19.486, MSE = .0030, p < .001, with greater accuracy for low
difficulty sentences (M = .70, SD = 19) than high difficulty sentences (M = .53, SD = .20). There were no other
main effects or interactions.

                                                        92
Elaboration
        Two sets of 2x2 mixed design ANOVAs were performed on the proportion elaborations contained in
the self-explanations.   The    results showed  that there was  a marginally  significant   main   effect of sentence
difficulty, F(1,33) = 3.4, MSE = .0371, p = .07, and a main effect of reading comprehension skill, F(1,33)= 6.1,
MSE = .012, p < .05. More elaborations were produced for easy sentences (M = .44, SD = .30) than difficult
sentences (M = .35, SD = .24). Also, more elaborations were produced by skilled readers (M = .49, SD = .05)
than less skilled readers (M = .30, SD = .05). There were no other reliable main effects or interactions.

        Of the elaborations produced, 66% were based on general knowledge or common sense, 23% were text-
based, and 11% were based on scientific knowledge. We used 2x2 ANOVAs to investigate effects of individual
differences and sentence difficulty in the production of different types of elaboration. For general knowledge
elaborations there were no reliable main effects. However, an interaction between reading skill and sentence
difficulty was reliable, F(1,33) = 5.2, MSE = .024, p < .05. A post-hoc t-test indicated that, for less skilled
readers, more general knowledge elaborations were produced for easy sentences (M = .26, SD = .24) than
difficult sentences (M = .17, SD = .19). For text-based elaborations there was a main effect of sentence difficulty,
F(1,33)= 11.7, MSE = 0.009, p < 0.01. More text-based elaborations were produced for easy sentences (M = .13,
SD = .17) than difficult sentences (M = .06, SD = .14), There were no other reliable main effects or interactions.
Finally, we found no reliable main effects or interactions for scientific elaborations.

        In terms of the contribution of elaborations to explaining the target sentences, 68% focused on the
current sentence, 11% on a global level of comprehension beyond the current sentence, and 20% were irrelevant.
Again, we     used 2x2   ANOVAs     to   examine   whether individual difference  factors   and    sentence  difficulty
influenced the production of each of the current sentence, knowledge building and irrelevant elaborations. For
current sentence and irrelevant elaborations, there were no main effects or interactions between individual
difference factors or sentence difficulty. However, for knowledge building elaborations there was a main effect
of reading comprehension skill, F(1,33)= 7.6, MSE = .002, p < 0.01. Skilled readers were more likely to make
knowledge building elaborations (M = .11, SD = .12) than less skilled readers (M = .03, SD = .11). There were
no other reliable main effects or interactions.

        Thus    far, the analysis  has   considered  the source and  contribution of     elaborations independently.
However, the source of information contained in the elaborations and the contribution of elaborations may be
interrelated. To investigate the relationship between the source and contribution of elaborations in explaining the
target sentences we carried out a distribution analysis. Table 1 presents frequency distribution of irrelevant,
relevant to current sentence, and knowledge building elaborations as the function of the source of information
used in the elaboration. The table shows a difference in the distribution of elaboration source and contribution,
X2=6.2 (2), p < .05.  In particular, text-based elaborations were more likely to be relevant to either explaining the
current sentence or knowledge building. This trend was not affected by individual difference factors (reading
comprehension skill and prior knowledge) or sentence difficulty.

Table 1. Relationship between the source and contribution of elaborations

                                        Irrelevant         Current sentence      Knowledge building
               General knowledgeand common sense35 (.23)        109 (.73)                  4 (.03)
                   Text-based                2 (.03)              31 (.59)                19 (.36)
                     Scientific              8 (.33)              14 (.58)                 2 (.08)
        Note. Table reports frequencies (with proportions in parentheses).

        Finally, we examined the accuracy of elaborations. The two 2x2 mixed model ANOVAs yielded a main
effect of sentence difficulty, F(1, 39)=8.6, MSE = .0098, p < 0.01, and reading comprehension skill, F(1,39)=
9.2, MSE = .037, p < .01. Accurate elaborations were more likely to be produced for easy sentences (M = .22, SD
= .03) than difficult sentences (M = .12, SD = .02). Skilled readers tended to produce more accurate elaborations
(M = .22, SD = .20) than less skilled readers (M = .12, SD = .15). There were no other reliable main effects or
interactions.

                                                       93
Co-occurrence of Paraphrases and Elaborations
         The analysis so far has explored the nature of students' paraphrases and elaborations individually.
However, they often occur together within a given self explanation. This section explores the relationships
between paraphrases and elaborations contained in the self-explanations by examining the co-occurrence of
paraphrases and elaborations.

         Of the sentences self-explained, 54% contained paraphrasing only, 10% elaboration only and 31% both
paraphrasing and elaboration (5% of the sentences contained neither paraphrasing nor elaboration). As will be
shown shortly, the combination of paraphrases and elaborations was mediated by individual difference factors
(prior knowledge and reading comprehension skill), but not sentence difficulty.

         Table 2 shows that the distribution of self-explanations containing paraphrasing and/or elaborations
differed for skilled and less skilled readers, X2: 21.7 (2), p < .001. More skilled readers produced a combination
of paraphrases and elaborations, and elaborations only, whereas less skilled readers produced more paraphrases
only.
A similar distribution pattern emerged for high and low-knowledge students, indicating a difference in the
pattern of co-occurrence of paraphrasing and elaboration between high and low-knowledge students, X2: 6.0 (2),
p < .05. As the   left two  columns  of Table  2  shows, high-knowledge      students produced   a combination      of
paraphrases and    elaborations,  and  elaborations  only,  whereas      low-knowledge   students  produced   more
paraphrases only.

Table 2. Co-occurrence of paraphrases and elaborations as a function of individual differences.

            Strategies               Low readingskill    High readingskill   Low-knowledge     High-knowledge
         Paraphrasing only             162 (.67)           128 (.50)            140 (.62)          150 (.55)
         Elaboration only               13 (.05)           39 (.14)             27 (.11)            25 (.09)
   Paraphrasing and elaboration         64 (.28)           94 (.36)             59 (.27)            99 (.36)
         Note. Table reports frequencies (with proportions in parentheses).

         The analysis so far has indicated a difference in the co-occurrence of paraphrasing and elaboration as a
function of prior knowledge and reading skill. We further explored the nature of the co-occurrence in more detail
by looking into the kinds of paraphrasing and elaborations that co-occurred. Table 3 and Table 4 show the
relationship between close and distant paraphrases and the source and contribution of the elaborations.

         Chi-square analysis indicated that different types of elaboration tended to co-occur with distant and
close paraphrases, X2:  6.2 (2), p <  .05. More  text-based elaborations    co-occurred  with distant   paraphrases,
whereas more general knowledge elaborations co-occurred with close paraphrases.

Table 3. Co-occurrence of close and distant paraphrases and types of elaboration

                           Elaborations             Close paraphrases        Distant paraphrases
                        General knowledge                50 (.72)                 55 (.56)
                            Text-based                   13 (.19)                 36 (.37)
                            Scientific                   6 (.08)                  7 (.07)
                            Note. Table reports frequencies (with proportions in parentheses).

         Focusing on the contribution of elaborations, the Chi square analysis again showed that different kinds
of elaboration tended to occur with close or distant paraphrases, X2: 6.1 (2), p < .05. Distant paraphrases tended
to co-occur with knowledge building elaborations.

                                                     94
Table 4. Co-occurrence of close and distant paraphrases and contribution of elaboration

                             Elaborations              Close paraphrases        Distant paraphrases
                               Irrelevant                    11 (.15)               20 (.20)
                           Current sentence                  54 (.78)               58 (.59)
                        Knowledge building                   4 (.05)                20 (.20)
                               Note. Table reports frequencies (with proportions in parentheses).

          Overall, the above two Chi-square analyses regarding the co-occurrence of close and distant paraphrase
with different   kinds  of elaborations    indicate that the quality  elaborations, in particular   the text-based  and
knowledge building elaboration, tend to co-occur with distant as opposed to close paraphrases.

Discussion
          Overall, our analyses established that prior knowledge (high or low), reading comprehension skill (high
or low) and sentence difficulty (low difficulty and high difficulty) played a role in both the production and
quality of paraphrases and elaborations. The research is unique in that it has identified ways in which self-
explanations    differ as  a function   of  reader  characteristics and   text characteristics.  It  thus  expands  our
understanding of the ways in which different types of reader interpret sentences in the comprehension process.

          At the most general level, although marginal, students with better reading comprehension skill tended to
produce paraphrases (as opposed to simple repetition or topic identification) and elaborations more frequently.
More importantly, reading skill was associated with the type and accuracy of elaborations. Better comprehenders
produced higher quality elaborations; that is, their elaborations contained more knowledge building, sentence
linking, and were more accurate. However, the overall analysis indicates that these high quality elaborations
were often associated with "easy sentences." This pattern implies that skilled readers are not necessarily good at
solving problems associated with the comprehension of the difficult sentences. Rather they are good at actively
relating different parts of texts to construct a global representation of the text. Indeed, previous research has
shown that reading skill is closely associated with active processing (as opposed to minimalist processing) of the
text (O'Reilly & McNamara, 2002).

          On the other hand, prior knowledge was found to be important for the production of distant paraphrases.
This makes sense because an accurate distant paraphrase requires a better understanding of the situation depicted
by the sentence; the resulting paraphrase would become distorted if one attempts to transform the sentence
without   understanding    the situation.   This finding   appears   to be  consistent with   general   consensus   that
comprehension of a sentence in scientific text is closely associated with prior knowledge of the topic.

          It is somewhat     surprising that effects  of prior knowledge    were  not  detected  in  other areas of the
analysis, such   as the   production    of elaborations.  Greater   prior knowledge    should   help students  produce
elaborations. One possible explanation is that high-knowledge students may not need to elaborate because they
understand the sentence. This notion is in accordance with deLeeuw and Chi (2003) who argued that elaborations
are often    produced  when    there is a  gap between    the  information   depicted  by the   text and   the readers'
representation of the situation depicted by the text.

          Of course, readers may elaborate not only when they have problems with the current sentence, but also
when they have difficulty placing the meaning of the current sentence in the context of the broader text.
However, for this to occur, two conditions need to be met. First, the sentence must be sufficiently easy so that
readers can comprehend the meaning of individual sentences relatively well. Second, readers' must be active
processors (see O'Reilly & McNamara, 2002) to link a given sentence to the previous section of the text. Our
data are consistent with this speculation. Text-based elaborations that tend to contribute to knowledge building
appear to occur more frequently in easy sentences than difficult sentences. Further they are more likely to co-
occur with distant than close paraphrases, indicating many text-based, knowledge building elaborations occur
when readers understand the sentence relatively well. Finally, this trend is more pronounced among skilled than
less-skilled readers. Taken together, the findings suggest that knowledge building elaborations tend to occur
when skilled readers read a sufficiently easy sentence.

                                                         95
          Overall, our analyses, regarding the relations between individual difference measures (prior knowledge
and  reading  comprehension      skill), sentence  characteristics (information   density),  and   the type  of self-
explanation, provide an insight into how different types of individuals deal with different types of sentences.
However, because our research is limited to self-explanations produced under somewhat artificial training
conditions, care needs to be taken in generalizing the findings to spontaneous reading conditions in which
students are not provided with prompts or hints in connection with their self-explanations. We are currently
analyzing written self-explanations that are spontaneously produced outside the iSTART training to examine the
quality of self-explanations produced during more natural reading conditions.

          Nevertheless, our findings have important implications for educational practice; this is because optimal
learning requires the careful matching of student type (knowledge level and reading skill) to text type (text
difficulty). Our findings suggest that sentences, or their relation to the other sections of the text, should be
challenging enough to introduce some conflict between students' current mental model and the text, which, in
turn facilitates the use of elaboration. If sentences are too easy, students do not find it necessary to elaborate; if
too difficult, they inhibit access to sources of information needed to elaborate. This notion is in accordance with
evidence that high-knowledge, inactive readers benefit most from reading relatively low-cohesion texts (O'Reilly
& McNamara, 2002; McNamara, in press). We believe that future research should explore the effect of various
text characteristics on the production of quality self-explanations in order to adequately match the reader type to
text type at much more fine grained level using various global/local attributes of the texts. We also believe that
future versions of iSTART should take into account both reader and text characteristics, and thus train students to
self-explain texts using `optimal' texts (i.e., those that encourage the production of quality self-explanations).
The challenge for McNamara and colleagues is to develop a reading strategy trainer that is adaptable to the
aptitudes of the student.

References
Chi, M. T. H., & VanLehn, K. A. (1991). The content of physics self-explanations. The Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 1, 69-105.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989).Self-explanations: How students
          study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Chi, M.   T.  H., de  Leeuw,     N., Chiu,  M.,  &  LaVancher,     C. (1994). Eliciting   self-explanations improves
          understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
deLeeuw, N. & Chi, M. T. H. (2003). The role of self-explanation in conceptual change learning. In G. Sinatra
          and P. Pinprich (Eds.). Intentional conceptual change, Erlbaum: NJ.
Einstein, G.  O., McDaniel,    M.  A.,   Owen,  P. D., &  Cote, N.  C.  (1990).   Encoding and recall of texts: The
          importance of material appropriate processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 29, 566-581.
McNamara, D. S. (2001). Reading both high-coherence and low-coherence texts: Effects of text sequence and
          prior knowledge. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology. 55, 51-62.
McNamara, D. S. (in press). SERT: Self-Explanation Reading Training. Discourse Processes.
McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning from texts: Effects of prior knowledge and text coherence.
          Discourse Processes, 22, 247-288.
McNamara, D. S., Levinstein, I. B. & Boonthum, C. (2003). iSTART: Interactive Strategy Trainer for Active
          Reading and Thinking.   Submitted to Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers.
McNamara,     D.  S., Louwerse,   M.     M. and Graesser,  A.   C. (2002).  Coh-Metrix:    Automated   cohesion  and
          coherence   scores  to predict  text readability and  facilitate comprehension.    Technical  Report,  The
          University of Memphis.
McNamara, D. S., & Scott, J. L. (1999).        Training reading strategies. Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual
       Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Oakhill, J., & Yuill, N. (1996). Higher order factors in comprehension disability: Processes and remediation. In
          C. Cornaldi  &   J. Oakhill  (Eds.),  Reading  Comprehension     Difficulties: Processes and  Intervention.
          Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
O'Reilly, T., & McNamara, D. S. (2002).        Text coherence effects: Interactions of prior knowledge and reading
          skill. Paper presented at the 43rd annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society Inc., Kansas City, MO.
O'Reilly, T., McNamara, D. S., & Sinclair, G. P. (2004). Reading Strategy Training: Automated versus Live.
          Paper presented at the AERA Conference, San Diego, California.

                                                       96
