Representing a Problem Space: Towards a Deeper Understanding of
                         the Practice of Instructional Leadership

                        Lawrence D. Brenninkmeyer, Bruce L. Sherin, & James P. Spillane
                          School of Education and Social Policy, Northwestern University
                          Annenberg Hall, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208-2610
                                      Tel: (847) 491-3927, Fax: (847) 491-8999
                                 Email: {ldb, bsherin, j-spillane}@northwestern.edu

         Abstract: Understanding how principals solve the problems they encounter in practice is a
         critical step in   improving  instructional    leadership in schools.   Traditional  approaches  to
         extracting expertise in principals are sufficient to capture some differences in behavior and
         may hint at cognitive differences, but we argue that they do not tackle differences in the
         architecture  of   the problem  space     that principals construct  when   they   are working  on
         instructional problems. Drawing on a subset of data from a larger study of 40 principals, we
         present our visual approach to understanding how principals reason through problems. We
         conclude the paper with a discussion of how our approach could be used to better understand
         the practice of instructional leadership.

Introduction
         It is clear that effective leadership is a critical factor in the academic success of schools. Several studies
have shown that principal leadership is important for promoting the school conditions that lead to improved
instructional practice and student achievement (Hallinger & Heck, 1996; Liberman, Falk, & Alexander, 1994;
Rosenholtz, 1989; Seashore-Louis & Kruse, 1995). This is despite the fact that very little is known about the way
that principals think and solve problems; cognitive research on leadership has traditionally limited itself to
studying how  a    leader's decision  making   influences   their actions and    behavior  (Green  & Mitchell, 1979;
Newmann & Wehlage, 1995; Pfeffer, 1977; Simon, 1976; Weick, 1979). Leithwood & Stager (1989) point out
that this focus on decision-making can only reveal simple cognitive structures of the `black box' that is the
principals' mind, leaving a detailed understanding of the process of how principals reason through problems
undiscovered. Leithwood & Stager tackle this problem through the use of unstructured administrative scenarios,
which were given to principals of varying expertise. They were able to draw parallels between the expert
strategies of principals working on scenarios and individuals in other domains that the problem solving literature
has studied. Leithwood and Stager found that the best scenarios for differentiating between experts and typical
principals were those that were the most unstructured or `ill-structured'. These problems are so termed because
they force one to structure the problem, as well as come up with a solution. In fact, as Simon (1973) points out,
structuring an ill-structured problem is often harder than finding the solution.

         Although Leithwood and Stager's work demonstrated that problem-solving strategies were the same
across domains and could be used to differentiate between experts and typical principals, they left room to
further unpack the `black box that is the principal's mind' (Leithwood & Stager, 1989). Their approach made
extensive use of what they called the `grounded components' of the problem, but they did not address the way
that those individual components interacted, or how they structured and populated the problem space. We may
know that principals exhibit expert problem solving skills, but we still don't know how those qualities interact to
form a problem     space that   the principal can  use   to solve  problems in   practice. One  of the ways  that we
understand this construction of a problem space is as the building, by principals, of a mental model of the world
in which they act.

         Willett Kempton's (1986) work on folk theories for heat control serve as an example to illustrate the
benefits of  such an approach. Kempton analyzed the folk models that individual's use for operating their
thermostat, revealing that what appeared to be small differences in the usage of thermostats was actually caused
by wildly differing mental models on how thermostats worked. For example, one participant believed that by
turning the heat all the way up, the thermostat would trigger the heater to a powerful level, slowing down as the

                                                         97
room temperature approached the set thermostat level. Kempton found that by asking more questions and
comparing   the thermostat  to  the oven   temperature, the  participants     would  question their own  model   and
ultimately change it. This reveals that the participants were using a rough heuristic that governed how the
thermostat worked. Upon investigation, the participants eventually realized that the heuristic didn't match other
models that they held. Kempton's work is interesting in its own right as well as for its grounded approach to
understanding how individuals perceived the problem space of using a thermostat.

          Davis & Davis (2003) recently argued that principals rely on heuristics for the better portion of their
problem solving strategies. When Kempton interviewed individuals about their actions with the thermostat, it
was evident that many of them used heuristics to get the desired temperature rather than a clear understanding of
the thermostat's functionality. We concluded that using a methodology that would reveal some of the mechanics
of those heuristics would be a great platform from which to both compare expert and typical principals as well as
to discover the content of principals' models of particular elements of instructional practice. This differentiated
our work from what had previously been done in the literature because although the literature could provide a
good understanding of the more general components of principal problem solving, it did not provide any insight
into how principals modeled the world that they operated in.

          This paper presents   an  approach  that exposes   the problem      spaces that principals generate   when
presented with instructional scenarios. It is important to note that we deviated from Kempton's approach, as we
were not interested in discoursing with the principals about their heuristics, but rather just capturing their way of
working on the scenario. We ground our approach in the data gathered from a larger study, thus immediately
testing it with relevant data. Our use of data in this paper is intended only to be illustrative of our approach. We
will not present an analysis that is refined enough to draw any general conclusions about, for example, how
typical and expert principals differ. Our conclusions focus solely on the merit of our methodology as a means of
understanding the way people reason through problems. Overall, our goal is to begin to show that our approach
to understanding  principals    thinking reveals much   more  about     their practice than other   approaches  have
previously managed. Moreover, we believe that in the future this approach could be implemented in the larger
study to rate comparisons of salient relations in the problem space.

Research Design
          The data that we analyzed for the purpose of this paper was taken from an ongoing study of 40 active
principals and 20 novice principals participating in a training program. The active principals were selected on the
basis of several leadership and organizational measures from a public-use dataset of teacher surveys. Informed
by the aforementioned literature that highlights the qualities of effective school leaders, we drew on measures of
instructional leadership and teacher-principal trust to assess leadership skill. Then, to verify that the principal
was  having an   effect on the  organization, the  organizational    measures   of  collegiality, peer collaboration,
innovation, focus on student learning, reflective dialogue, and school commitment were also assessed. Principals
who exhibited an increase in their leadership and organizational measures over several years were classified as
experts. Principals whose leadership and organizational variables were comparatively low and stayed low over
the length of their tenure were classified as `typical' principals. This dataset was then cross-referenced with
socio-economic data to match the two group's ethnic makeup and poverty rates (as measured by free and reduced
lunches).

          Interviews were conducted at the school, usually in the principals' office. To accurately capture the way
that principals structured the scenarios that they were given, the principal's response was not interrupted or `led
on' with additional questions that might artificially cause the principal to think about new elements in the
problem space. The principals were encouraged to think about the problem and respond as they saw fit. The
scenario segment of the interviews took about 20 minutes. The scenarios were preceded by questions about the
participant's background and responsibilities as principal of the school to ease the principal into the format of the
interview. After the scenarios, the principals were given a series of leadership and organizational questions.

          Since the goal of this paper is to illustrate our approach, we draw only on the data from two participants
(one expert & one typical) of this larger participant pool, as well as just the scenario segments of the interview.
The scenario that we will be analyzing in this sub-study is as follows:

                                                     98
       After your first day as principal of your school, you realize how poorly the previous school
       improvement plan was done. Apparently, the previous principal used last year's plan and
       changed   a    few paragraphs.  As the  new  instructional leader  of this building, how  do     you
       approach this situation?

All names referenced in this paper are pseudonyms to protect the research participants.

Approach
       The   new   approach    presented  here  was  developed,   in part, due  to specific  limitations    in other
approaches, developed     by earlier researchers, that we attempted   to apply.   Crudely speaking,     these  earlier
approaches work by assigning codes that are part of a category scheme to portions of a transcript. These earlier
approaches tend, for example, to attribute broad characterizations to principals. For example, they might code
portions of a particular problem-solving attempt as indicating that a principal is "focused on student learning".
However, this sort of approach failed to capture some of the most salient features of our data. Namely, we noted
that the same specific elements repeatedly showed up in principal's problems solving attempts.

       Thus, we set out to develop an approach specifically directed at capturing the problem spaces that
principals construct. As a first step in our approach, we attempted to extend the categorical coding approach in a
relatively straightforward way. We read through the data and sought to identify grounded objects in the problem
space that we saw.    Objects that the principals populated their problem space with were noted as interesting
fixtures, representing some sort of function to the principals. We tried not to prematurely look for differences but
rather just to get a feel for an accurate representation of the way that everything interacted. Soon we had a rich
ecology composed of feelers, causes, actions, and links that each served some purpose for the principal in the
solving of their scenario. For example, the following excerpt from the transcript highlights this process. A {x}
denotes the beginning of the element, and the {/x} denotes the end.  We adopted this convention from TAMS, an
open source text analysis markup language (Weinstein, 2003)

       "Well if the {object}previous principal{/object}, as you indicated, {link}was making {/link}
       little changes in what they were doing on a year to year basis certainly {cause}you need to
       do{/cause} your own {object}needs assessment{/object} to {feeler}find out{/feeler} where
       your {object}building {/object} is at the time that you arrive."

       This first step of our approach gave us what we were looking for in terms of an understanding of the
ontology of the problem space. However, we still felt that this approach, where we attempted to directly "see"
elements of the problem space in the transcript, still missed much that was important. Namely, what we were
looking for, we realized, were the `levers', that the principals mentioned in their response.    The `levers' are
elements of the problem space that give the principal some traction in solving the problem. For example, in the
excerpt above, the principal is explaining how he would begin addressing the scenario with a needs assessment.
However, our analysis does not capture the fact that the principal wants the needs assessment to be done on the
building so that he can find out "where it is".   We capture an object (a static item), a feeler (a data gathering
action), and another object, but there is no specific point in the text that reveals the connection between the three
items (the lever), and so all we can say is that there is a feeler and two objects. The relation between them that
reveals how the needs assessment is used by the principal to learn about the building is lost and is not readily
recoverable with such a coding scheme. We know the needs assessment is a lever because it is a type of tool that
the principal will use for leveraging a solution. We needed a different coding scheme that could capture the true
nature of levers in the problem space.   Furthermore, while brainstorming about the nature of these levers, we
realized that some of our elements should not really exist on their own and were necessarily compound. For
example, we came to understand feelers as specific types of levers that must necessarily have an output or datum
(in this case an understanding of the building), and ideally at least one action based on that output. By being able
to build a rule that a feeler lever must have a connected object, one or more actions, and a datum, we would be
better equipped to tease out differences in the ways that expert or typical principals constructed their problem
spaces. We did the same thing for actions, because we realized every action necessarily needed some impetus,
the action, and a target. An action lever had to have an initiator object, an action, and a target object. Feeler
levers differed from action levers in that feeler levers were focused on gathering data and action levers were

                                                     99
ways that the principal could effect change in the organization.  An added benefit that these action and feeler
levers brought was the inclusion of empty objects into the problem space. Instead of just being able to say what
a principal populated the problem space with, we could now also say what they didn't populate it with.

                                         Figure 1. An expert response.

         At the same time as discussing rules that governed what levers looked like, we were working on a
meaningful way of representing both the individual as well as the levers in the problem space, and well as the
relations between them. We wanted an approach that allowed us more latitude in making inferences, and that
allowed us to capture more of the structure of principals' mental models than a simple categorical coding. We
thus set out to represent connections graphically, thus telling a graphic story for each principals and each
scenario.   However, being a graphic    representation,   we immediately  recognized   the need to     subject the
representation to a certain number of rules that structure the look of the diagrams. Our worry was that by an
arbitrary placement of objects, things would look different but would not really be any different at the conceptual
level. We also had to make sure that the representation was useful for something other than its own sake, i.e. it
had to reveal new things that could also be compared across individuals, perhaps even individual scenarios.    To
do this we had to be careful not to connect things that we felt should be connected but were not explicitly
connected in the data or subject to our set of rules. These worries were all realized in the initial drafts, so with
each revision we added rules to standardize the output as well as to reveal in more detail, which principals were
not doing what their counterparts had. After several revisions and the adoption of a standard set of objects that
the problem space was filled with we arrived at what seemed to be a working formula, which we are still
improving upon as we work through scenarios. Figures 1 and 2 reproduce an expert and typical principal
working the scenario mentioned earlier. The full transcripts that yielded these models are included at the end of
this paper.

                                                      100
                                           Figure 2. A typical response.

         We will now discuss three viable methods for analyzing the above models. The first most obvious
method is just to look at the two models as a whole and see whether they look different. Though being quick, this
method is hampered by our decision to not systematize the location of objects (e.g. in columns) resulting in
models that may have objects placed differently but actually be the same thing. This was done intentionally so
that the lines in the model would remain uncrossed. With this caution in mind we can still use this method to see
that the `meeting' action in the expert response (Figure 1) takes a much more prominent role than the `discuss'
action in the typical response (Figure 2). In addition, we also see from this method that the expert model seems
more interconnected than the typical model, which has several weakly connected datum in the upper right.       This
brings us to a second method of assessing differences between models, doing a thorough inventory of the
individual items in the model and then comparing the counts of the two models. At first sight, this method is very
similar to the textual coding example outlined earlier in this paper because all we are doing is counting individual
elements in the model. However, the graphical representation gives us the benefit of being able to also count
connections between objects. This is problematic in the textual example as the connected objects might be at
opposite  ends of the textual response     and therefore   hard to  code  as connected     items.  In the graphical
representation, they are very clearly linked together, thus counting as a connection wherever they may be in the
text. An example of this is in the expert response where the principal initially refers to the School Improvement
Plan in the context of the budget, but then later again in the context of the meeting. This is something that would
be very hard to capture using a traditional coding method.

         The true strength of this graphical    representation   is revealed  with     an analysis focused  on the
combinations of individual elements and levers. Capturing this level of detail is practically impossible at the
lower textual level because we are incorporating both connections between elements that may be scattered all
over the response of the principal, as well as the unpopulated items that exist as part of the action and feeler
levers.  So, looking at the expert response, we see that in the top section the meeting is part of a lever to change
the school improvement plan, which via some undefined actions changes the school, the students and the budget.
Looking at the lower right hand corner, we see several feeler levers, meeting with the old principal, listening, and

                                                    101
viewing reports. Taken together, these two clumps show highly complex associations, centered on action in the
problem space of the expert. In contrast, the typical principal's feelers have connections that are, for lack of a
better description, much weaker in substance.       The typical principal does make attempts to gather input and
support like the expert principal, but the feelers link to planning goals and being supportive of the principals own
vision, rather than  specific objects such     as the budget, the  school  improvement    plan, reports, etc. This is
reminiscent of what was noticed using the previous methodology where we highlighted how the datum in the
typical model were not as integrated into the model as with the typical principal.  More insight can be had of the
expert model by looking the way that the parents are more central to the model by virtue of their attribute of
experience, their connection to the feeler lever "listen", and their connection to the meeting.      This gives us a
unique insight into how the principal perceives the different interests at the meeting.

         There may be several more ways to analyze these graphical representations, for example by looking at
the number of hops there are between students and action units, but we are not trying to exhaustively capture
each possible way slicing the model but rather the three principal methods for doing so that is useful for
understanding    the problem  space.      Nor  are we  claiming   that the differences   we  have shown    offer any
generalizable information about how expert or typical principals construct their problem spaces.      We offered the
three methods to satisfy the requirements that we set out for ourselves, namely that the new coding scheme be
something   that could  be used  as a     tool to extract quantifiable differences in   the way  that the principals
constructed their problem spaces to solve scenarios. To recap, the first method of coding using the graphical
representation is to just look and see if the models are different, the second is to count the objects or connections,
and the third is to look at the levers and the integration of those levers into the larger model.      It is the third
method that we feel best captures the nuances of the data and would be best for discriminating between expert
and typical principals on a larger scale.

Discussion
         We have argued that although other coding approaches can extract data from textual passages, they do
not preserve the subtlety of the interactions of different elements in the problem space. Nor do they account for
interactions amongst more compound elements, such as levers, with the other elements. Given this limitation, we
have detailed our approach for gaining a deeper understanding of the way that principals think through the use of
a graphic representation of the problem space.     This approach, as well as the rules and methods to extract data are
still in a refinement phase. We cannot stress enough that the strength of our approach lies not in the specific
terminology or levers within the problem space. The strength of the approach comes from its power to elucidate
the interactions between elements in the problem space. In another domain we could well imagine different
levers, different elements. However, in this domain there is a confluence of elements that allows us to orient
ourselves around particular levers (action and feeler) and other objects, so we may compare across principals
with different experience levels and still manage to extract meaningful results.

         What constitutes `meaningful results' is what we perceive to be the central critique of our approach.
Throughout the development of the graphical representation we struggled with developing a set of rules for how
to convert  text into a graphic representations.      For example,  one  struggle focused   on  whether  to sacrifice
simplicity for logical consistency. For example, when a typical principal talked about "People" and then "Staff"
followed by  `the Bandwagon' are the three objects to be left as separate, or should they be combined under the
general rule that "Staff" is a sub unit of "People" and therefore should be within it? By combining them the
model is simplified, but at the same time there are some subtleties that are being lost.    We did not successfully
arrive at a rule to govern this, so some of the models have more than one of the same units for example, "my
vision" and "my goals" in the typical example. Things must be handled on a case-by-case basis and are another
reason that the first and second methods for analyzing the data (counts) might be corrupted by a decision to
combine, or not to combine, elements.      Throughout the coding of our graphic representations, one of the things
that we struggled with was overcoming the natural tendency to simplify what was being said. It was only through
successive readings of the data and corrections of the representation that one was satisfied with the way that the
text was  represented.   This  naturally   has  implications  for how  quickly   these  models  can be   generated in
comparison to coding text.    Ultimately, the use of such a graphic representation is a tradeoff.   The approach we
have presented here allows one to capture subtleties in the connections between elements that the textual coding
scheme cannot do because the units cannot be decomposed and rearranged to form a problem space. Textual
coding essentially forces a gloss that brushes over the data and prevents us from accurately understanding the

                                                       102
problem space. Moreover, the cognitive act of building the graphic representation through successive iterations
allows one to interact much more closely with the text giving a real understanding of what was and was not said,
and so our actual understanding of the problem space was deepened just by going through the motions of
creating the graphical representation. For different theoretical models and research, it is quite conceivable that
the problem space may be irrelevant and so a textual coding will suffice. However, we argue that in order to
fully understand the practice of instructional leadership, it is necessary to be able to unpack the cognitive
elements that form a principals' problem space.

        Our  approach   to graphically  representing  reasoning would benefit       greatly from   more  research
investigating its application to different problem settings. We believe that as more research is conducted into
how individuals solve problems, the need for a coding system that captures the way that people think through the
problem space will only   grow correspondingly.    However,  we know  nothing      of how   robust such graphical
representations are across domains. Can the same representations be created for the way that individuals solve
physics or economics problems?   How do those graphical representations differ from the ones that we have
created in this paper? Are the differences more superficial in nature, or is for example the very concept and
structure of `feelers' that we have developed here not applicable in different settings? The best way forward is
for more research of this type to be conducted so that our combined efforts can help us proceed towards a
formalization of the way such graphical representations of thought are created.

Transcripts
Expert Response: Ok. Well how we did it here as far as how do we work with our school improvement plan; in
   order to give us money in the budget so that I can in-service the, well not in-service but bring in a group of
   parents, teachers, staff, community members on a Saturday. And what we did is we opened up the school.
   And at that time we tore up the SIP. And we looked at all the, I had a lot of ___ in there also by the way. But
   what we did is we looked at it and we looked at well, this is good, this is not good, this is where we want our
   school to go, this would work well with our students. And it was at that time I wasn't that knowledgeable
   about the needs of the school. I had seen the reports on the school prior to coming to the school and I knew
   where they were at, I knew where they were at according to the city and the state. But the programs they
   were involved in the school I wasn't, you know that much into because the principal did meet with me and
   we knew what was going on. But at the same time there was a change in population. There was a change in
   needs for the students. So the best way, at that time, to be able to grasp as to what the school needs was to
   listen to the people that had experience with the school; the parents and the career service (?). So that's what
   I did and I brought 'em in. it was a whole day. We had food sent in. we had coffee in the morning. We met
   as a group, we got to know each other. And with that we broke it apart and we looked at you know, this is
   working well, this is how much money we're gonna put here, we're gonna put there and so forth. And that's
   how it was done the very first year when I was here.
Typical Response: Um, well I believe I would get the staff together and discuss what my vision is, what our
   mission for the school should be and our mission of where we should be. And um, try to get their input. I
   believe in having the staff give me input; I'm not the decision maker, we do cooperative learning, leadership.
   And plan our goals, figure out what our priorities are and where we should go from there with their input.
   And also have some input from the local school council; bring them in. and sometimes people are reluctant
   for change and you know I think I have to establish where my goals are and what I envision for our school
   and our kids. And I have to see how many of those people on my staff are gonna jump on the bandwagon
   and be supportive of it. But I want them to have the input otherwise we probably wouldn't succeed in our
   vision.

References
Davis, S. H., & Davis, P. B. (2003). The Intuitive Dimensions of Administrative Decision Making. Lanham, MD:
        Scarecrow Press.
Green, & Mitchell. (1979). Attributional processes of leaders in leader-member interactions. Organizational
        Behavior & Human Decision Processes, 23, 429-458.
Hallinger, P., & Heck, R. H. (1996). Reassessing the Principal's Role in School Effectiveness. Educational
        Administration Quarterly, 32(1), 5-44.
Kempton, W. (1986). Two theories of home heat control. Cognitive Science, 10(1) Jan-Mar 1986, US, www.

                                                    103
Leithwood, K., & Stager, M. (1989). Expertise in Principals' Problem Solving. Educational Administration
       Quarterly, 25(2), 126-161.
Liberman, A., Falk, B., & Alexander, L. (1994). A culture in the making: Leadership in learner-centered
       schools. New York: National Center for Restructuring Education, Schools, and Teaching, Teachers
       College.
Newmann, F. M., & Wehlage, G. G. (1995). Successful School Restructuring: A Report to the Public and
       Educators (No. ED387925): Center on Organization and Restructuring of Schools Madison WI.
Pfeffer, J. (1977). The Ambiguity of Leadership. Academy of Management Review, 2, 104-112.
Rosenholtz, S. J. (1989). Workplace Conditions that Affect Teacher Quality and Commitment: Implications for
       Teacher Induction Programs. Elementary School Journal, 89(4), 421-439.
Seashore-Louis, K., & Kruse, S. (1995). Professionalism and community perspectives on reforming urban
       schools. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Simon, H. A. (1976). Administrative Behavior. New York: Macmillan.
Simon, H. A., & Chase, W. G. (1973). Skill in chess. American Scientist, 61(4), 394-403.
Weick, K. E. (1979). The social psychology of organizing (2d ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill Inc.
Weinstein, M. (2003). TAMS Analyzer. Retrieved November, 24th, 2003, from
       http://educ.kent.edu/~mweinste/tams/

Acknowledgements
Work on this paper is supported by the Distributed Leadership Study, (see http://www.distributedleadership.org)
funded by research grants from the National Science Foundation (REC-9873583) and the Spencer Foundation.
Northwestern University's School  of Education  and Social      Policy and Institute for   Policy Research  also
supported work on this paper. All opinions and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of any funding agency.

                                                104
