Telepedagogy: understanding collaborative telelearning
through semiotic configurations
Milton Campos
Telelearning/NCE, Sao Paulo State University

Abstract:

Computer mediated collaborative education brings new possibilities
and also difficulties to the process of teaching and learning. Some of
those new possibilities are having a broader world of information at reach
and taking advantage of written accounts of peers about different subjects
to provide us feedback to our own contributions. Some difficulties are not
having physical contact with our peers and knowing just from what they
write as an audio/video complementation of telelearning is still a
promise. As collaborative education supposes a constructive interactive
relationship between peers, and interaction means exchange of experiences,
ideas and beliefs, it seems that a new approach to communication is
important to understand computer mediated education and indicate ways to
boost its possibilities and to make a positive use of its difficulties.
   Communication science seeks to understand the production,
processing and effects of symbolic systems and explain the phenomena
associated with them (Berger and Chaffee, 1987, p.17). A constructivist
approach to communication science implies: a) the impossibility of
discussing production, processing and effects isolated one from the
others, b) that "symbolic systems" cannot be understood separately from
the subjects, groups and/or societies that produce them, process them and
produce effects on them as they are dynamic resulting semiotic
configurations intrinsically connected to their experiences and history,
and c) that semiotic configurations are always permanently being
constructed one upon each other in such a way that they always share a
part of the virtual representational space and reconstruct it, consistent
with the idea of "schematisation", the communication exchange situation
(Grize, 1990).
   Semiotic configurations are dynamic and fluid virtual
representations of subjects, groups and societies mental structures that
carry meanings produced from perceptions and symbolic objects (such as
natural language, logic, a movie, a computer software) through the mental
process of meaning implication. Meaning implication is the inferential
transfer of meanings. The resulting fluid intersection of various semiotic
configurations is always unique, changes uninterruptedly and is the site
of symbolic interaction, of communication. Communication is a
socio-psycho-biological evolutionary mechanism that propitiates the
exchange of meanings through and by the dynamics of working semiotic
configurations (Campos, 1996). The use of the term "semiotic" has nothing
to do with Peircean semiotics but is originated in the concept of
"semiotic function" that indicates the moment in the life of the child in
which she/he becomes capable of entering in the world of language (Piaget,
1976).
   Telepedagogy is the evolutionary and developmental study of
educational interaction through computers, consistent with the
communication theory of semiotic configurations. It applies for explaining
teaching and learning computer mediated processes and also providing
methods and techniques for notional as well conceptual collaborative
knowledge building. Transcript analysis assessing conditional reasoning
through the flow of meaning implications in on-line discourses of two
Virtual-U V-Groups human science courses taught at Simon Fraser
University, BC, Canada, suggest that telepedagogy is useful for
formulating transcript evaluation techniques and tools for knowledge
building in asynchronous learning environments.
