ACT: Asynchronous Collaboration Tool
Bill Dueber, Tom Duffy -- Indiana University

Keywords: Conferencing, Asynchronous, WWW

ACT (Asynchronous Collaboration Tool) is a WWW-based asynchronous conferencing
tool designed to support the small-group problem-solving process. Created to be used as a
research tool in the study of asynchronous communication in an online (potentially
distributed) environment, ACT's design reflects an attempt to (a) appropriately support the
real-world communication needs of small groups in volved in critical inquiry, and (b)
encourage deep thinking about the structure and validity of a growing discussion/argument
through various forms of reflection and organization.

Our observations of groups involved in Problem-Based Learning (PBL)  scenarios suggest
a need to support two separate organizations of information. First is the conversation, a
temporally-organized interaction which closely resembles unmoderated face-to-face
interaction. Conversations place a value on speed, a sense of moving the conversation
forward, relevant anecdotes, and a holistic assessment of the problem and serve as an
appropriate forum for brainstorming, problem definition, socializing/synergy-building, and
exploratory interactions. Lengthy focus on a specific issue, though, is difficult. Issue-
based discussion takes place in conferences organized hierarchically (in an outline form).
This provides not only the structures necessary to conduct topic-by-topic exploration, but
affords students the opportunity to easily track the history of discussion on an individual
issue.

Besides offering two separate "types" of conference organization, ACT encourages
reflective activities in several ways. First, the hierarchical structure itself forces a user to
ask herself, "Where, if anywhere, does this post most appropriately fit?" Second, all posts
in the hierarchical conferences are given labels indicating the nature of the message, such as
Question, Hypothesis, Data, Opinion, etc. Even posts in a conversation can be flagged as a
summary.

By exploiting the separate structures and encouraging reflection and periodic re-assessment
of the ongoing discussion, we hope to provide opportunities for better communication
between team members, better archiving of peer interaction for assessment purposes, and a
more pedagogically-sound communication medium for students.
