                  Zebu: WWW-based Educational Groupware

                       Esther L. Tiessen & Douglas R. Ward

                                   MC2 Learning Systems Inc.

                                     Simon Fraser University

                                      Burnaby BC Canada

    A major goal of the ALiVE! (Active Learning in Virtual Environments) Project is to design

and develop network-based tools that support teachers and students in collaborative project-based

learning. Zebu is a web-based educational groupware application which allows teachers and

students to create, publish, and participate in interactive, online projects both in their classrooms

and around the world. The development of Zebu has been a joint venture between members of the

ALiVE! Project research team at Simon Fraser University and MC2 Learning Systems, Inc.

    In this demonstration, we would like to demonstrate the Zebu software and highlight three of

our design goals for the software:

1. take advantage of networked technologies to support communication, cooperation, and

collaboration within one seamless environment.

    Zebu, provides project structures for sharing student work, embedded discussion facilities,

shared reference collections of information resources, and shared collections of multimedia

components for students to use in constructing their own representations.

2. support progressive discourse, in which students are engaged in sustained activities that build

on the work that students have already done.

    With Zebu, students have ongoing access to representations of their own work and that of

their peers, and can build on these representations in ongoing activities.
3. provide teachers with a flexible environment in which they design a learning environment for

their students.

    In Zebu, teachers can create project structures to coordinate student activities, templates to

scaffold students' construction of representations, and collections for information resources for

students to access for their own constructive work.

    As part of the demonstration, examples of student and teacher work will be shown.
