                  POLARIS: The first impressions
                                        by
                       Frans Ronteltap and Anneke Eurelings

Department of Educational Development and Research, Universiteit Maastricht,
P.O. Box 616,
6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands

F.Ronteltap@educ.unimaas.nl
A.Eurelings@educ.unimaas.nl

    In the POLARIS-project at the University of Maastricht a new developed groupware
application will be tested in two curricula (Medicine and Law) in the coming curriculum
year 1997-1998. At this CSCL-conference in Toronto the application will be demonstrated
and the first results of the experiments will be discussed.

    The first step in the development of the POLARIS-application was a comprehensive
analysis by a survey among students and teachers of the learning activities in the two
curricula. The results of this study, in combination with a review of experiences with
electronic learning environments elsewhere as well as a review of relevant learning
theories, were the input for the formulation of the user requirements of POLARIS. The
second step was the development of the functional design and the prototype. The project
team tested several versions of the prototype with two user groups (teachers and students)
and the findings in these tests were used for the development of the experimental version
that will be demonstrated. The application is developed in Lotus Notes (4.5) and supports
two elements that are essential for the practice of problem based learning in Maastricht:

    1. Support of searching, processing and saving of information. In self directed
learning students regularly perform these activities after the definition of their learning
issues. The system contains all necessary tools (word processor, concept mapping tools,
databases, Internet-browser, etc.) to support these activities.

    2. Support of group collaboration. Students submit their contribution in a shared
group environment where peers can read and comment their input. The results of this
collaborative activities can be transmitted to a personal database for later use.

    One of the features of POLARIS that was given special attention in the development
is the support of reflection in collaborative learning. The software contains a range of
merge functions by which users can create aggregative views of the results of peer
interactions (discussion threads, reports by keyword or learning issue, questions +
answers, etc.) which can be used for reflection.

    In the poster presentation the software will be demonstrated and a summary of the
results in the first experiment in the regular curriculum (october - november) will be
discussed.
