Children Collaborating in Making Movies Using Computer
Based Multimedia--Multimedia Summer Camp Revisited
Ilona Posner, Ronald Baecker, Stephen Poplar, and Marci Becker
ilona@dgp.toronto.edu rmb@dgp.toronto.edu Steve_Poplar@tednet.oise.utoronto.ca
mbecker@interlog.com

   In the summer of 1996, we studied children who were learning how to make movies
using multimedia authoring tools.     We conducted a within subjects experiment, observing
8 groups of seventh grade students working for one week   under the supervision of high
school age counselors. The students used two different software packages to make two
different movies.
   This experiment demonstrated that students, given adequate support, can quickly
learn to use the technology and can make their first movie in as little as 5 hours. When we
focused on the quality of their movies and on the moviemaking process, we discovered
great variability in these areas. Learning  effect was great, the second movies were
significantly better than the first. More time spent in the idea development led to movies of
higher quality. Counselors' interaction and constructive criticism had significant effect on
the movie quality.
   In the summer of 1997, we returned to the Multimedia Camp and         attempted to
improve the process using our experience. We decide to use one software package, Movie
Authoring and Design (MAD) software, which has strong     support for scripting and
multiple views of media documents. MAD enables students to proceed from
brainstorming, to script writing, to compiling their movies, and editing the digitized video,
using one integrated package. We chose to have the students focus on making one movie
of high quality during their week at the camp. In the first year, we wanted to see what
students would  create with very little guidance; they were given the freedom to choose
topics, guide the moviemaking process, and determine the desired quality of their    movies.
The resulting movies were extremely varied and included many violent plots. This year,
we decided to provide more guidance including a list of movie topics, and feedback during
the moviemaking concerning the process and product     quality.
   This poster will present the early results of our second experience with children
learning to create movies using multimedia software. We will focus particularly on
observations about the role of collaborative work and learning  in the filmmaking process.
We will discuss the effects of a more structured pedagogically focused approach.     We will
compare the quality of the movies and the overall experience of the students during these
multimedia summer camps.   We will provide advice about replicating such projects and for
application of this technology into school curriculum.
   This poster will be accompanied by a demonstration of the MAD software. Attendees
will be able to try the software using sample movies, including those   created by the
students at the summer camp.

References:

AERA, 1997.     Ronald Baecker, Ilona Posner, Isabel Jevans, Bruce Homer, Andrew
   Cohen, and Steven Poplar (1997). A Study of Children Learning to Create Motion
   Pictures. American Educational Research Association Annual Meeting, March 1997,
   Chicago, IL, USA.

ED-Media, 1997.    Ilona Posner, Ronald Baecker, and Bruce Homer (1997).      Children
   Learning Filmmaking Using Multimedia Tools. Electronic Proceedings of ED-
   Media/ED-Telecom Conference, June 1997, Calgary, AL, Canada.
CHI, 1996. Naomi Friedlander, Ronald Baecker, Alan Rosenthal, and Eric Smith
(1996). MAD: A Movie Authoring and Design System. Demonstration in
Companion to the Proceedings of CHI '96, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
