              Poster/demo proposal submitted at the Program Committee of the
              Meeting of the Computer Support for Collaborative Learning '97
           Ontario Institute for Studies in Education/University of Toronto, Canada
                                     December 10-14, 1997

TeleLearning and Interconnected Learning Communities

Members of The TeleLearning Network of Centres of Excellence, funded in September 1995
through the Social Science Research Council of Canada, will present the social structures of
interconnected learning communities growing out of well-established partnerships, learning
activities, and social interactions involving high school learners, student teachers, teachers,
and  teacher  educators.  Applied    to  the education    of  educators,   the notion  of learning
community stresses the importance that the entire communication process (between students,
between  schools,  between      undergraduates    already linked    to different schools, between
undergraduates   and  teachers   or university    supervisors   and  professors, etc.) constitute   a
system dominated by complementary, knowledge building and common sharing, creating
therefore an environment imbued with continuous transformation.            The research question of
"How   can  telelearning  tools  contribute    to the creation    of functional  and   collaborative
communities of practice?" is being investigated.     The websites TACT and Virtual U support
these collaborative activities.

Social  interactions are clustered   along   a progressive      continuum,  which   goes  from     the
transmission of information in traditional teaching-learning settings to computer-supported
social interaction between learners : i) information, ii) cooperation, iii) coordination, and
iv) integration.  For   instance,  the  Coordination   cluster    regroups  interactions  where    1)
teachers and  teacher   educators   co-plan, and   co-supervise   student   teachers'  activities; 2)
Student teachers coordinate through face-to-face and on-line interactions their searches of
relevant web sites, and lesson plans; 3) joint professional development activities for associate
teachers and/or teacher educators on the use of new technologies for learning and teaching are
occurring.

At  each site (Laval  &  McGill),    the value    of building   a learning   community    is highly
recognized.   Working    documents   specify   the   value system      and key   ideas of a   fully-
functioning learning community. They are meant to create images of the vision, and to
facilitate the coordination of the activities occurring at each location as we design each of our
unique and interconnected learning communities.

On  the  content level,  integrative curriculum      activities are  sought. The   emphasis   is   on
knowledge building. Knowledge building constitutes the aim of the whole TeleLearning
Program. Rooted in a vision that forging and participating in these new community links is in
itself an active engagement in the construction and testing of one's         own   knowledge,      the
actual learnings, in general, take shape or form through itineraries or projects which have a
certain scope and which call upon some expertise in the area of varieties of knowledge,
particularly of a fundamental nature and of skills of all kinds.

Presenters    :  Thérèse Laferrière, School of Education, Laval University, Ste-Foy, Que,
Canada, G1K 7P4, 1-418-656-2131 (5480), tlaf@fse.ulaval.ca; Alain Breuleux & Robert
Bracewell,  Faculty  of  Education,    3 700   McTavish,   McGill      University, Montreal,  Que,
Canada, H3A 1Y2, 1-514-398-4240, ed13@musica.mcgill.ca

Keywords : Networks developments, Collaboration and conceptual change, Tools to
support teaching in collaborative settings
