Lines We Trace: Comparing Data Displays to Support Youth Sailing
                    Katherine Chapman, Vanderbilt University, k.chapman@vanderbilt.edu
             Ben Rydal Shapiro, Georgia Institute of Technology, benjamin.shapiro@cc.gatech.edu

        Abstract: This submission to the special interactive session aims to develop testable design
        conjectures for a design-based research project involving a youth sailing camp. Youth sailing
        involves intensely immersive embodied experiences in boats, but also reflection on broader
        principles and processes. Coordinating between these two levels is often difficult for youth,
        particularly  over  a  short time  frame  in  an  interest-driven environment.     We   present two
        existing tools  that  we  believe  have  the  potential to bridge   this difficult  conceptual  and
        motivational   gap,  but involve   very different epistemological   hurdles.  Using   both  existing
        footage of the tools in action and interactive reworking, we hope to collaborate with other
        participants to further specify the affordances and constraints of these tools, and potentially
        more effectively hybridize them toward our curricular goals.

Overview and background
This interactive session will contrast the affordances of two existing tools--GoPro's latest "gauge" displays,
and Re-Shape (developed by the second author)--in the context of youth learning to sail small boats. Our
purpose is to consider the potential for each tool to contribute to youth's development along two related lines: 1)
coordinating between their experiences in boats and the birdseye view typical of sailing instruction, and 2)
considering broader principles of sailing and design.
        The first author is in the initial phases of a design study (Cobb et al., 2003) during which she identified
a general conception of the "no go zone" as a persistent problem of practice in youth sailing camps. Essentially,
the "no go zone" is the range of orientations toward the wind at which it is impossible to sail. During a pilot
session, students struggling with this concept were shown video of themselves sailing and asked to think about
what they could tell from the video and in particular from the GPS-enabled gauges that show speed and cardinal
direction. Preliminary analysis suggests that this task helped students coordinate between their experiences in
the boats and   the birdseye  representations   that sailors frequently use to   illustrate the points  of   sail. This
coordination appeared   to  be more   salient for the   focal student and   suggests  both   that  highly    interactive
technology is useful in this domain, and that more work is needed to facilitate coordination between first-person
embodied experiences of sailing and group-level processes.
        The second author, by contrast, has done significant work in recent years developing and piloting Re-
Shape, which allows students to use GPS data to visualize their movements in space-time and compare these to
their peers' movements, as well as to aggregate data from other sources (Shapiro, 2017). This tool grew out of
work with museum professionals (Shapiro, Hall, & Owens, 2017), and has been used in classes with pre-service
Social Studies teachers to help students think about their patterns of movement in relation to demographic
information as arranged on a city grid.

Theoretical framing
This presentation draws from and contributes to a growing body of work looking at what researchers are calling
"learning on the move" (Marin & Bang, 2015; Marin, 2013; Radinsky et al., 2008; Silvis et al., 2018; Taylor,
2017; Taylor & Hall, 2013). This term helps to organize a diverse body of work that seeks to both describe how
people learn by moving through the physical environment, and use these descriptions to help design learning
activities that require such movement. Notably, much of this research has been made possible by the steady
development  of  mobile  and   location-aware   technologies,   which provide    the capacity   to geo-locate   media
collected by learners as well as to generate location data for and about learners' activities. For example, this
body of work encompasses theoretical and empirical work that frames learning as place-based and mobile
(Danish et al.,  2015; Enyedy    et  al., 2015;  Lindgren,   2015; Taylor,  2017;    Zimmerman      et  al., 2016)   or
characterizes learning as the process by which people "make places" to pursue their own interest-driven learning
as they move through physical environments rich with meaning potential (Leander et al., 2010). Furthermore, it
also encompasses efforts to design experiences in urban environments where relations between people and the
designed environment are in question (Dennis, 2006; Elwood & Mitchell, 2013), study everyday practices in
forested areas or nature parks where relations between people and animals, ground, water or air are the focus of
learning (Marin & Bang, 2015; Marin, 2013), and look at technologically mediated activities such as mobile
story telling (Farmen, 2014; Sakr et al., 2016) and simulations organized as games (Squire & Klopfer, 2007).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   1009                                                    © ISLS
Implicit and explicit epistemological orientations
Traditional youth sailing instruction is an intensely collaborative, hands-on activity. Unlike many classroom
structures where youth are expected to listen to detailed instructions ahead of time and then execute once before
moving on to the next topic, sailing is understood to be a personal, embodied learning experience--there's only
so much that can be achieved through talking, sailing has to be performed and practiced. Even so, a certain
amount   of   instruction happens  outside  of the boats,  sometimes    to ensure    safety and   collaboration, and
sometimes in an effort to make connections to broader principles of sailing. The technological tools presented in
this interactive demonstration have the potential to help bridge the gulf between broader principles or group-
level coordination and individual performance in small boats, but each has its own affordances that influence its
implicit epistemological position.
         Much like sailing instruction, action cameras such as the GoPro are frequently used to capture an
individual's experiences, which can later be shared with an audience on reviewing. While working with friends
(or using technological innovations like drones) can allow for more traditional cinematography, most action
camera footage is shot either from a first-person perspective (e.g. mounted on a helmet) or first-person-adjacent
(e.g. a selfie stick that captures the subject's face or shoulder along with the close-tied footage). The new system
of gauges provides a birdseye record by including a location trace and average speed over time. Still, the
dominant cultural assumption is that videos are meant to be watched as they are displayed (in real time, or sped
up if edited for timelapse). The GoPro footage with coordinated gauges thus shares significant epistemological
orientations  with  traditional sailing instruction--the  main action   is an individual    experience that  can  be
explained to others later, but never quite experienced or shared by those not present during the original event.
         The Re-Shape tool, by contrast, emphasizes the group-level processes; while individual GPS traces
constitute the most salient data, the focus of the tool is on the aggregate, and on comparisons between group-
level aggregate data and imported data displays (such as city-level demographic information). Furthermore, the
tool is built to be manipulated,   rather than simply watched.    Thus, use   of the  tool  is a creative experience
implying an active epistemological stance to a productive investigative activity, rather than the passive reception
of an imperfect copy of an earlier experience. This tool thus offers the potential for an experience with the
broader principles of sailing that is on its face far removed from traditional sailing instruction, but ultimately
shares epistemological assumptions behind the curricular decision to just put kids in boats.

Specific commonalities and differences
Both tools involved in this demonstration are aimed at helping students to coordinate between their first-person
experiences and a representation of those experiences over time. In the case of the GoPro gauges, the individual
camera is coordinated with a birdseye representation of the location and speed over time (see figure 1); in the
case of the coordinated multi-angle video, the placement of two of the cameras also adds to the coordination
between ego view and birdseye view (see figure 2); in the case of the Re-Shape tool, the first person account is
less explicit (i.e. there is no ego-view footage, only the GPS trace; see figure 3).
         Both tools also make some effort toward coordinating individual traces with broader phenomena. In the
case of the Re-Shape tool, individual GPS traces are visible on a map over which other individual traces can be
overlaid. The map itself can also include relevant large-scale data displays--in the case of the social studies
class, demographic data from the city was included to illustrate a curricular point. With the gauges, more of the
work of coordinating with broader phenomena is left to the user--the gauges include a trace of the average
speed, and a GPS trace over time, but there is little scaffolding to coordinate these even with each other, let
alone with geography or wind, which are the curricular goals.
         Finally, while in both cases the user is able to move through space-time as represented in the tool--
either by scrolling the video or by manipulating what data are displayed--the Re-Shape tool is specifically
designed to invite this kind of reworking of the data display, whereas the GoPro gauges are simply an add-on to
video, which is often read by users as a passive display.

Table 1: Major design features of each tool (see figures 1­3 for illustrations).

Design feature        Conjectured               GoPro Gauges            GoPro Gauges w/          Re-Shape tool
                      contribution to           alone (figure 1)        coordinated              (figure 3)
                      learning                                          display (figure 2)
GPS trace             help establish third-     upper left corner       upper right corner       main display
                      person perspective &
                      continuity over time

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   1010                                                   © ISLS
First-person view     make explicit            none                 secondary displays     none
                      connections to first-
                      hand embodied
                      experiences
Coordination          help coordinate          none                 tertiary display of    secondary display
with other data       between first-hand                            static map             (e.g. demographic
sources               experience and group-                                                data) integrated
                      level processes                                                      into main display
Invites               provoke exploratory      less apparent        less apparent          major goal of tool
manipulation          epistemological
                      stance (vs. typical
                      "received"
                      knowledge)

    Figure 1 (left). Screenshot of top-down boat-level video showing GPS displays, as shown to students.
Figure 2 (right). Screenshot of coordinated video from three cameras (and a static chart) showing GPS displays.

 Figure 3. Screenshot from Re-Shape tool (top and right) with still of pre-service Social Studies teachers (left).
                       Full demonstration available at https://youtu.be/H8vd_HX9RVs.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  1011                                                © ISLS
Next steps
The aim of this interactive demonstration is to generate testable design conjectures, whether from existing tools
or novel hybridizations (or novel tools). Given that we intend to approach this problem with youth, we are
hoping to think through some of the assumptions and potential stumbling blocks with colleagues and potential
collaborators before we iterate in practice with young sailors.

References
Brown,   A.  (1992).    Design  experiments:    Theoretical and   methodological    challenges  in  creating  complex
         interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Cobb,   P., Confrey,   J., DiSessa,  A., Lehrer,   R., & Schauble,  L.   (2003). Design   experiments   in educational
         research. Educational researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Danish,  J.A.  et  al. (2015).  Science  Through    Technology   Enhanced    Play:  Designing   to Support  Reflection
         Through    Play   and  Embodiment.     In S.  Ludvigsen  &   O. Lindwall   (Eds.),  Proceedings   of the 11th
         International     Conference   on Computer     Supported  Collaborative    Learning.   Gothenburg,   Sweden:
         International Society of the Learning Science.
Dawson, E., & Jensen, E. (2011). Towards a contextual turn in visitor studies: Evaluating visitor segmentation
         and identity-related motivations. Visitor Studies, 14(2), 127-140.
Elwood, S., & Mitchell, K. (2013). Another politics is possible: Neogeographies, visual spatial tactics, and
         political  formation.     Cartographica:  The   International   Journal for  Geographic     Information   and
         Geovisualization, 48(4), 275-292.
Enyedy, N., Danish, J.A., and DeLiema, D. (2015). Constructing liminal blends in a collaborative augmented-
         reality  learning   environment.  International  Journal  of Computer-Supported     Collaborative    Learning,
         10(1), 7-34.
Farman, J. (Ed.). (2013). The mobile story: Narrative practices with locative technologies. Routledge.
Hawkins, J., & Pea, R. D. (1987). Tools for bridging the cultures of everyday and scientific thinking. Journal
         for Research in Science Teaching, 24, 291-307.
Howe, A. C. (1996). Development of science concepts within a Vygotskian framework. Science Education,
         80(1), 35-51.
Leander, K.M., Phillips, N.C.       and Taylor, K.H. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping new
         mobilities. Review of Research in Education, 34, 329-394.
Lindgren, R. (2015). Getting into the cue: Embracing technology-facilitated body movements as a starting point
         for learning. In V. R. Lee (Ed.), Learning technologies and the body: Integration and implementation in
         formal and informal learning environments (pp. 39e54). New York, NY: Rutledge.
Marin,  A.  M.   (2013).   Learning  to  attend and    observe: Parent-child meaning   making   in  the  natural world
         (Doctoral dissertation, Northwestern University).
Marin, A., & Bang, M. (2015). Designing pedagogies for Indigenous science education: Finding our way to
         storywork. Journal of American Indian Education, 54(2), 29-51.
Radinsky, J., Loh, B. & Lukasik, J. (2008) "GIS tools for historical inquiry: Issues for classroom-centered
         design," Journal of the Association of History and Computing, v.XII(2).
Sakr, M.,   Jewitt, C., &    Price, S. (2016).  Mobile  experiences   of historical place: A  multimodal   analysis  of
         emotional engagement. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25, 51­92.
Shapiro, B. R. (2017, May). Using Space Time Visualization in Learning Environment Design. In Proceedings
         of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 178-
         183). ACM.
Shapiro,    B. R.,  Hall,  R.  P.,  &  Owens,   D.  A.  (2017).  Developing   &    using interaction geography    in a
         museum. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(4), 377-399.
Silvis, D.,  Taylor,   K.H.   & Stevens,   R.   (2018). Community     technology    mapping:  inscribing places   when
         "everything is on the move". International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning.
Squire, K., & Klopfer, E. (2007). Augmented reality simulations on handheld computers. The journal of the
         learning sciences, 16(3), 371-413.
Taylor, K. H. (2017). Learning along lines: Locative literacies for reading and writing the city. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 26(4), 533-574.
Taylor, K.   H.,  &    Hall, R. (2013).  Counter-mapping    the   neighborhood   on   bicycles: Mobilizing    youth  to
         reimagine the city. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18(1-2), 65-93.
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language (A. Kozulin, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Zimmerman, H. T., Land, S. M., Maggiore, C., Ashely, R. W. & Millet, C. (2016). Designing outdoor learning
         spaces with iBeacons: Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference for the Learning Sciences.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      1012                                                  © ISLS
