Mission HydroSci: Meeting Learning Standards Through Gameplay
                            James Laffey, University of Missouri, laffeyj@missouri.edu
                          Joseph Griffin, University of Missouri, griffinjg@missouri.edu
                         Justin Sigoloff, University of Missouri, sigoloffj@missouri.edu
             Troy Sadler, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, sadlert@missouri.edu
                              Sean Goggins, University of Missouri, s@goggins.com
                        Andrew Womack, University of Missouri, womacka@missouri.edu
                          Eric Wulff, University of Missouri, epwr38@mail.missouri.edu
                            Sean Lander, University of Missouri, landers@missouri.edu

       Abstract:      Mission  HydroSci  (MHS)  teaches   water   systems and   scientific argumentation
       towards       meeting Next  Generation Science   Standards.   MHS  is a  game-based    3D virtual
       environment      for  enacting transformational role-playing, wherein  students must   learn new
       knowledge and competencies in order to successfully complete the game missions. MHS was
       developed for middle school science as a replacement unit of about 6 to 8 hours and uses
       analytics and a teacher dashboard to help support teachers support their students.

Introduction
Mission HydroSci (MHS) is a game-based 3D virtual environment for teaching and learning key concepts and
knowledge of water systems as well as building competencies in scientific argumentation in ways that support
meeting Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). Meeting these new science education goals for middle
school students requires rich learning contexts for exploring substantive science ideas through engagement in
scientific practices. Our goal is to meet these educational goals for all learners by using online learning to serve
those in distance education and rural communities as well as more traditional and wellresourced classrooms, and
to use gaming to engage and support students who typically do not see themselves as successful science learners.
       MHS is a research and development project funded by grants from the U.S. Department of Education.
The grant support has enabled a team of researchers, science educators, learning and game designers, creative arts
professionals and software developers to build MHS through an iterative process. The process started with
envisioning a powerful fit between emerging technological capabilities and the requirements of teaching and
learning to NGSS. Next came conceptualizing a complete system to engage and teach students a robust curriculum
and then building and testing each component of the system. The building and testing process has included
prototyping, creating design documents, such as requirements specifications and storyboards and building initial
versions which then can be taken to usability testing and further refined. Once we felt a substantial portion of
MHS  was playable      and   met our  requirements specifications  for teaching and learning   activities through
implementation of the curriculum as a game, we conducted usage testing in live classrooms. The usage testing
taught us about the practical challenges of using a game in classrooms as well as identifying many areas of
gameplay that needed improvement.      Our intention and obligation to the funding sources is to undertake a field
test using a randomized control trial (RCT) to rigorously evaluate the impact of MHS game play. The RCT will
be undertaken in Winter, 2019. However, to test the feasibility of conducting a large field test in classrooms we
undertook a feasibility field test in the Spring of 2018. This report and showcase describes MHS and presents
some insights about the use of MHS in classrooms from interviews with 12 teachers who participated in the 2018
feasibility testing.

Rationale for MHS
While MHS is a research project with goals of understanding and testing the potential impacts of a gameplay
approach on teaching and learning and of developing gameplay strategies that map to teaching and learning
approaches, it is also a product development project aspiring to build a game that middle school science teachers
will use to meet important learning objectives in their science curriculum in ways that align with the NGSS. MHS
targets general and earth science courses by meeting learning objectives for understanding water systems and
building competencies in scientific argumentation. The MHS game provides an active learning environment for
meeting these learning objectives by engaging students in a narrative about needing to investigate water resources
and use scientific argumentation to complete missions critical to the survival and accomplishments of the members
of their scientific enterprise. The enterprise is set on an earth-like planet in the future as the science cadets (our
player and a set of non-player characters who serve as guides, partners and sometimes antagonists) explore

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   1017                                                 © ISLS
mysteries and prepare for survival on the planet. Along with the narrative gameplay MHS includes learning
progressions for water systems science and scientific argumentation, a visually exciting environment, substantial
interaction and feedback, and applies transformational role-playing as an approach to integrate learning within
gameplay.
       The theory of transformational play (Barab, Gresfali & Ingram-Goble, 2010) shows how specific design
strategies can optimize the potential of games and gameplay to lead to desired learning outcomes. The design
strategies to enact transformational play include the student taking on the role of a protagonist, who must use
subject matter knowledge to make decisions and take action during play, and having these actions and decisions
transform the problem-based situation. In turn the student's understanding of the subject matter is transformed
and so is the student's identity. Virtualization and role-playing experiences in MHS are intended to make realistic
actions possible and bring about the consequences of actions to dynamically impact the world and the learner.
       Building competence with scientific practices, such as scientific argumentation, requires learning a
progression of competencies, thus multiple practice settings and iteration with feedback must be provided. The
game experience helps sustain the student through the many activities as well as makes it OK and natural to fail
and try again. MHS is a first person narrative adventure with a sustained learning experience of 6 to 8 hours of
instructional time for gameplay and 1 to 2 hours of supplementary classroom or discussion board activity for the
teacher to clarify, supplement, and extend the learning from the gameplay.

Game Play

Unit 1
Unit 1 introduces students to (1) gameplay including game controls, characters and narrative, (2) scientific
argumentation as a process of using evidence to judge between competing claims and (3) the argumentation engine
that will be used to conduct arguments during game play. The design task of unit 1 is to help the player get off to
a good start, but also to set the stage for engaging at one's own pace, so as to learn how to succeed in the game
and not just to move through the game. The tutorial nature of the starting tasks are counter balanced by interesting
and fun visuals, learning about interesting NPC characters, and an exciting start to the game.
       The unit starts with the player awakening on a space station orbiting an alien but earth-like planet. The
player is introduced to ARF who will be an assistant for the player's exploration and activities. ARF is presented
as a buddy, given an avatar of a dog, and a high form of artificial intelligence to assist the player. The player also
meets Dr. Toppo who is the mission leader and sets up challenges for the player throughout the game. After
learning some basics of how to navigate and play MHS as well as being introduced to other NPC's and tools to
be used throughout the game, the space-craft if rocked with an explosion and our player must escape the station
and fly to the alien planet.

                Figure 1. Meeting Dr. Toppo and ARF on the spacecraft and the explosion.

Unit 2
Unit 2 teaches players about topography and using a topographic map as well as understanding watershed and
how the relative size of the watershed is related to the amount of water flowing through it. After crash landing on
the alien planet our player practices some of the skills they learned in unit 1 while collecting scrap to repair a
broken hoverboard and tracking down the communication equipment which they will need to move rapidly on the
large terrain and find the rest of their team. In order to find the team they must use a topographic map and respond

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   1018                                                © ISLS
to clues and feedback framed using topographic terminology. Once they have located the team, our player is
assigned the task of finding which watershed is larger and thus best for setting up the base camp for the expedition.
After traveling to key waterfalls and gathering evidence our player engages in an argument where she must use
evidence to support the claim of which watershed is largest.

          Figure 2. Finding the team and reaching the waterfall to collect data about watersheds.

Unit 3
Unit 3 teaches about surface water with the learning objectives of having the player be able to predict the spread
of a dissolved material through a watershed and identify the direction of water flow based on a map of a watershed.
This is enacted narratively through one of the NPCs, Sam, who needs to set up her camp but her supplies are
scattered all over the terrain. Our player must find the supplies and figure out which waterways to use in order to
float them back to Sam's camp. Upon completing the task, our player returns to the base only to find that Sam's
base is polluted and she asks our player to solve what's causing the pollution by tracing the source of the pollution.
The player does this by throwing sensors into the nearby river and eventually will find wreckage from the space
station explosion. Our player works their way up the river and then must create a good argument using reasoning
to connect evidence with a claim in order to get the pollutant removed. Next, our player discovers that the aliens
had left irrigation devices to support growing food in gardens, which will be extremely important for the success
of the expedition. Unfortunately, the pumps are old and need to be replaced. By succeeding at solving the first of
the dungeon-like puzzles the player unlocks new pumps and then must use their knowledge of surface water flow
to pick which irrigation systems to restart.

  Figure 3. Sam telling you that the crate was tossed in the wrong river and tossing sensor in river to collect
                                   evidence for finding the pollution.

Next Steps
As noted in the introduction, the MHS team is planning a substantial field test of MHS for the winter/spring of
2019. To reach the field test we have prioritized several objectives. First, we need to achieve technical soundness,
optimization to perform on as low a performance computer as possible, and clear direction for what systems will

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   1019                                                © ISLS
work. Second, improvements across a range of quests and tasks to better achieve learning outcomes. Third, making
argumentation a better fit to the rest of the gameplay and providing support for students who are likely to struggle
with the competencies. Finally, support for low readers by adding audio for dialog, low experience gamers by
adding better feedback, clearer graphics, more tutorials and simplifying some game mechanisms and activities, as
well as support for high gamers by enriched graphics and rewards and side quests. More information about MHS
can be found at MHS.missouri.edu or by contacting the authors.

References
Barab, S., Gresfali, M. & Ingram-Goble. A. 2010. Transformational play using games to position person, content
       and context. Educational Researcher 39, 7 (2010), 525-536.
Griffin, J., Kim, S. M., Sigoloff, J., Sadler, T. D., & Laffey, J. (2016, August). Designing scientific argumentation
       into Mission HydroSci. Proceedings of the Games + Learning + Society Conference. Madison, WI
Laffey, J., Sadler, T., Goggins, S., Griffin, J. & Babiuch, R. (2015). Mission HydroSci: Distance Learning through
       Game-Based     3D Virtual Learning  Environments.    In Russell,   D. & Laffey,  J. (Eds.), Handbook  of
       Research  on    Gaming  Trends   in P-12   Education.    (pp.    421-441).   Hershey,  PA:   IGI  Global.
       doi:10.4018/9781-4666-9629-7
Laffey, J., Griffin, J., Babiuch, R., Sigoloff, J., Kim, S. M., Sadler, T. D., & Goggins, S. (2016, August). Mission
       HydroSci: Designing   a   game for next generation    science    standards. Proceedings of  the Games +
       Learning + Society Conference. Madison, WI.
NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: The
       National Academies Press.
Osborne, J., Henderson, B., MacPherson, A., & Szu, E. (2013). Building a learning progression for argument in
       science. Paper presented at the annual conference of the American Educational Research Association
       Conference, San Francisco, CA.
Shulman (Eds.), Issues in education research: Problems and possibilities (pp. 399-409). San Francisco: Jossey-
       Bass Publishers.
Hawkins, J., & Pea, R. D. (1987). Tools for bridging the cultures of everyday and scientific thinking. Journal for
       Research in Science Teaching, 24, 291-307.
Lave, J. (1987). Cognition in practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgements
The work described herein is supported by the US Department of Education's Institute of Education Sciences
(R305A150364) and Investing in Innovation (i3) program (U411C140081). The ideas expressed are those of our
project team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funders.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 1020                                                  © ISLS
