 The Power of a Network Analysis Tool for Collaborative Learning
Haesol Bae, Kalani Craig, Joshua Danish, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Suraj Uttamchandani, Maksymilian Szostalo,
                                              and Ann McCranie
           haebae@iu.edu, craigkl@indiana.edu, jdanish@indiana.edu, chmelosi@indiana.edu,
                    suttamch@indiana.edu, mszostal@indiana.edu, amccrani@indiana.edu
                                              Indiana University

       Abstract: Net.Create is an open source network analysis software tool that affords simultaneous
       data-entry and network analysis to help students collaboratively co-construct knowledge about
       a large corpus of data. In this interactive demo, we demonstrate how the tool uniquely supports
       collaboration    at both the small and large group    level in a big  lecture format to facilitate
       discovery, discussion, and reading comprehension in an interactive and engaging way.

Introduction
The Net.Create tool aims to bring the power of network analysis into university humanities classrooms to support
student engagement and collaborative learning. Network analysis is increasingly seen as a powerful computational
tool for making sense of big data sets that seek to describe the large network of interdependencies created by the
overlap of many localized small networks. Net.Create is an open-source network-analysis software tool that
affords simultaneous data-entry, network visualization and analysis to help students collaboratively co-construct
knowledge about the text they are representing as a network. Though Net.Create was originally developed
specifically for use in history instruction, it can be useful in any context where simultaneous or team-based
network data entry is needed. The tool supports students as they enter information about actors (e.g., people and
institutions) and the relationships among them. Unlike traditional network visualization tools that are intended for
experts to individually enter data and engage in visualization, the Net.Create tool immediately displays the results
of the whole network, including students' classmates' work, in a sociography, allowing them to continuously
build off of each other's work and ideas. This immediacy and collaborative effort facilitate discovery, discussion,
and reading comprehension.
       For example, in a history class, Net.Create affords simultaneous data-entry and network analysis to help
students collaboratively create the framework for a historical event and fill in its details (see Figure 1). During a
Net.Create activity, students collaboratively do network-data entry in small groups who are each assigned a sub-
section of the larger historical text. As they do this, students can connect to and see the data that their peers are
also entering. By dividing up a large, unfamiliar text into smaller pieces and assigning those to small collaborating
groups whose work fed back into a whole-class network, the tool leverages the large collaborating group to support
students in interpreting an entirely new text. This combination emphasizes both the localized details that make
interactions manifest as well as the larger network that makes historical context visible and supports historical
argumentation. In  this interactive demo, we  will demonstrate     several student-created networks produced   in
Net.Create pilot studies and showcase how the specific features of Net.Create can offer a promising collaboration
platform to encourage co-construction of knowledge in both the small and large group level. We'll introduce
attendees to one of the sources our students have used, provide a short activity that lets attendees try their hands
at one of the student activities based on that source, and then do a short debrief that affords time for discussion
after the interactive portion of the demo concludes. The Net.Create team is finalizing a version of the software
tool and a scaffolded activity that can be downloaded from www.netcreate.org for computers running MacOS
10.12 or greater.

                  Figure 1. Students' constructed network of Alexander the Great in Net.Create.

Using Net.Create to support argumentation and collaborative learning

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  1025                                                 © ISLS
The vast majority of humanities instructional strategies depends on consuming lengthy texts, both written texts
and images as a form of text (Theibault, 2013). Novice students run into a number of common challenges as they
read and discuss these texts. For example, novice history learners struggle to consume volume of historical texts
because they may not understand the language used in the past, or the context in which events occurred (Craig,
2017). It is particularly difficult for them to grasp the connections between the many participants and events in
the text, and these connections may not be explicitly spelled out for students (Wineburg, 1991). Network analysis
can support students as they reflect on and explicitly represent the connections within the texts by reducing
information in a network to single nodes (an item in the network) and edges (the connections between nodes) then
using aggregate information from each node-and edge paring to interpret the whole network (Carrington, Scott &
Wasserman, 2005).
        Next,  integrating newly  acquired  network-visualization   literacy into the arsenal    of  tools to present
arguments can   support students  learning  as they appropriate  disciplinary  norms.   The    gap   between   novice
historians' assumptions about history as a "settled" straightforward linear narrative and expert practice in history
as an argumentative discipline is an important consideration in leveraging the notion of capta "taken not given,
constructed as an interpretation of the phenomenal world" in a history classroom (Drucker, 2014, p. 128). Student
assumptions about history as a discipline with established facts are underscored by the lecture environment that
is common to many undergraduate history surveys, and it only serves to exacerbate this gap between novice
historians' view of history as settled and expert views of history as negotiated. When history is seen not as list of
facts to memorize but as an interpretive account that collectively holds the cause and meaning of historical
interactions supported by  evidence, these  novice  students might  more  easily  understand     and  remember    the
historical content (Theibault, 2013). Because of the broad scope contained in many historical texts, collaboration
in creating  these argumentation-evidence    cycles  should   be encouraged      for students,    so that   they can
simultaneously  examine  the  underlying factors that shape   their interpretive  history accounts    and   negotiate
argument using the resources they have access. Therefore, it is important to foster multiple skills, such as
corroboration, sourcing and perspective taking in order to transform the text into contextualized data (Simon,
Erduran, & Obsorne, 2002).
        However, it is challenging to frame history as an interpretive account through collaborative effort in
undergraduate  history  classrooms  in part because   of the  large  lecture  format   that   is common     to many
undergraduate  history survey classes  and  the single-authored  nature of   the  historical  document.    Moreover,
collaborative inquiry activity for novice students is not easy. The students are often asked to simultaneously
regulate inquiry processes and activities, negotiate challenges, monitor progress, and articulate their argument as
a group (Quintana et al., 2002). Establishing and sustaining mutual understanding via effective communication
is a consistent challenge in collaboration. To support these challenges, Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer (2009)
suggested that technology-rich environments should provide groups with a learning environment where they can
set shared goals through the repeated negotiation over the course of collaboration and ensure the division of work.
It is critical to use the group members as a source for clarifications and to ask relevant questions through
productive interaction. Net.Create was designed specifically to support this kind of collaborative co-construction
of knowledge.

Activity theory: Design framework of Net.Create
Our design of tool Net.Create is grounded in activity theory (Engeström, 1987). A core assumption in activity
theory is that cognition and learning are socially mediated, or transformed by the multiple mediators of the activity,
thus, it focuses on how individuals learn within rich activity contexts (Danish, 2014). The activity triangle (see
Figure 2) is a representation of the key mediators of activity in the Net.Create context and their relationships with
each other, and is intended to help visualize how they are all interconnected (Engeström, 1987). In this design, we
positioned Net.Create as a mediating tool to scaffold student collaborative argumentation process across two
different levels of learning to develop the necessary skills surrounding historical thinking.
        Students within the proposed Net.Create activities are presumed to come to our classroom with some
basic knowledge about social networking tools, and with a wide range of ideas about history (the subject). Their
object (or shared motive) will be to make sense of a historical text. To help them accomplish this, we will present
them with Net.Create (a new tool). Net.Create will fundamentally change how they engage with their motive and
with the text (also a tool) by providing new ways of looking at the text, and new ways of looking at the information
that the students glean from within the text (in the form of network visualizations). We believe that the students
are more likely to engage with these tools in productive ways if they work collaboratively. Therefore, we will
arrange them in small groups where they will be assumed to support each other by noticing, suggesting, and
critiquing alternative elements within the text and resulting visualization (the division of labor). Finally, they will
be expected to justify their answers within the tool providing significance and using citations (a rule) and to share

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  1026                                                    © ISLS
            Figure 2. Activity triangle to integrate proposed Net.Create features into a classroom.
their aspects of the network with the entire class, who will also provide feedback. Thus, the community includes
the other students in the entire class as well as the instructor who will be present for these discussions. Our
assumption is that as students see new aspects of the historical phenomena, they will come to appreciate the value
of using a network tool, while also learning how to use such a tool through practice. This appreciation is what we
think will drive their appropriation in that they will know both how and why such a tool might be useful, and will
be motivated to use one anew in the future.

Features to scaffold students in Net.Create for network entry and analysis
To use network analysis and visualization as supporting tools for collaborative argumentation, we need to scaffold
student encounters with these tools. Most    undergraduates  do not have high  proficiency  for understanding,
interpreting, and creating data visualizations, particularly network visualizations that are likely unfamiliar to
students and have complex visual elements. Fortunately, prior work has shown that even users who are new to
network visualizations intuitively understand how the elements of a network visualization represent the actual
elements of the network: lines are representative of connections between nodes in the network, and connection
distances represent the relative similarity or difference of those nodes within their shared category (Nickerson,
Tversky, Corter, Yu, & Mason, 2010). This suggests that Net.Create is still accessible to students with limited
data-visualization skills, particularly considering prior successes in two short pilots. However, our pilot also
suggests that engaging with network analysis is still challenging, so our aim is to scaffold the necessary skills
surrounding network analysis in a number of ways.
        First, the history students in small groups can collaboratively enter information from historical texts
through a simple data entry form (Figure 3) and see the visualized connection live in a network. The students need

                            Figure 3. Nodes and edges entry form.
to first review and interpret the text and negotiate the options for recording a historical data point. As they
negotiate, the node entry form guides students to consider historical categories for nodes that include person,
group, event, or place. Second, students need to determine if the node can be associated with any other nodes. The
edge form prompts students to look at the relationship between nodes by asking them to select from a pre-
populated dropdown    menu (e.g., "has martial   or adversarial interaction with",   "has peaceful,  familial or
conversational interaction with", "is a group member of", "makes visit to [a place]", "participates in [an event]").
These options invite students to clearly identify the type of relationships between nodes within the text. They are
also encouraged to make their work verifiable by two other features in the edge entry form: a citation field and a
significance field. The former means their source material will be readily available to other students engaged in
the collaborative process; the latter asks them to be explicit about why they chose to record details and features
of a specific edge. The process emphasizes disciplinary norms of citation and historical argumentation and
encourages students to interpret and reflect on the historical significance for each detail while reading the text and
collaboratively co-construct the historical connections among many possible entries.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 1027                                                © ISLS
        Secondly, the tool provides live network visualizations with based on the most recent student input. As
students engage in data entry, the tool will calculate the number of times two nodes appear in an edge relationship
in order to visualize a "weight" through thickness that tells how strong the edge between two nodes should be (see
Figure 1). As students input a new node or edge, instructor tools allow deletion, merging and editing of accidental
duplicate entry and the network visualization will adjust to provide students with a clear view of the live network.
The immediate effect in the tool can support students to understand the network as a whole rather than looking at
the local network built by small groups. For instance, few historical agents in a historical context have no
connections. Therefore, as students add new nodes, we can prompt students to draw on elements of the network
visualization provided by other students as they determine whether they need to also add more historical context
for that node based on the whole network. The network can serve as a reference point for the whole class
discussion, leveraging the work of small collaboration groups to support connections only visible in the aggregate.
Finally, the tool generates nodes and edges tables (see Figure 4) so that students can seek specific information
while reading the text that wasn't assigned previously and investigate multiple nodes, edges, significance, or
citations in one place. In this unique way, the large lecture format that typically limits collaboration options can
become a positive feature of the activity by leveraging the large collaborating group to support students in making
sense of an entirely new text in a limited time with the small collaborating groups whose work fed back into a
whole-class network.

                                              Figure 4. Edges table.

References
Carrington, P. J., Scott, J. & Wassserman, S. (2005). Models and Methods in Social Network Analysis. New York:
        Cambridge University Press.
Craig, K. (2017). Analog   tools in digital  history classrooms: An    activity-theory case study of learning
        opportunities in digital humanities. Intl Jrl for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 11(1), 1-9.
Danish, J. A. (2014). Applying an Activity Theory Lens to Designing Instruction for Learning About the Structure,
        Behavior, and Function of a Honeybee System. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(2), 1-49.
Dillenbourg P, Järvelä S, & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research on computer-supported collaborative
        learning. In: Balacheff N, Ludvigsen S, de Jong T, Lazonder A, Barnes S (Eds.) Technology-enhanced
        learning (3-19). Berlin: Springer.
Drucker, J. (2014). Graphesis: Visual forms of knowledge production. Harvard University Press.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.
        Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit Oy.
Nickerson, J. V., Tversky, B., Corter, J. E., Yu, L., Rho, Y. J., & Mason, D. (2010). Thinking with networks.
        In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (Vol. 32, No. 32).
Osborne, J., Erduran, S., & Simon, S. (2004). Enhancing the quality of argumentation in school science. Journal
        of research in science teaching, 41(10), 994-1020.
Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Golan, R., Kyza, E., et al. (2002). Evolving a scaffolding
        design framework for designing educational software. IN P. Bell, R.
Theibault, J. (2013). Visualizations and Historical Arguments. In Nawrotzki, K. & Dougherty, J (Eds.), Writing
        History in the Digital Age (173­185). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Wineburg, S. S. (1991). Historical problem solving: A study of the cognitive processes used in the evaluation of
        documentary and pictorial evidence. Journal of educational Psychology, 83(1), 73.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Colin Elliott, Assistant Professor of History at Indiana University for supporting the project
and Inquirium for designing and developing the tool. This study was made possible by the National Science
Foundation, award #1848655.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 1028                                                © ISLS
