     Teacher Monitoring Routines: Understanding Pedagogical
             Judgments During Students' Collaborative Learning
                                       Nadav Ehrenfeld and Ilana S. Horn (1)
                          Nadav.Ehrenfeld@vanderbilt.edu, Ilana.Horn@vanderbilt.edu
                                      Peabody College, Vanderbilt University

         Abstract: In this paper we conceptualize teacher monitoring routines ­ a consequential yet
         understudied phase of instruction during students' collaborative work. We examine 5 lessons
         of experienced and equity-oriented secondary math teachers using a comparative case study
         design  and analysis  of   their interactional routines. Our   goal is  to  understand   how   teachers
         monitor  groupwork    and   how   they decide   (intentionally  or not)  when,   where,   and  how  to
         intervene in student talk. We identified various patterns that make clearer the micro-judgments
         monitoring routines entail for teachers' (a) ways of moving among students and conversational
         initiation, (b) conversational entry; (c) focus of the interaction; (d) when and how to exit the
         interaction; and (e) conversation participation pattern; with an eye toward teachers' goals and
         instructional contexts.    We end   by considering   implications    for research    on  teaching and
         professional education in support of collaborative learning.

Purpose
As mathematics teachers shift toward what has been called "ambitious instruction" (Lampert et al., 2011), they
frequently build on collaborative groupwork to promote students' sensemaking of mathematical ideas through
interaction (Cohen   &  Lotan   2014;  Horn,    2012;   Smith &   Stein, 2011).   While    teachers'  judgments   during
groupwork involve managing tensions between intervention and student autonomy, these micro-judgments remain
understudied and ill defined (Stein et al., 2008; Webb et al., 2009). Different scholars who study this phase of
lessons suggest different roles for teachers, with some advocating that teachers primarily listen to conversations
(Smith & Stein, 2011) or intervene only when a group is "hopelessly off task" (Cohen & Lotan 2014), while others
suggest it is more productive for the teacher to be more active and probe students' thinking (Webb et al., 2009).
         Our own interest in studying teacher monitoring routines did not arise as a theoretical gap to fill, but
rather as an in vivo problem of practice we encountered as teacher educators. For the past several years, we have
partnered with a professional development organization (PDO) to bridge formal professional development with
classroom   teaching through   video-based   coaching.   As  we   have  spent time   in   the teachers' classrooms   and
discussed their  teaching with   them, we   have noticed  two   things:  (1) There   is a  surprising variability across
teachers' groupwork    monitoring   practices;  and (2)  The  "shakiest"  moments      of lessons  tend to occur  in the
monitoring   phase.  While   tasks, launches,   and instructional  routines  can    be  easily shared   among    teachers,
monitoring is inherently interpretive and responsive, requiring more of the teachers' sensemaking in-the-moment.
The uncertainties involved in this phase of the lesson, along with the imperative to support cognitive demand and
productive engagement for all students, provoked our interest in identifying the sequence of judgments teachers
make during this phase of their lessons. To this end, we offer a framework for teachers' monitoring routines as a
sequence of moves, which we name Initiation-Entry-Focus-Exit, to better understand the choices teachers make.
Building  on examples   from   5 secondary   math   teachers, this paper    aims  to probe    and conceptualize   teacher
monitoring routines, and to make clearer the myriad micro-judgments (intentional or not) they entail for teachers.

Theoretical perspectives

Interactional routines
In their basic form, interactional routines are recurrent moves constituting the patterned ways conversations unfold
within a certain social group, as within a classroom. However, while routines might have some recognizable
structure, interactional routines are also emergent, as their details are contingent on the situation. In this way,
interactional routines are both stable and performative, reflecting structure in their consistent aspects as well as
the agency of those who use them (Feldman & Pentland, 2003; Horn & Little, 2010; Lavie et al., 2018).
         Attuning to the tensions of structure and agency, our conceptualization of monitoring routines builds on
two definitions. The   first comes   from  Cazden   (2001),   who  describes  interactional    routines as holding  both
sequential and selectional dimensions. Cazden compares these two dimensions to a Western restaurant menu,
likening the sequential dimension to the set of categories (e.g. appetizer, entrée, dessert) that is culturally set and
rarely varies, while the selectional dimension is the specific appetizer, entrée or dessert that a person orders. For

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     120                                                      © ISLS
monitoring routines, the structural, sequential dimension is captured in our generic framework of initiation, entry,
focus, and exit, coupled with students access to participation in the interaction. The agentic, selectional dimensions
are then the particular choices teachers make as they initiate, enter, focus, and exit interactions, based on their
interpretations and responses to the situation.
          For that reason, we find it compatible to use Lavie and colleagues' (2018) definition of interactional
routines as a task-procedure pair:

          "a routine performed in a given task situation, by a given person, is the task as seen by the
          performer, together with the procedure she executed to perform the task." (Lavie, Steiner &
          Sfard, 2018, p. 9).

For example, in the case of groupwork monitoring routines, one teacher might see the initiation move as a task in
which it is the teacher's responsibility to check-in with the groups. Another teacher might interpret the same task
with different  reasoning  ­­ for instance, as   a situation where teacher-initiated  conversation might   interrupt
students' thinking and thus would only approach a group if students had a question. Either way, some relatively
stable structure of local classroom culture would be constructed, and students would know whether they need to
raise their hands or simply wait for the teacher to come over. As we mentioned before, such teacher sensemaking
is necessarily situated in the particularities of their teaching situations, including the teachers' instructional goals
and their institutional constraints.

Situated view of teaching
Teaching is an irreducibly situated act, as teachers navigate complex relational and institutional terrain during
instruction. By   taking a situated   view, we     acknowledge  teachers' instruction as  co-constructed   with the
particularities of their teaching situations (Greeno, 1998; Horn & Kane, 2015; Lave & Wenger, 1991). As a
consequence,   teachers' monitoring    practices are an interactional  accomplishment   between   teachers  and the
particular students, content, and settings they are working with. Although routines may stay somewhat stable
within individual teachers as they move between classrooms or groups, we also see teachers making micro-
judgments about whom they direct their attention to, in what ways, and for how long. For this reason, while
abstract and idealized notions of monitoring practices may serve as a useful heuristic guide to practice, teachers
necessarily exercise pedagogical judgment as they enact any instructional practice in their teaching situations
(Horn, in press).
          Applying this lens to the teachers in our study, we are especially interested in how their pedagogical
judgment shapes the ways they monitor student worktime. By highlighting teachers' micro-judgments as they
monitor students' work, we claim that teachers do more than simply implement known models of groupwork;
teachers are constantly assessing, interpreting, and adjusting as groupwork unfolds in their particular classroom
contexts.

Research question
Given  our   goal to probe    and    conceptualize teacher monitoring   routines and  considering    our theoretical
perspective, we ask: What interactional routines emerge during the focal teachers' conversations with student
groups during the monitoring phase of the lessons? In the rest of the paper, we answer this question, with an eye
towards the teacher micro-judgments that underlie these routines.

Data and methods

Research context and data
As we mentioned, this study comes from a research practice partnership between our university research team and
a PDO. Our shared work centers on bridging formal professional development and classroom instruction, and we
have worked to design a video-based formative feedback (VFF) coaching cycle to help elicit and engage secondary
math  teachers'   pedagogical  judgment.   At the  PDO,  the  secondary   mathematics   teachers have  encountered
different models of monitoring groupwork, including the aforementioned 5 Practices (Smith & Stein, 2011) as
well as Complex Instruction (Cohen & Lotan 2014; Horn, 2012). In addition, they have attended workshops on
the TRUmath    Framework      (Schoenfeld, 2014),  which   highlights issues of student agency   and access to  rich
mathematics. In sum, our participants have had atypically rich opportunities to learn about ambitious instruction
in formal professional development.
          For this analysis, we looked at 5 lessons (see Table 1) from experienced secondary teachers in the PDO
(5 to 18 years of teaching experience, mean = 8 years), in a large urban district in the western U.S. They were

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    121                                                  © ISLS
selected because they included segments of 20 minutes or longer of teachers' monitoring students' mathematical
groupwork (20 to 45 min segments, mean = 28.5 min). For all 5 lessons, we have two cameras recording the class
session. Camera 1, a tablet camera on a robot tripod, captured the whole class, with a focus on the teachers'
movements through the classroom. These video records also have student audio tracks captured through 4 separate
microphones placed at students' desks. Camera 2, a point of view camera, was mounted on the teacher's head,
shoulder, or chest to approximate what they were seeing as they moved through the classroom and interacted with
students. In addition to these recordings, our data include lesson artifacts, conversations with the focal teachers
before and after instruction, and email exchanges about the activities.

Table 1: information about the focal teachers and the lessons

 Focal teacher         Experience   School      Class                        Date            Groupwork
                       (years)                                                               (minutes) (%)
 Veronica Kennedy      8            Rees        8th grade math               Feb 1 2018      33 of 82 (40%)
 Brad Miller           6            Noether     Algebra 1                    May 7 2018      20 of 58 (34%)
 Bridgette Campbell    7            Johnson     Algebra 1                    Oct 05 2017     20 of 85 (23%)
 Lee Bellver           14           Falconer    Algebra 1                    Mar 1 2018      26 of 100 (26%)
 Lizette McLoughlin    5            Fermat      AP Calculus                  Feb 2 2018      45 of 55 (82%)

Data analysis

Phase 1: Data reduction and re-representation
We edited the video to isolate the monitoring sequences of each lesson, reducing 380 min of classroom footage
to 144 min. Then, using Final Cut Pro X, we edited the two camera perspectives together as a picture-in-picture
to support coordinated analysis of the teachers' actions and a view of where they are located in the classroom.
(See Figure 1.)

                         Figure 1. Two camera perspectives on Lizette's classroom.

Phase 2: The sequential dimension of teachers' monitoring routines
Using the subset of video data from Phase 1, we used inductive coding (Strauss & Corbin, 1998) to identify the
sequential dimension of the monitoring routine. We arrived at categories that explained all 5 cases, and they were
5 recurrent moves that described: (a) how teachers moved around the room and how conversations were initiated
(initiation) (b) their opening moves of conversation (entry); (c) the main focus of the interaction; (d) when and
how they exit the interaction; (e) whether the teacher interacts with students as a group or as individuals (see Table
2). This constituted the general task of the emergent monitoring routines.

Phase 3: The selectional dimension of teachers' monitoring routines
Once we arrived at the basic sequence of monitoring routines, we could delve into the interactional details ­­ the
particular judgments teachers made in their teaching situations. Using an inductive comparative case study design
(Strauss and Corbin, 1998) and methods of interaction analysis (Jordan and Henderson, 1995), we looked closely
at the videos to explore patterns of how the 5 teachers took up each of the 5 moves identified in Phase 3. The
coding team consisted of two PhD students (including the first author) and a secondary math teacher. During the
coding process, the team met regularly, maintained an online "coding dilemmas" document and a codebook with
definitions and examples for each code. As coding dilemmas were discussed and resolved among the coding team

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  122                                                  © ISLS
and the Principle Investigator (the second author), the definitions and examples were refined. Peer Debriefing was
done with the larger research team (2 additional PhD students, a post-doctoral fellow, and an assistant professor)
to ensure the ecological validity of the coding scheme (Lincoln & Guba, 1985).
        Once the codes were more or less agreed upon, the team used Vosaic software to code the videos. Python
code (in Pycharm framework) was used to process the data and to create representations that account for the
teachers' time spent with each student group as well as the sequence of their visits (Figures 2,4,5).

Table 2: description of the 4 basic moves and participation pattern

 Move               Description                       Codes

 Initiation         How the teacher approachesthe group?  ·    Student-initiated: Student calls teacher over·Teacher-initiated:Theteacherapproachesthegroup of their own accord
                                                          ·    Teacher asks for a summary or "what Ss are up
 Entry              Teacher's first statement to thegroup      to" in terms of math or participation norms·Teacher answers students' question·Teacher specifically asks about results or pacing
                                                          ·    Teacher redirects Ss interaction to a new topic
                                                          ·    Teacher discusses mathematical ideas
                                                                    o  Probing (how? why?)
                                                                    o  Discussing results (what?)
                                                                    o  Hinting (pointing resources or
 Focus              The substance of theinteraction                    evaluating students' ideas)·Teacher discusses group dynamics
                                                          ·    Teacher discusses task directions
                                                          ·    Technical issues or brief comment
                                                          ·    Any combination of the above
 Exit               The last directive the teacher        ·    Closed directive of "next steps"gives before moving away·Open directive of "things to think about"
 Participation      Whom does the teacher                 ·    Teacher discussing with whole group
 pattern            interact with?                        ·    Teacher discussing with individuals or subgroup

Findings
As teachers monitor groupwork, we noted five distinct types of moves, generally following the sequence of
initiation, entry, focus, and exit, as well as an overarching participation pattern summarized in Table 2. In the
following section, we discuss each of these, using two contrasting cases from our data set to illuminate and span
a space of possibilities by which these moves can be taken up.
        We offer three caveats about the scope of this analysis. First, our intention is not to be exhaustive: We
do not claim   that these contrasts capture the full  breadth of how  teachers might  use the   moves   to monitor
groupwork. Second, we do we intend to claim that these routines capture an essence of any individual teacher. In
fact, we have examples in our data set of the same teachers leading different lessons where their monitoring
routines look quite different. Finally, we do not seek global, normative statements about monitoring routines.
Returning to our situative perspective, we see the monitoring routine's structure as capturing a wide range of
instruction across a variety of teaching situations. Instead of highlighting "best practices," we identify these phases
to help teachers reflect on and deliberate on the range of micro-judgments they can make during this crucial phase
of the lesson.

Initiation
We used three codes for the initiation phase of each group interaction describing who initiated the teachers'
involvement: student(s), teacher, or unclear. (This third code was not used much.) Within each monitoring case,
we saw patterns of mostly student initiation, mostly teacher initiation, or mixed initiation. These top-level patterns
capture the general tendency of different teachers to intervene in student groupwork as well as the degree of
student autonomy in the class.
        To illustrate how initiation patterns vary, we contrast Veronica and Lizette (Figures 2a and 2b). Because
these are nonstandard representations, we offer this guide to understanding what they mean: the x-axis represents

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   123                                                  © ISLS
time, the y-axis represents each unique group in the class, with -1 representing moments when the teacher did not
directly interact with a group. Thus, the rectangles represent discrete interactions, and their lengths represent the
amount of time the teacher spent with a particular group. Green rectangles signal teacher-initiated interactions,
while blue rectangles signal student-initiated ones. Immediately we see that Veronica's top-level pattern was
mostly teacher initiated, while Lizette's was mixed initiation.
        Using these representations, we note a few differences between Veronica and Lizette's initiation routines.
First, while Lizette spent 31% of her time quietly monitoring (-1 on the y-axis, light blue rectangles), Veronica
only spent 2% of hers in the same way. Turning to the underlying pedagogical judgment, we surmise that this
may be due to the age difference between the students and, relatedly, their degree of autonomy: Veronica taught
8th grade math, while Lizette taught older students AP Calculus. From our conversations with the teachers, we
also see these differences as arising from their conceptions of their role as a teacher during groupwork. For
example, when we discussed Veronica's monitoring pattern with her, she shared that she did not think about
standing back and watching.
        Second, Veronica walked around the room in a fixed pattern from group to group, represented by the
sinusoidal curve, whereas Lizette constantly changed the order that she approached student groups. Turning to
the underlying pedagogical judgments, we can interpret Veronica's fixed pattern as informed by her judgment
that she needs to distribute her attention evenly and help keep the students on task, whereas Lizette's irregular
pattern might signal her responsiveness to students' initiation, which may be less predictable.
        To reiterate, we do not seek to evaluate these moves as good or bad in an absolute sense. However, we
are curious about the consequence of teachers' moves for students' opportunities for mathematical engagement.
As we listened to the student audio tracks during Veronica's lesson, for instance, we noted several times that, as
a consequence of her fixed pattern of teacher initiation, students' vibrant mathematical talk got interrupted by
Veronica's intervention. At the same time, the fixed pattern results in a relatively equal time allocation among the
groups, which, as the diagrams show, was not true for Lizette's students. For example, Lizette conversed with
Group 2 briefly exactly once and conversed with Group 6 only twice, with the second time lasting much longer.
Of course, equal time allocation is not necessarily equitable or even productive for learning. A group that is
working well might not need the teacher intervention. But all this points back to the centrality of pedagogical
judgment during monitoring: What `working well' means, for whom, and when, is a matter of interpretation.
However, knowing that not to intervene is a sound possibility ­­ and one that hadn't occurred to Veronica ­­
might help support the complexity of this (intentional or not) micro-judgment.

                    Figures 2a & 2b. Veronica's (left) & Lizette's (right) initiation routines.

Entry and focus
Entry and focus capture the heart of the teachers' interactions with student groups. First, the four codes that
captured teachers' entry into the conversation answered the question: how does the teacher verbally begin the
interaction with the students? Our codes were: (1) listening/asking for a summary;(2) asking about results; (3)
answering student questions; and (4) redirecting interaction. The focal teachers typically started their entry by
asking where the group stands (codes 1 and 2). Code 1, listening or asking for a summary, can center on either in
terms of their mathematical thinking ("so tell me about what you're doing") or participation patterns ("are they
helping you out?").
        Next, to capture   the focus  of the conversations, we    asked, what is the    nature  of the sensemaking
throughout the conversation? We had six codes for the focus, 3 of which involved math talk and 3 of which
involved not-math talk. The three math codes were: probing students' explanation, results-centered talk, and
teacher hints/scaffolds. The   three not-math codes were:   norms   of   participation, assignment   centered, and
technical issues/brief asides. Of our four moves in the monitoring routine, focus was the only one that was often
double coded, as teachers commonly focused on more than one thing over the course of an interaction.
        To illustrate how entry and focus can vary, we contrast Bridgette and Brad. Bridgette (Figure 3a) was
the only teacher who spoke about participation more than she did about math. In comparison, Brad's entry and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  124                                                    © ISLS
focus (Figure 3b), was more typical, since most of his focus was mathematical, with a constant tension between
probing students thinking and scaffolding it.
        Like Lizette, Bridgette quietly monitored her classroom more than the other teachers in our sample.
However, unlike Lizette (see Figure 2b), Bridgette seldom initiated interactions during the monitoring phase (only
3 out of 16 interactions were teacher-initiated). Bridgette also assigned group roles to students and was very
consistent about redirecting student questions back to their peers. In sum, at a top-level description, Bridgette's
entry and focus aimed for equitable participation.
         Brad, on the other hand, like most of our focal teachers, primarily spoke about math with student groups.
Looking into the types of math talk, we see a tension between probing students' thinking and hints/scaffolds. As
we mentioned above, Brad's conversations generally started with an entry move (move 2) of asking for a summary
of what they have done, followed by a focus (move 3) on probing students' questions and thinking, concluding
with a strong hint/scaffold by either evaluating their thinking or directing students to a next step to continue with.
In sum, at a top-level description, Brad's entry and focus aimed for guided work completion.
        By  contrasting Bridgette's  equitable  participation   approach     with Brad's    guided work   completion
approach,  we again abstain from evaluation    of  their actions.   Instead, we  emphasize   the tensions  they were
navigating in making  the micro-judgments     that inform    their practice. For  instance, Bridgette's  emphasis on
equitable participation pressed on student involvement and centered their mathematical thinking. However, in the
class session we observed, not all groups completed their task for the day, a valued outcome for many teachers,
In contrast, Brad's students, guided by his responsive hints and scaffolds, mostly completed their work, although
its production may not have been as equally distributed across students.     How and how much to balance probing
and scaffolding, and for whom and when, again is ultimately a matter of teachers' pedagogical judgment.

          Figures 3a & 3b. Bridgette's (upper charts) & Brad's (lower charts) entry and focus routines.

Exit
To capture the exit moves, we asked, how does the teacher end the interaction with students? with an eye toward
how varying exits set students up for continued conversation. For this reason, we distinguished between open
exits that point toward further exploration, and closed exits, which involved clearer directives. For example, an
open ending might offer an issue to think about, while a closed exit would tell a next step.
        To illustrate exit moves, we contrast Brad and Lizette. Using diagrams constructed similar to those
illustrating the initiation move, Figures 4a and 4b show the teachers' movement around their classroom, the time
spent with each group, with yellow rectangles signaling open exits and orange rectangles signaling closed exits.
Here, we  see that Brad's exit routines (Figure    4a) provide     us with important insights  regarding  his overall
monitoring routine. On the one hand, Brad elicited students thinking and had rich mathematical conversations
with the groups (which we omit here for lack of space). On the other hand, all of Brad's 11 group interactions had
a closed ending (e.g., "so the vertex should come in the middle"). In contrast to Brad, Lizette (Figure 4b) had
mostly open exit moves, which included less directive hinting, such as pointing to a resource (e.g. "anything we've
talked about last week that might help here?"), generally leaving the group with something to think about rather
than something to do.
        Once   again, the teachers' understanding    of  their role   during  monitoring shapes    these moves.  The
distinction between open and closed endings are critical here, because it might have important implications for
how students' conversation will unfold after the teacher walks away. In Lavie and colleagues' (2018) terms, if

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    125                                                   © ISLS
teachers interpret their task as supporting students' collaboration in their absence, they should privilege open exits.
If teachers interpret their task as wrapping up the conversation, ensuring work completion, or supporting student
pacing, then they should privilege closed endings.

                         Figures 4a & 4b. Brad's (left) and Lizette's (right) exit routines.

Participation pattern
As we were coding the moves of the monitoring routine, we noticed differences in the overarching participation
pattern between the teacher and student groups. Specifically, whom the teacher interacts with during intervention
and in what ways. To illustrate participation patterns, we turn to the contrasting cases of Bridgette and Lee, two
outliers in our sample. Most of the other cases show teachers moving between interacting with all students in a
student group or only with some. In many cases, teachers start a conversation with certain students and slowly
(and seemingly unintentionally) exclude other students from the discussion through their gaze or body positioning.
          Bridgette, as we have already described, was very intentional about equitable participation. Of our 5
focal  teachers, Bridgette was  the only  one      who    consistently addressed all students in  the group  (16 of 16
interactions). Other teachers were either less intentional about this participation pattern or clearly facilitated a
different one. Lee, for example, walked between groups and made sure to talk to every student; however, he
addressed them one at a time. We see this as evidence that Lee's interpretation of his own task was less about
promoting collaboration and more about supporting individual students' understanding of content.

Discussion
Teachers' monitoring practices are consistent enough to be captured as emergent routines involving initiation,
entry, focus, and exit, with general overarching participation patterns. We note two things about these routines.
First, the different teacher   monitoring routines       described above  have   implications for sustaining students'
mathematical engagement. Our claim is not that one mode of monitoring is always appropriate, but rather that
monitoring groupwork entails complex interactions, some of which teachers may not be aware of. Second, the
differences in monitoring routines seem to reflect the teachers' understandings of their role during groupwork. By
examining and conceptualizing this understudied phase of instruction, we illuminate how different monitoring
routines both shape the learning environment and are shaped by it.
          Although we see monitoring practices as reflecting teachers' conceptions of their role, we also stress that
they are not teachers' fixed "teaching style." For example, while Lizette was quietly monitoring 31% of the time
in this class session and mainly used open-ended exits, she was teaching an AP Calculus class. If she, like
Veronica, had been teaching a middle school mathematics class, she may not have had a chance to circulate
quietly, and she may have exited conversations in a content oriented way to work toward task completion ­­ or
to quell the anxieties of the younger students. Other aspects of the teaching situation surely influence monitoring
routines,  such  as the extent to which   the      tasks are groupworthy  (Lotan, 2003)  and  thus invite open   ended
exploration, as well as the physical space of the classroom. For instance, some of our teachers used vertical
whiteboards on the perimeter of the room for groupwork. In these classrooms, the sinusoidal pattern emerged
fairly consistently as teachers circulated around the room's perimeter. (See Veronica [Figure 2a] and Lee [Figure
5b] for examples.) In contrast, teachers who are walking between desks could circulate quietly without officially
being part of some group discussion.
          While supports exist to aid teachers in building student-centered classrooms, this analysis highlights key
points in this work, uncovering the range of possibilities for monitoring groupwork, and the complexity of the
micro-judgments required in monitoring. As we better understand these routines, we can develop clearer ways to
support productive equitable mathematical discourse during this crucial phase of lessons.

Endnotes
(1) The authors contributed equally to this paper.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        126                                                 © ISLS
References
Cazden, C. (2001). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning. Second Edition. Portsmouth,
         NH: Heinemann.
Cohen, E. G., & Lotan, R. A. (2014). Designing Groupwork: Strategies for the Heterogeneous Classroom. Third
         Edition. Teachers College Press.
Feldman, M. S., & Pentland, B. T. (2003). Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a source of flexibility and
         change. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48, 94­118.
Greeno, J. G. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and research. American psychologist, 53(1), 5.
Horn, I. S. (2012), Strength in Numbers: Collaborative Learning in Secondary Mathematics. National Council of
         Teachers of Mathematics.
Horn, I. S. (in press). Supporting the Development of Pedagogical Judgment: Connecting Instruction to Context.
         International Handbook of Mathematics Teacher Education, 2nd edition, Volume 3. Sense Publishers.
Horn, I. S., & Kane, B. D. (2015). Opportunities for professional learning in mathematics teacher workgroup
         conversations: Relationships to instructional expertise. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 24(3), 373-418.
Horn, I. S., & Little, J. W. (2010). Attending to problems of practice: Routines and resources for professional
         learning in teachers' workplace interactions. American educational research journal, 47(1), 181-217.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The journal of the learning
         sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Lampert, M., Boerst, T. A., & Graziani, F. (2011). Organizational Resources in the Service of School-Wide
         Ambitious Teaching Practice. Teachers College Record, 113(7), 1361-1400.
Lave, J., Wenger, E., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge:
         Cambridge university press.
Lavie, I., Steiner, A., & Sfard, A. (2018). Routines we live by: from ritual to exploration. Educational Studies in
         Mathematics, 1-24. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-018-9817-4
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Establishing trustworthiness. Naturalistic inquiry, 289-331.
Lotan, R. A. (2003). Group-worthy tasks. Educational Leadership, 60(6), 72-75.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (2014). What makes for powerful classrooms, and how can we support teachers in creating
         them? A story of research and practice, productively intertwined. Educational researcher, 43(8), 404-
         412.
Smith, M. S., & Stein, M. K. (2011). 5 practices for orchestrating productive mathematics discussions. Reston,
         National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Stein, M. K., Engle,  R. A., Smith,  M.   S., & Hughes,    E. K. (2008). Orchestrating productive  mathematical
         discussions: Five practices for helping teachers move beyond show and tell. Mathematical thinking and
         learning, 10(4), 313-340.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998).  Basics of   qualitative research: Procedures  and techniques for  developing
         grounded theory. Sage.
Webb, N. M., Franke, M. L., De, T., Chan, A. G., Freund, D., Shein, P., & Melkonian, D. K. (2009). `Explain to
         your partner': teachers' instructional practices and students' dialogue in small groups. Cambridge Journal
         of Education, 39(1), 49-70.

Acknowledgments
We are thankful to the participating teachers, to Nicole Louie and Anna Sfard who gave helpful feedback on
earlier stages of work, to Avital for her help with the graphic representations, and to the research team: Patricia
Buenrostro, Grace Chen, Brette Garner, Mariah Harmon, Lara Jasien, Samantha Marshall, Elizabeth Metts, and
Katherine  Schneeberger  McGugan.    This  work   has been    supported  by a grant from the National   Science
Foundation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  127                                                  © ISLS
