Impacts of Augmented Reality on Collaborative Physics Learning,
                        Leadership, and Knowledge Imbalance
         Iulian Radu, Harvard University Graduate School of Education, iulian_radu@gse.harvard.edu
   Bertrand Schneider, Harvard University Graduate School of Education, bertrand_schneider@g.harvard.edu

         Abstract:   Emerging   technologies such   as Augmented    Reality   (AR), have  the  potential  to
         radically transform science education by making challenging concepts visible and accessible to
         novices. In this project, we designed a Hololens-based system in which participants learned
         about  the  physics involved   in audio  speakers  (Radu   &  Schneider,     2019). We  analyzed
         participant dyad where educational AR representations were present or not, focusing on the
         relationships between collaboration, learning, leadership, and knowledge imbalance. We find
         that, overall, AR representations improved time management, learning of structural concepts
         but reduced  learning  of physical  concepts. The  effects of leadership   were mediated   by   the
         presence of AR: the presence of leaders in AR was linked to higher learning gains and better
         collaboration, whereas these effects were not present without AR. Finally, for groups with
         imbalanced   knowledge,   AR   seemed   to benefit participants   in configurations   where less-
         knowledgeable participants took the lead in discussions. These results indicate that AR can be
         beneficial for equalizing the effects of imbalanced collaboration. We discuss the implications
         of those results for the design of CSCL learning activities using augmented reality.

Introduction
In this research we   investigate the benefits and  drawbacks  of augmented    reality for   inquiry-based   learning,
specifically in relation to participant agency and leadership. We focus on a collaborative activity that allows pairs
of students to explore concepts in electromagnetism. Electromagnetism is a topic that is often encountered in both
maker spaces and traditional physics classrooms, and it is one of the most difficult topic to master because it
combines understanding of physical objects (ex: magnets, wires) and abstract concepts (ex: magnetic field shapes,
voltage, electricity) (Belcher and Bessette 2001; Ibáñez et al. 2014; Maloney et al. 2001).
         We   focus  on how  AR    technology  in this educational  context   relates to leadership and   individual
agency. A prevailing issue in classroom group collaborations is the effect of unequal participation and unequal
knowledge among group members. Some people are naturally more dominant while others more passive, and this
may be enhanced by the amount of each person's domain expertise (Salomon & Globerson, 1989). This imbalance
can create negative effects whereby the more passive or less-knowledgeable students do not contribute as much
as their peers, potentially leading to less effective problem solving, collaboration breakdowns, and "free rider"
effects. Augmented reality environments have the potential to mediate the effects of participant leadership and
knowledge imbalances. On one hand, AR environments can provide a plethora of holographic visualizations,
which can be beneficial for participants by allowing passive or lower-knowledge participants to easily follow the
communications of their peers; they allow participants to more easily ask for clarification or interrupt by pointing
at representations; they allow more knowledgeable participants to explain by use of the available representations;
and they can allow more equitable interaction with the experience, thus providing agency to participants who may
naturally be more passive. On the other hand, AR environments require the use of specialized hardware, including
the use of head-mounted devices which may cover the participants' eyes, thus making communication difficult
by masking nonverbal cues such as facial expressions.
         In this study we investigate these topics by studying dyads using head-mounted Microsoft Hololens AR
devices, in conditions where educational AR representations are either present or not. We predict that the presence
of AR information will balance collaboration because participants have shared access to information, thus one
person  will be  less likely to   dominate the  experience;  additionally, we   expect   the availability of  shared
representations to potentially increase the participation of more passive group members. For this reason, we
predict that educational AR   visualizations will have  positive effects on   collaborative  processes.  Finally, we
observe how groups behave when more active participants (drivers) have high or low knowledge, and expect that
groups with more knowledge imbalance will be negatively impacted in the condition where groups do not have
access to educational AR information because a "free rider" effect (Salomon & Globerson, 1989).

Related work
Augmented    reality systems have  been  developed  for a wide   range of  educational   uses, such as  for  learning
geometry (Radu et al. 2015), chemistry (Yu-Chien 2006), and history (Chang et al. 2015). Specifically for physics

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   128                                                    © ISLS
education,  systems have been    built for visualizing   electricity (Belcher and  Bessette 2001)    and magnetism
(Maloney et al. 2001). Augmented reality systems can support student learning of spatial structures, improve
performance on physical tasks, and have lasting effects on participant memory (for a comparative media review
see Radu, 2014). While the effects of AR experiences on learning have been studied, there is relatively less
research focused on  understanding    the impact  of  AR  on  the dynamics    of co-located collaboration. Previous
research projects have focused on designing AR infrastructures that support social interactions (Billinghurst,
Clark, and Lee 2015), for example by allowing a remote expert to inhabit a physical space, allowing multiple
users to annotate physical environments, and allowing users to have different views of the same environment.
Research has also found that student groups using augmented reality can benefit from increased collaboration
because they are more motivated to engage with the experience (Phon, Ali, & Halim, 2014) and because the
experiences simulate real-world professional collaborations (Dunleavy & Dede, 2014). Furthermore, it has been
argued that AR experiences can balance leadership behaviors of participants, since group members can have
access to shared visualizations and one person is less likely to control the group resources (Morrison et al., 2009).
         We contribute to this research agenda by specifically studying how collaboration aspects of leadership
and knowledge imbalance are impacted by the presence of educational AR, presented as holograms on physical
artifacts. A prevailing issue in group collaborations is the effect of unequal participation among group members.
Unequal participation is caused by multiple factors including unequal knowledge relevant to the activity, unequal
ability to control the activity, or unequal personal interest and initiative. In situations where team members do not
(or cannot) contribute  equally, this  typically results in lower learning gains   (Chen  2006).  Previous  research
indicates that when a resource is limited among team members, this encourages one person to dominate the
interaction and creates imbalanced     participation  (Church,  Hazlewood     &  Rogers  2006).   In  such contexts,
participants may simply follow along, leading to decreased learning gains and poor collaboration (Salomon and
Globerson 1989). Shared interfaces such as tangible objects have the potential to balance participation as each
user has access to the learning content (Church, Hazlewood & Rogers 2006), especially when such interfaces
allow participants to have shared control and awareness of information available to the group (Yuill and Rogers
2012).

Augmented reality system and research questions
In this section, we describe how prior work informed the design of our system, the study we conducted, our
research questions and the methodology we used to answer them.
         We   have  designed a   tangible  model   of  a  sound-producing   speaker,    augmented  with  interactive
educational holograms   visible  to two users through    the Microsoft  Hololens  augmented   reality  headset. This
educational system mixes physical content (physical wires, magnets, sounds, magnetic forces, movement) and
virtual content (visualizations of electricity, magnetic fields, force directions). The participants can interact with
the system by playing music or constant electric current in different directions; modify amplification; switch
between different electromagnet coils; and slide the vibrating membrane. They also can use a compass to measure
magnetic fields manually. The system is shown in Figure 1.

 Figure 1. View of the system without educational AR representations (left) with components labeled; view of
    the system with educational AR showing magnetic fields, electricity and related representations (right ­ all
                                holograms and labels are shown as visible in AR).

         In (Radu   &  Schneider,   2019), we    have investigated    how participants'  learning  is influenced by
augmented reality representations at the individual level (results are summarized in Fig. 3). Participants were
randomly assigned to four experimental conditions which comprised a nested design with two factors (primary
factor: presence of AR educational representations, sub-factor: type of technology features). All conditions had
access to the physical system and were able interact by changing electricity, generate sound, move the speaker
membrane,   change  the speaker  coils, and  change   amplification;  furthermore,  all conditions had   access to a

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    129                                                  © ISLS
physical  poster   that explained   electromagnetism   concepts,  had   labels                                                               showing        the        function        of pieces     of   the
physical system. The groups which did not have educational AR representations (noEdAR) were split into 2
subgroups ­ dyads which did not wear the Hololens AR devices, and dyads who did but only saw minimal AR
representations composed of holographic labels of major system components, and holograms of sound waves
which  represented     the   sound  when  the  system  played   music.   The                                                                 participants      who          saw        educational       AR
representations    (EdAR)    had access  to  the same  information, but  could                                                                also        see interactive            visualizations        of
magnetic fields, electron flows, and electricity graphs. These EdAR groups were split into 2 subgroups in which
the presentation of AR visualizations was either presented all at once, or sequenced by a timer. All conditions
performed the same study activities.
         Our   analysis  of   individual learning  gains  indicates that participants                                                                      who         used AR         technology        had
significantly higher learning gains on specific concepts such as understanding spatial structures (ex: shapes of
magnetic fields through questions, i.e. "Draw the magnetic field around a single wire"), higher ability to transfer
knowledge to different situations (ex: transfer questions, i.e. "Is it possible to build a motor that is moved through
electric signals?   If  yes, explain how."),  but  were   significantly worse                                                                at understanding               physical             effects (ex:
questions    about relationship  between    physical  movement   and  magnetic                                                                  fields,     i.e.       "If the       magnetic        field is
suddenly inverted, the speaker membrane: a) is pulled closer; b) is pushed away; c) does not move").

                                                                                                                   Transfer Questions

                                                                                                            Shapes of Magnetic Fields

                                                                                                                Sequential Reasoning

                                                                                                          Rel. Movement vs. Electricity

                                                                                                            Rel. Movement-Mag. Field

                                                                                                             Rel. Electricity-Mag. Field

                                                                                                                      Amplifier Effect

                                                                                                                                         0.0          0.1          0.2          0.3          0.4

 Figure  2.  A  dyad    pair interacting with  the    Figure 3. Individual differences in relative learning gains
 system while seeing AR through Microsoft             (Green: without educational AR; Red: with educational AR;
 Hololens headsets.                                   whiskers: standard error).
         In the current research we focus on the effects of AR on collaboration and participant leadership and
agency, and analyze the data aggregated at the group level. We, compare learning and collaborative behaviors
between two conditions: participants who used the system and saw educational AR visualizations; and participants
who used the system but did not see educational visualizations. We predict that, due to the increased availability
of educational   visualization,  participants  who    see educational   AR                                                               will   exhibit       less      affected       by        imbalanced
leadership and imbalanced knowledge in the group. Our research questions are as follows:
         RQ1: Is overall collaboration and learning impacted by the presence of educational AR?
         RQ2a: How does participant leadership imbalance impact learning, collaboration, and interaction?
         RQ2b: How does leadership differ with the presence of AR?
         RQ3a: How does leadership imbalance impact learning, collaboration, and interaction?
         RQ3b: How does the effect of driver-follower imbalance differ with the presence of AR?

Method
Participants were recruited from the study pool of a laboratory at a university in the northeastern United States.
Participation required subjects to not know each other, have no significant prior physics knowledge, be born
on/after 1976,   speak   English   fluently, have  at least a bachelor's  degree,                                                                and       wear         no  bifocal       glasses.       All
participants first completed a pre-test, followed by a short written introduction to relevant physics concepts.
Participants then worked on the speaker activity for 30 minutes under different experimental conditions (see
Figure   3). During    this period, all participants  worked  on  a worksheet                                                                 and         saw a        poster       of printed      physics
knowledge on the wall. The study ended with a post-test and debriefing. The variables of interest are as follows:

Independent variables
We looked at three different independent variables in our analyses: presence / absence of AR, leadership and
knowledge imbalance. We provide our operationalization of those constructs below:
         Presence of Educational AR: Groups were randomly assigned to conditions in which educational AR

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       130                                                                                                                                        © ISLS
was present (EdAR) or not present (NoEdAR), as described above.
       Leadership: Groups were categorized under two conditions depending on participant leadership: dyads
where a leader was present, and dyads where no leader was present. Leadership was considered to be present
when both partners in a group do not initiate actions equally (i.e. when the maximum score was not recorded for
the qualitatively-observed "reciprocal interaction" dimension, defined in Table 2 below).
       Driver Follower Knowledge: We rated the participation of each person in a group as either being a
"driver" (the participant who typically initiated actions overall) or "follower" (the participant who was more
passive overall). We accounted for differences pretest knowledge, resulting in four group configurations: LL, LH,
HL, HH where the first letter refers to the driver and the second letter refers to the passenger. For example, HL
indicates a high-knowledge driver, and low-knowledge passenger; LH indicates low-knowledge driver and high-
knowledge follower.

Dependent variables
Learning Metrics: We measured participant learning through pre- and post-tests. Participants' learning was
compared using relative learning gains, a measure of the relative improvement that occurred between pre-post test
scores (Cuendet et. al. 2012). The learning test contained multiple-choice and open-ended questions measuring
several aspects of conceptual knowledge. All learning metrics are listed in Figure 3 and described in detail in
(Radu & Schneider, 2019).
       Collaboration Metrics: Collaboration metrics were qualitatively coded for each pair of participants
across several dimensions using a validated rating scheme described in Meier, Spada & Rummel (2007). The scale
evaluates collaboratives  processes through a 5-point        scale  on the  following     dimensions: sustained     mutual
understanding,   dialogue  management,  information        pooling,  reaching       consensus, task division, technical
coordination, and reciprocal interaction. Examples are provided in Table 1.
       Interaction Metrics: The backend of the tangible interface system recorded how much users interacted
with different system components, such as changes in electricity direction, movement of speaker membrane,
changes of speaker coils, and changes in amplification.

Table 1: The measured dimensions of collaboration, based on Meier, Spada & Rummel (2007)

Collaboration Metrics  Example
Sustained mutual       Ensure partners are on same page. Speakers make their contributions understandable for their
understanding          collaboration partner rather than ignoring each other's insight.
Dialogue management Smooth flow of communication with little overlaps. Smooth volley of conversation with little
                       interruptions; partners make sure to have each other's' attention before transitioning to other topics
Information pooling    Ask questions to seek each other's perspective. Partners contribute their insight effectively or ask
                       useful questions to seek opinions.
Reaching consensus     Coming to shared understanding / agreement. Both partners come to a shared conclusion; if there is
                       disagreement, they resolve it through critical consideration
Task division          Task division is balanced, and tasks are explicitly distributed between partners through discussion.
Time management        Deadline met, detailed time planning. Partners monitor the time throughout their cooperation and make
                       sure to finish the current subtask or topic with enough time to complete the remaining subtasks.
Technical              All tools used, including physical compass. Partners use all technology at their disposal, including
coordination           features such as physical magnetic compass, using different coils, referring to the physical poster, etc.
Reciprocal interaction Partners hold equal status in working relationship; both take agency in leading the discussion instead
                       of one partner dominating the working relationship.
Overall Scores         Overall Communication (avg. dimensions 1,2), Overall Joint Information Processing (avg. dimensions
                       3,4), Overall Coordination (avg. dimensions 5,6,7), Overall Collaboration (avg. dimensions 1-8)

Results
In the original study, we recruited 30 participant pairs in the two primary conditions (N=60) and removed sessions
where technical issues were encountered or sessions that contained outliers with exemplary pretest knowledge
(2.5 standard deviations beyond the pretest mean score), resulting in N=56 sessions (N=28 in EdAR, N=28 in
noEdAR).
       For qualitative measurement of the degrees of collaboration and leadership, two researchers double-
coded 20% of the video recordings and achieved interrater reliability of Cohen Kappa 0.67, indicating "good"

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       131                                                     © ISLS
agreement. For statistical tests, normality assumptions were not met for continuous dependent variables, thus we
performed   Wilcoxon  Rank-Sum                                      nonparametric            tests     for      differences          between     conditions           of  Presence  of
Educational AR, and for conditions of Leadership; and we performed Kruskal-Wallis H nonparametric tests
followed by post-hoc tests for differences between conditions of Driver-Follower Knowledge.

RQ1: Are overall collaboration and learning impacted by the presence of educational
AR?
We tested for collaboration and learning differences between EdAR and noEdAR conditions. The EdAR groups
were significantly better at time management (W=446, p=0.050), and significantly better at answering near
transfer questions (W=568, p=0.003), but significantly worse at understanding relationship between magnetic
fields and movement (W=248.5, p=0.019). These learning effects mirror our results of analysis at the individual
level presented in (Radu & Schneider, 2019), where we found these and additional effects detectable in the larger
sample when participants are considered individually (Figure 3). We found no other statistically significant effects
when analyzing differences at the dyad level.

RQ2a: How does participant leadership imbalance impact learning, collaboration,
and interaction?
Dyads were categorized into two groups: dyads where a leader was present (N=22 overall; N=11 in EdAR, N=11
in noEdAR), and where no leader was present (N=34 overall; N=17 in EdAR, N=17 in noEdAR).
        We analyzed whether there is a significant effect of leadership on dependent variables across all groups.
We find that   dyads with                             leadership        generally          had higher         relative     learning     gains     on      all      transfer questions
(W=253.5, p=0.044); but had weaker collaboration in sustained mutual understanding (W=511, p=0.010),
reaching consensus (W=584, p<0.001), task division (W=511, p=0.004), overall joint information processing
(W=562, p=0.001), overall communication (W=492, p=0.033), and overall collaboration (W=584.5, p<0.001).
This indicates that, although leadership causes some learning gains, it also produces visible negative effects on
collaboration.

                                   Leadership Present
                                   Leadership Absent
                                                      Task Division                                              *                                                  *

                        Sustained Mutual Understanding                                                                                                              *

                                  Reaching Consensus                                                             *                                                  *

                     Overall Joint Information Processing                                                        *                                                  *

                                 Overall Communication                                                                                                              *

                                   Overall Collaboration                                                                                                            *

                                                                    0.0       0.5      1.0      1.5       2.0          0.0      0.5       1.0      1.5       2.0

                                    Membrane Sliding                                                                                                                   *
                                                                    0.0       0.5       1.0       1.5       2.0        0.0       0.5       1.0       1.5       2.0

   Figure 4. Significant effects of driver-follower configurations in EdAR (left) and noEdAR (right). *=sig.
                       difference between leadership groups. Whiskers=standard error.

RQ2b: How does leadership differ with the presence of AR?
Since AR seems to have an influence on group leadership, we investigated the effects of leadership in the presence
and absence of educational AR. Within EdAR groups, we found that groups with leadership had higher gains on
transfer questions (W=49.5, p=0.040) and understanding the relationship between electricity vs. movement
(W=47.5, p=0.031); also, groups with leadership had lower scores on reaching consensus (W=147.5, p=0.001),
task division (W=126, p=0.047), and overall joint information processing (W=137, p=0.027), compared to
groups without leadership. In contrast, in the noEdAR condition, the presence of leadership had no statistical
impact on  learning  gains,                           and had        worse        impact     on       collaboration        and system          interaction.        For   groups in the
noEdAR  condition,   similar                           to EdAR           condition,         groups      with       leadership        were      worse     on      reaching   consensus
(W=144.5, p=0.001), task division (W=130, p=0.040), joint information processing (W=144, p=0.009), but had
additional negative  effects                           through          lower     scores     on       interaction     with     speaker          membrane           (W=82,    p=0.039),

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                                                               132                                                                          © ISLS
sustained mutual understanding (W=140.5, p=0.016), overall communication (W=138, p=0.029), and overall
collaboration (W=162, p=0.001). These results indicate that within the EdAR experience, leadership imbalance
has a stronger effect of emphasizing learning gains, and has less negative effects on collaboration and system
interaction.
        To understand the differences between these conditions in relation to leadership effects, we sampled
video recordings from EdAR and noEdAR groups. One theme observed is that in situations where EdAR was
present, the visual representations helped the more passive participant follow the more dominant participant's
explanations: it allowed the passive participants to interrupt and ask for clarification by referencing to the AR
representation. Table 2 illustrates an example in EdAR (left) where one participant is teaching the other by using
magnetic field polarity representations. In contrast, in the Non-AR example (right) one participant is trying to
teach but ends up dominating the discussion while the other participant is unable to keep up with the explanations
due to the lack of shared representations.

Table 2: Quotes from participants in moments of teaching

 EdAR Group                                                         Non EdAR Group
 P1: "The direction is, like, the south pole, like N S N            P2: "So alright here's an interesting thing, when you play music,
 S is the backward one."                                            that's making little currents going forward and backwards, but if
 P2: "Uh huh."                                                      no forward current is allowed, it does this <pushes button> this
 P1: "Can you see that?" <pointing at AR>                           just overpowers everything, and only gonna pull, and when you
 P2: "Yeah."                                                        switch it to forward, only pushes, and when you switch it to
 P1: "Starting from the left, N S -"                                music it does little tiny currents like really fast, and then that's
 P2: "Yeah."                                                        making it vibrate, and as it vibrates it's shaking this cup, and as
 P1: "-N S. And, for forward current, it's -"                       that vibrates it's shaking the air, and that air is shaking our ears,
 P2: "Oh."                                                          and shaking our brains."
 P1: "-S N N S."                                                    P1: "Really cool"
 P2: "S N. Ok. So, this is...so backward was [picks up              P2: "What do you think?"
 pen]"                                                              P1: "Good story" [nervous laughter]
 P1 [confirms, as P2 draws]: "Backward, N S !"                      P2: "You like my story? Ok, so how does that help us get to the
                                                                    question"

RQ3a: How does group leadership imbalance impact learning, collaboration, and
interaction?
Each group was categorized into one of the four driver-follower conditions. LL (EdAR                       N=9, noEdAR               N=9), LH
(EdAR   N=6, noEdAR      N =6), HL (EdAR        N=9, noEdAR N=10), HH (EdAR N=4, noEdAR N=3). We analyzed
the effects of different types of driver-follower configurations across all groups. No statistical differences were
found for relative learning gains and interactions. There was a significant effect of driver-follower knowledge on
the dimension of overall coordination (X2=8.9, p=0.031), and overall collaboration (X2=11.9, p=0.008); in all
cases, descriptive LH    groups   scores higher   than             other groups.  This   indicates  that overall,            groups had           better
collaboration when novices were guiding the interaction.

RQ3b: How does the effect of driver-following knowledge differ with the presence of
AR?
Since the AR medium may influence how driver-follower configurations behave, we investigated the effects of
this variable when educational AR was present or absent. Within the EdAR groups, there were significant effects
of driver-follower configurations on the dimensions of dialogue management (X2=12.4, p=0.006), and overall
collaboration (X2=10.3, p=0.016); in all cases, descriptive statistics show that the LH groups scored higher than
other  groups. Within    the No-EdAR        groups,   there          were  no  significant   effect of   driver-follower            knowledge
distribution. These results suggest that AR educational representations are beneficial to participants in the LH
configurations (Fig. 5):

                                                                                  *Overall Collaboration                                       HLLHHH
                                                                                                                                               LL

        Dialogue Management                                                       *
                                                                                  *
                             0.0        0.5       1.0                1.5      2.0    0.0      0.5      1.0                  1.5      2.0
                                                             EdAR                                                 No EdAR

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                                  133                                                                © ISLS
   Figure 5. Significant effects of driver-follower configurations in EdAR (left) and noEdAR (right). *=sig.
             difference between driver-follower configuration conditions. Whiskers=standard error.

          By qualitatively analyzing  EdAR              and  noEdAR   groups, we   saw  examples    of participants    with      less
knowledge taking initiative in guiding group discussion (Table 3). In groups where AR representations were
present, participants with less knowledge could easily ask questions by pointing at hologram representations of
the system, and participants with more knowledge had an easier time communicating their knowledge by referring
to the visual representations. As an example, Table 3 illustrates how AR representations were useful for guiding
participant discussion (left) and lack of such representations in Non-AR groups contributed to difficulties in
understanding. In both examples, the participant with less knowledge is asking for clarification from the other
participant; in the AR scenario the knowledge is provided by using the AR representations; in the Non-AR
scenario, the person with more knowledge is unable to provide a clear explanation. These behaviors appeared to
encourage communication within AR groups and may be a reason for increased benefits to dyads in the LH driver-
follower configuration.

Table 3. Quotes from participants in the AR and non-AR conditions to clarify ambiguous interactions.
 EdAR Group                                                               Non EdAR Group
 P2: "Is it because it's - is it hitting it? Is the -"                    P1: "So, when it, when it's a backward current
 P1: "I can see the vibration, or I can see how it's moving in this       [illustrating shape of magnetic field using hands],
 AR [moving hand side to side]"                                           it looks like it's pulling this way"
 P2: "In the AR?"                                                         P2 [pointing toward cup]: "On this, this thing,
 P1: "AR - the augmented reality part, like it's just - [gesturing        right?"
 around area surrounding cup and coiled wire with hand]"                  P1: "Yeah, so I wonder - I wonder if it's almost
 P2: "Yeah"                                                               like, when it's backward, it's like that [illustrating
 P1: "The angle of the base is like [pointing to cup]"                    on paper with fingers]."
 P2: "Oh! Oh! Oh! Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah! I like the          P2 [confused, handing pen over]: "Are you good at
 - this thing [moving finger back and forth in front of area              drawing?"
 between cup and coiled wire]. Okay, so the alternating currents          P1 [starting to draw on worksheet]: "Well, I
 is pulling the magnet closer or further - further"                       would, um..."
 P1: "Mm-hm"
 P2: "Okay"

Discussion
Our original hypotheses predicted that the presence of educational AR representations would have an effect on
overall collaboration and learning. For collaboration, we found differences in time management, with lower values
for groups which did not have educational AR representations and tended to run out of time. This indicates that
the AR representations were useful for completing the task, and groups which lacked these had a harder time
understanding the system and communicating since they had to generate their own representations (for example
by drawing). For learning gains, analyses at dyad level did not show the same effect as the individual analysis
presented in (Radu & Schneider, 2019). This is likely due to the effect of averaging the learning between a
participant pair, which reduced the sample size and decreased our statistical power.
          Augmented reality was also helpful for groups where participants had knowledge imbalance, specifically
when the participants with high knowledge took a back seat and allowed the low-knowledge participants to drive
the interaction. When this occurred, metrics of group collaboration was higher in AR groups. This indicates that
AR can potentially improve collaboration in groups where participants have unequal knowledge. This might be
due to the availability of information to both participants, which can equalize the effect of knowledge imbalance
by allowing less-knowledgeable participants to more easily communicate points of confusion by referring to the
existing AR representation. Referring to the present representations might also allow the more knowledgeable
participants to teach his/her  peer, which             can help passive participants be more engaged    in      the collaborative
activity.
          These results point at potential future work investigating the detrimental effects of augmented reality on
learning concepts focused on physicality (ex: relationship between movement and magnetic fields), that possibly
may be caused by learners being hyper-focused by highly visual nature of the AR medium and paying less
attention to physical sensations. On the other hand, these results indicate that AR can be beneficial for equalizing
the effects of imbalanced collaboration, and future work could investigate how this can benefit situations where
participants tend to be imbalanced in agency (ex: in student team projects where some participants are more high-
achieving than others) or in knowledge (ex: in teams of varied expertise levels, where participants may need to
take on the role of teachers).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                             134                                                      © ISLS
Conclusions
In this study we analyzed collaboration, learning and interactions of dyad pairs as they experienced an AR system
for learning about electromagnetism. We found that, in this context, augmented reality was generally beneficial
for both learning   and   collaboration. Overall,   AR   representations improved   time  management,    learning of
structural concepts but reduced learning of physical concepts. The effects of leadership were mediated by the
presence of AR: the presence of leaders in AR was linked to higher learning gains and better collaboration,
whereas these effects were not present without AR. Finally, for groups with imbalanced knowledge, AR seemed
to benefit participants in configurations where less-knowledgeable participants took the lead in discussions.

References
Belcher, J.  W.,  & Bessette,   R.  M.   (2001). MIT   educators   share success-Using    3D animation   in teaching
         introductory electromagnetism. COMPUTER GRAPHICS-US, 35(1), 18­21.
Billinghurst, M.,  Clark, A.,  & Lee,  G.   (2015).  A survey   of augmented  reality. Foundations  and  Trends®  in
         Human­Computer Interaction, 8(2­3), 73­272.
Chang, Y.-L., Hou, H.-T., Pan, C.-Y., Sung, Y.-T., & Chang, K.-E. (2015). Apply an augmented reality in a
         mobile guidance to increase sense of place for heritage places. Journal of Educational Technology &
         Society, 18(2).
Chen, Y.-C.   (2006).  A  study  of comparing    the use of  augmented   reality and   physical models  in chemistry
         education. In Proceedings of the 2006 ACM international conference on Virtual reality continuum and
         its applications (pp. 369­372). ACM.
Church, T., Hazlewood, W. R., & Rogers, Y. (2006). Around the table: Studies in co-located collaboration.
         Austrian Computer Society.
Cuendet, S., Bumbacher, E., & Dillenbourg, P. (2012). Tangible vs. virtual representations: when tangibles benefit
         the  training of spatial   skills. In Proceedings   of the  7th Nordic  Conference     on Human-Computer
         Interaction: Making Sense Through Design (pp. 99­108). ACM.
Dunleavy,   M.,  & Dede,   C.  (2014).   Augmented   reality  teaching and learning.   In Handbook   of research  on
         educational communications and technology (pp. 735­745). Springer.
Ibáñez, M. B., Di Serio, Á., Villarán, D., & Kloos, C. D. (2014). Experimenting with electromagnetism using
         augmented    reality: Impact  on   flow student experience   and educational   effectiveness. Computers  &
         Education, 71, 1­13.
Maloney, D. P., O'Kuma, T. L., Hieggelke, C. J., & Van Heuvelen, A. (2001). Surveying students' conceptual
         knowledge of electricity and magnetism. American Journal of Physics, 69(S1), S12­S23.
Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supported
         collaboration processes. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2, 63­86.
Morrison, A., Oulasvirta, A., Peltonen, P., Lemmela, S., Jacucci, G., Reitmayr, G., ... Juustila, A. (2009). Like
         bees around the hive: a comparative study of a mobile augmented reality map. In Proceedings of the
         SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1889­1898). ACM.
Phon, D. N. E., Ali, M. B., & Halim, N. D. A. (2014). Collaborative augmented reality in education: A review. In
         Teaching and Learning in Computing and Engineering (LaTiCE), 2014 International Conference on (pp.
         78­83). IEEE.
Radu, I., Doherty, E., DiQuollo, K., McCarthy, B., & Tiu, M. (2015). Cyberchase shape quest: pushing geometry
         education boundaries with augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
         Interaction Design and Children (pp. 430­433). ACM.
Radu, I. & Schneider, B. (2019). What Can We Learn from Augmented Reality (AR)? Benefits and Drawbacks
         of AR for Inquiry-based Learning of Physics. In 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
         Systems Proceedings (CHI 2019), May 4­9, 2019, Glagsow, Scotland, UK. ACM.
Radu, I. (2014).   Augmented     reality in   education: a  meta-review   and cross-media    analysis. Personal  and
         Ubiquitous Computing, 18(6), 1533­1543.
Salomon, G., & Globerson, T. (1989). When teams do not function the way they ought to. International Journal
         of Educational Research, 13(1), 89­99.
Yuill, N., & Rogers, Y. (2012). Mechanisms for collaboration: A design and evaluation framework for multi-user
         interfaces. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 19(1), 1.

Acknowledgements
This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation, Grant No. 1748093. We thank all
our participants, reviewers, the Harvard Decision Science Lab, and assistants who helped with data collection.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     135                                                  © ISLS
