      Idea Thread Mapper: Designs for Sustaining Student-Driven
                        Knowledge Building Across Classrooms

                                          Jianwei Zhang and Mei-Hwa Chen
                                       jzhang1@albany.edu, mchen@albany.edu
                                 University at Albany, State University of New York

          Abstract:   This research    project aims to  address   the intra- and  inter-community    challenges
          associated with student-driven knowledge building over longer terms and across classrooms,
          in which students take on collective responsibility for charting the course of sustained inquiry
          and dynamic   interaction.   We   designed   the Idea   Thread    Mapper  (ITM)    system  to  support
          knowledge    building    in  each  classroom   community      as   well as  idea   interaction    across
          communities. At a local classroom level, students engage in focused inquiry and knowledge-
          building discourse. As their inquiry proceeds, they carry out metacognitive conversations to
          frame/reframe their collective inquiry directions and processes and synthesize their journey of
          thinking over time. For cross-community interaction, they selectively share productive idea
          threads and syntheses in a cross-community space for idea contact with broader knowledge
          builders. Supported by ITM, we conducted design-based research in a network of Grades 3-6
          classrooms. Findings and implications are discussed.

Introduction
Research on computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) has made substantial progress in understanding
the sociocultural  and  cognitive  processes    of collaborative  discourse  and  knowledge     building.   However,   as a
field, we still face the challenge of how to enable sustained educational change and transformation in line with
the ethos of CSCL (Chan, 2011; Stahl & Hesse, 2009; Wise & Schwarz, 2017). Tackling this grand challenge
requires new research-based innovations to extend CSCL to longer timescales and larger social scales (Stahl,
2013), transcending the traditional boundaries associated with curriculum areas and school years. Aligned with
these directions,  this paper    presents   our research   to create   new   learning infrastructures    and   designs  for
supporting student-driven knowledge building over long terms across classroom communities.
          Design  efforts  to support   student-driven,  long-term    knowledge   building   in each  classroom    need   to
address two competing demands: to provide the needed classroom guidance and, at the same time, to foster
students' high-level agency over creative knowledge processes (Zhang et al., 2018). Extensive research has been
conducted  to  scaffold  collaborative    learning using  collaboration  scripts,  which    are pre-designed   to  specify,
sequence, and distribute various actions and procedures among learners in order to guide effective interactions
(Kirschner &    Erkens, 2013).   Scripted   collaboration  tends  to  focus  on short-term  inquiry  activities,  in which
students  are given   limited  responsibility  for charting   the process   of  collaboration   and inquiry  (cf.  Wise   &
Schwarz, 2017). Long-term, creative knoweldge building involves highly dynamic interactions that are difficult
to predict and pre-script (Sawyer, 2007). In proudcitve knoweldge building communities, students need to take
on collective responsibly for charting the course of sustained discourse and inquiry (Scardamalia, 2002). The
inquiry  process  continually   evolves   and  deepens  through   members'      interactive input   (Zhang  et al.,  2011).
Deeper problems and knowledge goals are identified over time as new understandings are developed, driving
sustained cycles   of  inquiry. To    guide effective and  broad  classroom    implementation    of dynamic    knowledge
building, new   research   is needed   to clarify  how  such  student-driven,   open-ended,     interactive processes  can
become    socially organized     and   pedagogically   supported      while  addressing  curriculum    expectations    and
contextual constraints (Zhang et al., 2018).
          Efforts to support long-term knowledge building in each classroom can further be supported by a larger
social infrastructure that allows productive ideas to flow between communities. Such knowledge infrastructures
are essential to   the productivity    of real-world  knowledge    communities     that  work   as  interconnected   fields
(Csikszentmihalyi,    1999).  It   is an  unsolved    challenge   for CSCL     research  to  design  such    accumulative
infrastructures and   make    each community's     knowledge   progress  accessible   to other  classroom   communities.
Existing online collaboration systems can easily create a permanent record of student discourse; nevertheless,
the knowledge advances achieved in the discourse are not visible or easily interpretable to outsiders who were
not part of the discussion. In practice, online discussion spaces are typically reset each academic year for the
new student cohort, dumping out the ideas of the previous students. There are emerging efforts to share online
discussion spaces between different communities for collaborative knowledge building (e.g. Laferriere, Law, &
Montané, 2012). The dominant strategy is to have the different communities directly view each other's online

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      144                                                       © ISLS
discussion posts and participate in the same discussion space. However, students often find it difficult to read
other communities' online posts and understand their progress and contexts.
          The design and research work presented herein aims to address the challenges of how student-driven,
long-term knowledge building can be socially organized and how cross-classroom interaction can be supported.
Drawing upon our previous research, we designed the Idea Thread Mapper (ITM) system, which was used to
conduct design-based research in a network of Grades 3-6 classrooms.

The design of Idea Thread Mapper
Zhang   and   colleagues    have  conducted    a series  of studies   to examine    how   productive   knowledge   building
communities operate for student-driven, continual idea improvement (e.g. Zhang et al., 2007; Zhang & Messina,
2010;  Tao    et al., 2015).   The  findings   unveiled  a  socio-epistemic    mechanism    by   which  the  student-driven,
dynamic   inquiry     process  is organized  and  scaffolded:   emergent    reflective structuration.  Different  from   pre-
scripted guidance structures, teachers and students engage in ongoing reflection on their inquiry and discourse
and co-construct various inquiry structures and resources to support their collective work. The co-constructed
structures include shared frames and representations about what the community should investigate, how their
inquiry and discourse should be conducted, and who will work with whom in what areas (Tao & Zhang, 2018;
Zhang et al., 2018). Guided by the co-constructed structures, students monitor their ongoing knowledge building
practices and develop coordinated efforts to advance their collective agenda of inquiry without merely relying
on the  teacher   to  lead  them   through   the whole   process.  Based    on the  insights gained,   we  designed   a  new
collaboration system: Idea Thread Mapper (ITM, http://idea-thread.net), which interoperates with Knowledge
Forum   (Scardamalia     &    Bereiter, 2006)    and  potentially  other    collaborative   learning   platforms. ITM    was
originally created in 2012 (Chen, Zhang, & Lee, 2013; Zhang et al., 2012) and substantially redesigned and
upgraded   during     2017-2018.    The  new   ITM    incorporates    systematic   support   for co-organizing    long-term
knowledge building in each classroom community as well as idea interaction across communities. At a local
classroom level, students engage in focused inquiry and discourse in their own classroom's discourse space,
carry out metacognitive conversations to reflect on shared focuses and insights emerged from the distributed
discourse, and synthesize their journey of inquiry including the progress achieved and deeper problems to be
addressed. For cross-community interaction, they selectively share productive idea threads and syntheses in a
cross-community       space  for  dynamic  idea  contact   with their "buddy    classrooms."   Across     both social levels,
students  take   on   high-level  responsibility  for structuring    their  unfolding  inquiry   directions  and  processes,
reviewing progress, and planning for productive collaboration with the support of embedded analytics.                 Below
we summarize the design principles and features.

Principle 1: Reflective structuration: Co-organize the journey of inquiry as it unfolds
Current collaborative online environments in the forms of online forums and chatting lack support for students
to structure and monitor their unfolding, collective journey of inquiry. Students' online discourse tends to focus
on teacher-assigned     topics    and tasks. Also, with  students'   diverse   idea  input  recorded   in distributed online
postings,  it is  often difficult   for students  and   their teacher    to monitor  the   collective  knowledge   progress
achieved  in  the  online   discourse   (Hewitt, 2001;   Suthers,  Vatrapu,   Medina,   Joseph,  &   Dwyer,    2008;  Zhang,
2009). Therefore, to better support students' reflective monitoring and co-organizing of their collective inquiry,
ITM   incorporates     meta-layer   representations   of   student-constructed   inquiry    structures  on  the   top of  the
distributed online discourse. The meta-layer inquiry structures serve to capture students' shared directions of
inquiry  emerging     from  their  interactive discourse,   visualize the   unfolding  strands   of inquiry, and  document
shared progress in each strand of inquiry to inform students' deepening work. The specific features include:
          (a) Co-organizing shared wondering areas and inquiry threads: As a high-level structure to guide each
knowledge building inquiry that may last over several months, students co-organize their shared wondering
areas and specific threads of inquiry (Figure 1) as their work proceeds. Each wondering area is a major direction
of inquiry (e.g., brain), which is identified by the classroom members based on their interests and questions.
Under each wondering area, members develop one or more inquiry threads, each of which investigates a more
specific problem or challenge (e.g. How does the brain work to control body movement?) related to one (or
more) wondering area. The wondering areas and threads of inquiry are emergent, co-formed structures, which
are similar to "desire lines" --as apposed to pre-planned paths--formed in public spaces (Zhang et al., 2018). In
a knowledge building initiative, students begin with open exploration and discourse to develop initial ideas and
questions.  Through     monitoring    emerging   inquiry   interests and    evolving needs,  they   identify   high-potential
wondering areas and set up idea thread focus, which guide their collaborative discourse and joint inquiry to
advance   their  understandings    while continually    identifying  deeper   problems.   Each   student  can  select one or
more  wondering       areas as his/her  primary  focus   of inquiry,  and   adjust  his/her focus   as the inquiry  unfolds.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         145                                                      © ISLS
Students with shared  interests form into spontaneous flexible  groups to conduct collaborative      inquiry and
advance their understandings.

  Figure 1. Project dashboard with a visual organizer of the collective wondering areas and idea threads. The
              thickness of each branch shows the intensity of online contributions in each area.

     (b) Visualizing the conceptual, temporal and social profiles of each idea thread: Drawing upon the
temporal inquiry-thread analysis developed in our prior work (Zhang et al., 2007), ITM organizes and visualizes
students' online discourse in each idea thread as theme-based, temporal interactions. Each idea thread represents
a conceptual line of inquiry that involves a sequence of discourse entries--possibly involving several build-on
trees--investigating a shared inquiry object over a time period. Figure 2 shows the discourse in an idea thread
developed by a group of fifth-graders focusing on how the brain works. The discourse entries (notes) and build-
on responses are displayed in a two-dimension space based on the timeline of note creation and the authors
involved, showing the temporal and social profile of student contributions in this line of work.

   Figure 2. An idea thread developed by a Grade 5 classroom focusing on how the brain works. Each dot
 represents a note (click to open), and a line connecting two notes shows a build-on connection. The notes are
                      displayed based on the time of creation (x-axis) and author (y-axis).

         (c) Reflective documentation of Journey of Thinking in each thread of inquiry: As the conversation in
each thread of inquiry proceeds giving rise to new insights as well as deeper issues, the contributors co-compose
a Journey of Thinking (JoT) synthesis to deliberate their idea progress. JoT is a reflective "super note" that

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 146                                                   © ISLS
includes    three sections: problems/issues    explored, "big ideas" learned   so far, and deeper    research  needed.
Scaffolds are provided in each section to guide student reflection. For example, for the synthesis of the "big
ideas" learned, students frame their ideas using "We used to think...now we understand..." (see Table 1).

Table 1: A Journey of Thinking written by a group of 5th graders in the idea thread about breathing

 Questions             [We want to understand:] how do the tissues use the oxygen? How and why do we
 explored:            breathe?
 Big ideas            [We used to think:] That there was not a big process to this.
 learned:             [We now understand:] We get oxygen from air we breath in. The oxygen goes through the
                      thin walls of the air sacs. With the help of hemoglobin, oxygen passes through the air sacs
                      into the blood vessels throughout the body. As that happens CO2 goes out of your body.
                      ...
 Deeper               [We need to do more learning] about how air get around the body.
 research             [We need better theories about] Where is hemoglobin exactly located in the body and does
 needed:              it do anything else besides carry oxygen to the blood, and bring CO2 back into the lungs.
                      [We need to further understand] ...more about tissues.

            (d) Mapping collective progress and connections across different threads of inquiry: At a higher level,
the collective landscape of a whole knowledge building initiative is mapped out as clusters of idea threads that
investigate interrelated issues through the contributions of all the members (Figure 3). The map of idea threads
shows   how      the different threads  of inquiry  have  evolved  over   time and   further visualizes  cross-thread
connections,     which  show   student efforts to build  on and integrate ideas   from the related   areas to develop
coherent understandings (see analysis in Zhang et al., 2018). The connections include (a) build-on links among
the notes     in  the  different idea  threads;   and (b)   connective "bridging     contributions," each   of   which
simultaneously investigates two or more topics focusing on the interrelated issues and cross-cutting ideas. For
example, in Figure 3, there is a rich set of notes bridging thread #1 (heart and lungs), #3 (brain control), and #4
#4 (blood), as marked by the dashed vertical lines. Thus, with the visualizations and analytics embedded in the
map  of     idea threads, students can  reflect on  the  temporal process of   their inquiry as well  as   their social
participation (e.g. the number of notes and authors involved) and connectedness.

  Thread #1

  Thread #2

  Thread #3

  Thread #4

  Thread #5

Figure 3. Mapping student discourse in the different idea threads developed in a Grade 5 classroom that studied
the human body. Each color stripe represents an idea thread addressing a principal problem, spanning from the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     147                                                    © ISLS
    earliest to the latest note created. Each dot shows a note. A line connecting two notes indicates a build-on
 connection. Dashed vertical lines mark the notes belonging to multiple threads bridging the different lines of
                                                    discussions.

Principle 2: Boundary crossing between knowledge building communities
On the basis of the student-driven inquiry in each classroom community, ITM further incorporates supports for
cross-community interaction, which is approached using a multi-level, boundary-crossing design (Zhang et al.,
2017). As students engage in focused inquiry and conversations and make progress in their own classroom, they
reflect on  their progress of inquiry  and   generate   JoT   super notes, as synthetic knowledge       artifacts. These
artifacts are used  as boundary   objects  (Star &  Griesemer,    1989)  to  support  higher-level  interaction    across
classroom communities.
          In the related literature, boundary objects are defined as artifacts (e.g. reports, tools, models) that can
be used to bridge the boundaries (discontinuities) between different social worlds (Star & Griesemer, 1989).
Objects from a community often have contextual meanings that are not easily accessible to other communities.
What    makes boundary  objects  effective for bridging   different  communities   of practice  is  their interpretative
flexibility as a "means of translation" (Star & Griesemer, 1989): they have a structure that is common enough to
make them recognizable across the different social contexts and allow different communities to interact and
work together. Through interacting with shared boundary objects, members from different communities can
identify, understand,  and  reflect on their  different practices,  so they  can develop    better understandings    and
practices within their own community and potentially create new forms of practices at the intersection of the
different communities (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011).
          As noted previously, individual online discourse entries are hard to be used as boundary objects for
cross-classroom sharing and interaction. Therefore, ITM uses high-level structural representations in the form of
idea threads and JoT syntheses as boundary objects. These synthetic artifacts capture the journeys of inquiry
taking place in different classrooms using a set of common scaffolds (see Table 1), so they can help the different
communities    to  understand one    another's inquiry   directions  and   knowledge    progress.   Specifically,    ITM
incorporates a cross-classroom sharing space for each knowledge building initiative (See Figure 1). The teacher
can create "buddy connections" with other classrooms that are studying the same or related content areas, which
may   come   from  the same   or a  different  school   site. Students can  then   interact with   peers  in the   buddy
classrooms in the follow ways:
          (a) Ongoing access to the buddy classrooms' wondering areas and idea threads:        Students can see what
the buddy   classrooms  are researching   based  on their wondering     areas and  idea threads    (see  Figure  1), and
compare the wondering questions pursued by the different communities. For deeper information, they can also
directly view the online discourse in any of the idea threads (in a read-only mode).
          (b) Ongoing sharing of the JoT syntheses: Students can access the syntheses generated by the buddy
classrooms, and find the most relevant syntheses based on the keyword-based index or using the search tool. As
noted previously (Table 1), each JoT synthesizes the progress in a thread of inquiry including the questions
explored, "big ideas' learned, and deeper research needed. Thus, by viewing other classrooms' JoT syntheses,
students can get a sense of their journey of inquiry and learn from their "big ideas" and deepening questions.
For example, two upper elementary classrooms collaborated in their inquiry about human body systems. While
both classrooms investigated how the heart works as part of their inquiry, one classroom's inquiry questions
focused more how the healthy heart functions while the other classroom researched problems about how holes
in the heart affect its function. Through reading the heart-related JoT of the other classroom, students realized
the different questions asked and discussed the two perspectives to develop coherent understandings (Zhang et
al., 2017).
          (c) Live Super Talk across buddy classrooms: Students can propose challenging issues as potential
topics for cross-classroom discussion, which is called "Super Talk." For example, in our research, four Grade 5
classrooms studying the human body worked as buddy classrooms. As students made progress in their own
classroom understanding how the different body systems work, a few students in one of the classrooms were
intrigued by the question of how the human body grows. They proposed this challenging issue as a Super Talk
topic shared  by  the four classrooms.  A  total of 20   students   from the  four classrooms  contributed    23   notes,
looking into how people grow as related to the brain, spine, bones, muscles, skin, digestion, cells, and genetics.

Principe 3: Embedded analytics to leverage student reflection and idea interaction
ITM integrates a set of analytics and visualizations in the local discourse space and cross-community space (see
elements of analytics in Figures 1-3). Specific analytics embedded in the online discourse spaces aim to foster
students' reflective monitoring of the temporal, social, and conceptual profiles of their inquiry. A summary of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    148                                                       © ISLS
the  key  analytical information   is also  reported in  the Activity  Radar,  with    which  students can  trace  their
personal and collective contributions to the various wondering areas and idea threads in a selected time period.
Additionally, in collaboration with analytics researchers we tested a set of automated tools to help students
monitor inquiry directions, personal contributions, and collaborative connections.       For example, to help students
monitor  emerging    topics/areas  of inquiry and review    progress, ITM    provides   an automated   tool for topical
modeling. Specifically, it uses an augmented Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, 2012) method to retrieve
conceptual topics from student online discourse in relation to topical structures detected from the relevant expert
texts (e.g. Wikipedia article). For each topic, the tool further recommends the most relevant online posts, ranked
based on semantic relevancy. The user can then review the posts as potential entries for setting up a new idea
thread, and define the topic name based on the top keywords. To support student review of each idea thread,
ITM further incorporates automated analysis enabled by LightSIDE (formerly known as TagHelper -- see Rosé
et al., 2008). LightSIDE   learns   from human-coded     discourse  data  to  classify student online  posts  based on
contributions  types, including    questioning, referencing  sources,  theorizing,   and using evidence   (see  Tao  &
Zhang, 2018 for the coding scheme). The automated classification is used to help students monitor the various
online discourse moves in each thread of inquiry in order to make informed improvement. To facilitate cross-
community interaction, we further tested analytics to gauge the semantic similarity between the idea threads of
different communities. Students can find relevant inquiry work conducted by other classrooms, with which they
may develop buddy connection and collaboration.

Design-based research
ITM has been tested and refined through our multi-year design-based research conducted in a set of Grades 3-6
classrooms   (Zhang   et al,  2013,   2014, 2017,    2018;  Zhang   &  Yuan,   2018).    Students in   each  classroom
investigated a science topic over multiple months with the support of ITM and Knowledge Forum. Their work
integrated  whole  class  knowledge    building  conversations,    individual  and   group reading,  experiments   and
observations, and so forth. Major questions, ideas, and findings generated through face-to-face activities were
contributed online for continual discourse. With their teacher's support and using ITM, students engaged in
metacognitive meetings to reflect on the emerging interests and ideas, form shared wondering areas and inquiry
directions, and   organize   their collaborative  roles  to  guide  their work    in the   shared inquiry   areas. The
visualizations of the wondering areas and collaborative roles were used to guide their monitoring and planning
of the ongoing participation and discourse. As the inquiry deepened within their own classroom community,
students reviewed productive threads of ideas and composed JoT syntheses, which were shared with their buddy
classrooms  to stimulate  cross-community     interaction.  Multiple  sources  of  data  were  collected  and analyzed
including   video records  of metacognitive     meetings in  the   classrooms, online   discourse and  JoT   syntheses,
individual reflective portfolios, and interviews with the teachers and students. We summarize the main findings
below focusing on the within-community and cross-community processes.

Co-constructing shared inquiry structures serves to inform students' ongoing
discourse and enhance student understandings
The data analysis documented the processes by which students worked with their teacher to co-construct shared
inquiry structures to guide their collective work, including shared frames of collective wondering areas and idea
thread topics, mapping of cross-thread connections, and ongoing syntheses of JoT. Such structures served to
inform students' ongoing contribution and interaction. With ITM reflection, students were able to conduct more
productive and connected discourse: there was a higher proportion of notes identifying deeper questions, using
evidence to examine explanations, and integrating different ideas to address challenging issues. Their discourse
also became    more    connected    with   more  build-on    links and  more    connective    notes  that investigated
interconnected inquiry themes and issues (Zhang et al., 2013; 2014; 2018). The enhancement to student inquiry
and  discourse  contributed   to improving  students'   knowledge    outcomes.  Students   with   ITM  achieved    more
sophisticated understandings of the science topics as measured based on the content analysis of their reflective
portfolios (Zhang et al., 2018). Each student also developed clearer awareness of their community's knowledge
goals and progress beyond their personal interests, conducive to enhancing personal learning and collaborative
connections (Zhang et al., 2014).

Cross-classroom interaction leads to mutual learning and advancement
We further tested cross-classroom interaction for knowledge building (Zhang et al., 2017, 2018). For example, a
design-based research study was conducted in two grades 5/6 classrooms that studied human body systems over
a 10-week period (Zhang et al., 2017). As the students conducted focused inquiry and discourse within their

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    149                                                     © ISLS
own community, they reviewed productive threads of ideas and posted JoT syntheses in a cross-community
space. The syntheses were written by students using ITM's scaffolds for JoT reflection: Our problem, We used
to think...and now we understand..., We need deeper research. A set of syntheses from the previous classrooms
studying human body systems was also posted in the cross-community space. The analyses of the classroom
discussions and student interviews suggest that the students engaged in active and substantial interactions with
the JoT syntheses from other classrooms. They identified relevant and interesting inquiry topics from other
classrooms and compared the different perspectives and ideas, which triggered students' deep reflection on their
own inquiry. Further iterations of this design-based research expanded the cross-classroom interaction to more
classrooms studying human body systems (Zhang & Yuan, 2018). Content analysis showed that the students'
JoT syntheses had a high quality of reflection in capturing solid knowledge progress and deep questions. Social
network analysis indicated that through reading the JoT syntheses from their buddy classrooms, students built
extensive peer connections focusing on their own inquiry areas as well as the broader scientific concepts. They
further identified   challenging  topics (e.g. how  people   grow)   at the intersection of their interests to conduct
cross-classroom collaboration and discourse, putting together their knowledge about the specific body parts to
develop coherent explanations.

Conclusions and implications
ITM and the related studies contribute new strategies to address the intra- and inter-community challenges of
long-term knowledge     building.   Particularly, this research   elaborates  a reflective  structuration approach   to
implementing     long-term  inquiry   and knowledge    building   for   educational transformation.  In   a knowledge
building initiative  (unit) that  may  extend  over multiple   weeks  or   months, the teacher can work     with his/her
students to   co-structure  their collective journey of   inquiry over   time without  extensive  pre-scripting  of the
inquiry directions and tasks. Through ITM-supported reflective processes, students can work with their teacher
to co-structure the high-level issues about their inquiry, such as what to investigate, through what processes, by
whom/with whom as their inquiry unfolds (Zhang et al., 2018; Tao & Zhang, 2018). ITM provides meta-layer
representations and tools to capture the co-constructed directions and structures of inquiry, which are visualized
to aid members' reflective monitoring and participation. The ITM-based research further elaborates a boundary
crossing approach    to cross-community      interaction. While students    engage  in focused inquiry  and  discourse
within  their own    classroom,   they generate   reflective Journey    of Thinking syntheses,  as boundary-crossing
objects, and participate in the Super Talk to investigate challenging problems together. In sum, the ITM-based
technology designs and classroom processes shed light on new designs of socio-technological infrastructures for
enabling networks of knowledge building communities, each of which engage in continual idea advancement
while building on the knowledge work of other communities. ITM's generic data exchange model supports data
exchange  with    other online    discourse  environments    besides  Knowledge     Forum.  Building  on  the  existing
advances, we are currently designing analytics and feedback tools to help teachers and their students monitor
emergent inquiry directions and progress in their classroom while discovering potential knowledge connection
with other communities.

References
Akkerman,     S. F., &  Bakker,   A.   (2011). Boundary    crossing  and   boundary  objects.  Review of    Educational
         Research, 81 (2), 132-169.
Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic topic models. Communications of the ACM, 55(4), 77-84.
Chan, C. K. K. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge building in
         Hong Kong classrooms. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6, 147-
         186.
Chen, M.-H., Zhang, J. & Lee, J. (2013). Making collective progress visible for sustained knowledge building.
         In N. Rummel, M., Kapur, M. Nathan, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), To See the World and a Grain of
         Sand: Learning across Levels of Space, Time, and Scale: CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings Volume
         1 (pp.81-88). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). Implications of a systems perspective for the study of creativity. In R. J. Sternberg
         (Ed.), Handbook of creativity (pp. 313-335). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hewitt, J. (2001). Beyond threaded discourse. International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 7(3),
         207-221.
Kirschner, P. A., & Erkens, G. (2013). Toward a framework for CSCL research. Educational Psychologist, 48
         (1), 1-8.
Laferriere, T., Law, N., & Montané, M. (2012). An international knowledge building network for sustainable
         curriculum and pedagogical innovation. International Education Studies, 5, 148-160.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      150                                                   © ISLS
Rosé, C., Wang, Y.-C., Cui, Y., Arguello, J., Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2008). Analyzing
         collaborative learning processes automatically: Exploiting the advances of computational linguistics in
         CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(3), 237-271.
Sawyer, R. K. (2007). Group genius: The creative power of collaboration. New York: Basic Books.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
         (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Scardamalia,     M., &  Bereiter,  C.    (2006). Knowledge     building: Theory,   pedagogy,    and   technology.  In R.  K.
         Sawyer      (Ed.), Cambridge     handbook    of  the learning  sciences  (pp. 97-115).    New    York:  Cambridge
         University Press.
Stahl, G. (2013). Learning across levels. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,
         8(1), 1-12.
Stahl, G.,   &   Hesse, F.   (2009).   Classical  dialogs  in  CSCL.    International   Journal    of Computer-Supported
         Learning, 4, 233-237.
Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, "translations" and boundary objects: Amateurs and
         professionals in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907­39. Social Studies of Science, 19,
         387­420.
Suthers,  D.,    Vatrapu,   R., Medina,     R.,   Joseph,  S., &   Dwyer,    N.   (2008). Beyond      threaded   discussion:
         Representational     guidance     in asynchronous     collaborative   learning   environments.    Computers     and
         Education, 50, 1103-1127.
Tao, D., & Zhang, J. (2018). Forming shared inquiry structures to support knowledge building in a Grade 5
         community. Instructional Science, 46(4), 563-592.
Wise,  A.    F., &   Schwarz,   B. B.    (2017).  Visions  of  CSCL:   Eight   provocations    for the future of  the field.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(4), 423­467.
Zhang, J. (2009). Comments on Greenhow, Robelia, and Hughes: Toward a creative social Web for learners and
         teachers. Educational Researcher, 38, 274-279.
Zhang, J., & Messina, R. (2010). Collaborative productivity as self-sustaining processes in a Grade 4 knowledge
         building    community.       In K.   Gomez,   J.  Radinsky,    &   L. Lyons   (Eds.),  Proceedings     of  the  9th
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 49-56). Chicago, IL: International Society of
         the Learning Sciences.
Zhang, J., & Yuan, G. (2018). Cross-Classroom Interaction for Knowledge Building: A Design Experiment in
         Four     Grade 5    Science   Classrooms. Paper      presented  at  the  13th International   Conference     of the
         Learning Sciences (ICLS). London, UK: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Zhang, J., Bogouslavsky, M., & Yuan, G. (2017). Cross-community interaction for knowledge building in two
         Grade    5/6  classrooms.    In  Smith,  B. K.,  Borge,   M., Mercier,   E., and Lim,     K. Y.  (Eds.), Making   a
         Difference:    Prioritizing   Equity    and Access    in CSCL,   12th   International  Conference    on  Computer
         Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2017 (Vol. 1). Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the
         Learning Sciences.
Zhang, J., Chen, M. -C., Li, H., Zhao, Y., Chen, J., Rajbhandari, B. L., ... & Naqvi, S. (August, 2012). Making
         collective progress visible: The design and application of Idea Thread Mapper for sustained knowledge
         building. Knowledge Building Summer Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Zhang, J., Hong, H.-Y., Scardamalia, M., Teo, C., & Morley, E. (2011). Sustaining knowledge building as a
         principle-based innovation at an elementary school. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20, 262­307.
Zhang,   J., Lee,  J., &    Chen,  J. (2014).    Deepening    inquiry  about   human   body systems    through    computer-
         supported metadiscourse. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of American Educational Research
         Association, Philadelphia, PA.
Zhang,   J., Scardamalia,    M.,   Lamon,     M., Messina,    R.,  &  Reeve,   R. (2007).  Socio-cognitive    dynamics    of
         knowledge     building    in the work    of nine- and    ten-year-olds.  Educational  Technology     Research   and
         Development, 55, 117­145.
Zhang, J., Tao, D., Chen, M.-H., Sun, Y., Judson, D., & Naqvi, S. (2018). Co-organizing the collective journey
         of inquiry with Idea Thread Mapper. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 27, 390-430.

Acknowledgements
This research was sponsored by the National Science Foundation (#1122573, 1441479). We express our thanks
to Drs.  Feng    Chen, Carolyn    Rosé   and  Marlene    Scardamalia   for  their intellectual input;  to our collaborating
teachers and their students for their creative classroom work enabling this research; and to the members of our
project team who have contributed to the software development and classroom research.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         151                                                     © ISLS
