   The Role of Funds of Knowledge in Online Search and Brokering
                Wendy Roldan, Paola Vanegas, Laura Pina, Carmen Gonzalez, and Jason Yip
                wr4@uw.edu, pvdt@uw.edu, lpina@uw.edu, cmgonzal@uw.edu, jyip@uw.edu
                                          University of Washington

        Abstract: Lower-socioeconomic status, immigrant parents who are English language learners
        often work collaboratively with their children to search the internet. Family members rely on
        each other's  language and  digital literacy skills in this collaborative  information problem
        solving process known   as  online  search and  brokering   (OSB).   While  previous work   has
        identified the ecological factors that impact OSB, research has not yet distilled the specific
        learning processes behind such collaborations. From a case study analysis of three families, this
        work explores the funds of knowledge that children and parents rely on as they engage in
        collaborative learning experiences  through   OSB.   We    demonstrate how   in-home  computer
        supported collaborative processes are often informal, collaborative, social, and highly relevant
        to solving real-life information challenges. Our work shows how parents and children draw on
        their funds of knowledge when they search collaboratively, with and for their family members,
        to build their collective knowledge of technology and problem-solving.

Introduction
Approximately 8 million U.S. children have at least one immigrant parent who is an English language learner
(Zong, Batalova, & Hallock, 2018). Lower-socioeconomic status immigrant parents often rely on their children's
language and digital literacy skills to address family needs (Eksner & Orellana, 2012). In these families, adults
and children work with each other to search the internet, in a collaborative information problem-solving process
we call online search and brokering (OSB) (Pina et al., 2018; Yip, Gonzalez, & Katz, 2016). For these families,
children's responsibilities extend beyond traditional chores to holding the role as the family's primary problem-
solver for critical family needs through online information searches (Pina et al., 2018). While previous work has
identified online search and brokering practices (Yip et al., 2016) and the ecological factors that influence online
search and brokering (Pina et al., 2018), research has not yet distilled the specific learning processes behind such
family collaborations. While online information problem-solving models (Brand-Gruwel, Wopereis, & Walraven,
2009) contribute to our understanding of digital learning and information processing, they do not fully explain the
sociocultural, collaborative learning processes that occur as families engage in online search and brokering.
        Our  research focuses  on Latin  American  families,   the fastest growing population  in the U.S.    (Pew
Research Center, 2018). Latino children are projected to make up about a third of the K-12 enrollment by 2023
and with more than half of them living in immigrant families (Foxen & Mather, 2016), many of them are searching
for critical information online for their English language learning family members. Education researchers engaged
in sociocultural historical approaches with children from non-dominant backgrounds explain that learning is an
ongoing process that is not divided into separate characteristics of individuals and contexts (Gutiérrez & Rogoff,
2003). Therefore, we believe it is important to understand the learning that occurs in intergenerational, bilingual,
information problem-solving family collaborations. Previous research with families whose households have been
traditionally viewed as low-resourced, applies a funds of knowledge framework to understand and nurture the
strategic knowledge and skills that are often overlooked (Moll, Amanti, Neff, & Gonzalez, 1992). Using a funds
of knowledge  framework  (Moll  et al., 1992) this work    explores the learning  processes that occur in  Latino
families, when family members collaboratively search for information online. We examine a case study of three
focal Latin American,  lower-socioeconomic    status, English   language   learner families as they   engaged   in
collaborative, computer supported, online search and brokering. Our research questions are: RQ1. What funds of
knowledge do bilingual children and their English language learner parents rely on when attempting to solve
information problems using the Internet?; and RQ2. What are the collaborative learning processes around online
information searches in English language learner families as they work together?

Background
This work builds on literature in individual and collaborative search processes, the phenomenon of search and
brokering, joint media engagement, and sociocultural historical theory on learning as a cultural, ongoing activity.
We draw on research that investigates how individuals search for information online to make sense of the learning
that happens within individual search processes. However, in applying individual problem-solving models for
online search we find gaps with respect to understanding how learning occurs in intergenerational and bilingual
collaborative searches. Thus, we turn to the literature on language brokering that focuses on intergenerational and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  160                                                  © ISLS
bilingual problem-solving between youth and their parents to help us fill the gaps. To strengthen our literature
review on online search and brokering with families, we find that joint media engagement is a particularly useful
framework to examine the learning that is happening as families use media together and in the home.
Individual and collaborative search processes
A rich body of work explores how individuals search for information online. Models like Information Problem-
Solving for the Internet offer insights into the set of skills individuals need to search for information online. These
skills include: defining, searching, scanning, processing, and organizing information (Brand-Gruwel et al., 2009).
While we know much about the learning that happens within individual search processes, less is known about the
process of how people collaborate together to solve information problems and the learning processes behind it
(Stahl, Koschmann,    &  Suthers,   2006). Research    on online  searching as  a  collaborative   process between
individuals (Morris, 2013), shows the opportunity to reinforce and learn search skills from exposure to others'
strategies (Foss et al., 2012). But much of this work has focused on skilled peer adults searching remotely together
using online tools (Morris, 2013). Further, research with families engaged in informal collaborative relationships
with technology suggests that participation in these activities can nurture knowledge of managing information
and promoting self-direction of one's learning (Jenkins, 2006). This strand of research provides insights into the
relationship between  collaboration   and  learning but focuses  on collaborative  engagement     in technologically
mediated activities that are not information problems. From our literature review, we conclude that research on
intergenerational,  bilingual, collaborative search    processes and   learning is  limited  thus  we   turn to the
communications literature that explores language brokering with youth in the home.
Online search and brokering (OSB)
Recent literature explores how parents and children work collaboratively to address family information needs
using digital resources, in a process known as online search and brokering (Pina et al., 2018). Research on
immigrant youth shows how language brokering is part of everyday life as children and parents work together to
address family needs (Orellana, Dorner, & Pulido, 2003). Bilingual youth work as translators and interpreters for
their immigrant parents, which opens the families' access to resources and information on education, health, and
finances. As families collaborate to address family needs in everyday language-brokering events, different levels
of skills and expertise are leveraged, and knowledge becomes co-constructed (Eksner & Orellana, 2012). As the
digital divide narrows, scholars have also explored how children become technology brokers to introduce and
teach their parents new technologies (Nelissen & Van den Bulck, 2018). There are significant differences in how
children help their parents with technology across families from different socio-economic status (Brown, Bakken,
Nguyen,    & Von   Bank, 2007).  In high-socioeconomic    status families, children drive  the adoption  of  mobile
applications, technology for entertainment, and educational purposes. On the other hand, in families from a lower-
socioeconomic   status, children help  connect   their adult family members   to  critical information  needs (e.g.,
finances,  health, well-being)  (Nelissen  &  Van   den   Bulck, 2018).  Collaborative     family engagement    with
technology also differs significantly across families. To further contextualize our work as parents and children
use technology together, we draw on literature from joint media engagement.
Joint media engagement (JME)
The nuanced interactions that occur as parents and children engage in online search and brokering is a form of
joint media engagement that has not been previously studied (Pina et al., 2018). The phenomenon of joint media
engagement helps us understand the experiences of people using media together as they view, play, contribute,
search, and create with both traditional and digital media (Sobel et al., 2017; Takeuchi & Stevens, 2011). Previous
research with families defines joint media engagement as the process of learning between children and parents as
they co-create meaningful connections among interests, experiences, and representations using all forms of media
and technologies that are present in children's lives (Takeuchi & Stevens, 2011). However, much of the research
on joint media engagement emphasizes learning together through gaming, entertainment, and education (Gee,
Takeuchi, & Wartella, 2018). Our work builds on prior research with families and technology by identifying the
funds   of knowledge    that children and  their parents  draw   on to problem-solve   and   co-create  meaningful
connections that extend beyond play and family fun to solve critical family needs.
Theoretical framework ­ funds of knowledge
We apply a funds of knowledge framework to examine the collaborative, intergenerational, bilingual, information
problem-solving learning processes that occur during online search and brokering with an asset-based perspective.
A funds of knowledge framework allows us to understand the historically accumulated and culturally developed
bodies of knowledge that are essential for household and individual well-being (Moll et al., 1992). We posit that
a funds of knowledge approach allows us to capture the tacit knowledge parents and children draw on when

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    161                                                  © ISLS
engaging in online search and brokering, knowledge that is not necessarily taught but critical to family well-being.
This  framework allows    us to push   the conversation  away  from  deficit models  of learning   for non-dominant
students towards honoring the learning that occurs in the household and everyday activities of Latino youth and
adults as they search and broker for information online collaboratively. Previous research with families whose
households have been traditionally viewed as low-resourced uses funds of knowledge to refer to the strategic
knowledge and skills that exist within these families (Moll et al., 1992). A person's funds of knowledge can be
described as their accumulated life experiences, the skills and knowledge they use to navigate everyday life, and
their cultural-historical academic  and    personal background    knowledge.  Our  work  builds  on    prior funds of
knowledge research in learning and education, by identifying the knowledge and skills found in households that
members use to solve information problems as a computer supported collaborative learning process.
         As parents and    children engage   in everyday  online  search  and brokering,  we   explore   the learning
processes that occur through a sociocultural lens by applying a funds of knowledge framework. Sociocultural
scholars propose that the educational movement toward equity will occur, "as we create learning environments
that connect in deep ways to the life experiences of all students" (Nasir, Rosebery, Warren, & Lee, 2006). A
sociocultural lens provides new insights on issues of race, culture, and learning (Nasir et al., 2006). Learning, as
a cultural process of engagement in repertoires of practices, is a process in which individual development is
understood in cultural and historical contexts (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003). Building on this body of work, we
recognize understanding learning requires a focus on how individuals engage and participate in particular every
day activities and how they draw on artifacts, tools, and others to solve problems (Nasir & Hand, 2006).

Methods
For this study, we adhered to the standards and practices of a case study examination (Merriam & Tisdell, 2015).
We focused on three Latin American lower-socioeconomic status, English language learner families in the Pacific
Northwest and their collaborative learning experiences through engagement in online search and brokering.
         This exploratory, qualitative study with three focal families is a part of a larger qualitative study. Between
July 2016 and June 2017, we visited 23 families in an urban area of the Pacific Northwest, U.S., within a 32-
kilometer radius of our research institution. Our participants included parents, grandparents, and children aged
10-17. Most of the adults that were a part of our study were born in Mexico, did not have a college-degree, worked
in service industries, and represented a lower-socioeconomic population. At the time of this study, a tense political
climate existed for Latino families therefore we relied on community center networks, local cultural events, and
a paid community liaison as a part of our recruitment strategies. We conducted two separate in-home family visits
per family. In-home visits allowed participants to feel comfortable in their usual search and brokering environment
and allowed researchers to observe search practices within the home's digital infrastructure. In our first in-home
visit (V1), we conducted separate adult and youth retrospective interviews to contextualize where and how they
search. In V1 we  gathered   family    members'  perspective   on their practices, strategies, and challenges   when
searching for information online. The interview protocol was adapted from previous work on in-home media
studies (Katz & Gonzalez,    2016).    Each interview   (45-60 mins) was  audio    recorded and  transcribed.  Parent
interviews were in Spanish and youth interviews in English. For our second in-home visit (V2), we focused on
directed internet search tasks between adult-youth dyads. Visit 2 was audio recorded and screen interactions were
video recorded. In V2, participants engaged in a set of imposed search tasks prompted by researchers and historical
tasks of prior online searches. We take a deep dive into three specific families from this larger data set (Table 1).
Table 1: Demographics of the families
 ID    Relationship (Age)                   Occupation       Adult birthplace       Grade completed by adult
 2     Mother (39), Daughter (10)           Hospitality      Mexico                 Primary, 4th grade
 17    Grandfather (62), Grandson (12)      Food Industry    Mexico                 Secondary, 7th grade
 22    Mother (42), Daughter (15)           Housekeeping     Mexico                 Secondary, 10th grade

         Our selection criteria for these three families are the following. (1) Each family offered insights into
different household structures that influence the online search and brokering process. One family was a mother-
daughter dyad within a single-parent home, another was a grandparent-grandson dyad within a seven-person
home, and the third was a mother-daughter dyad within a four-person family home. (2) In a comparative analysis
each family allowed us to see how despite the differences across family structures, we observed themes in the
funds of knowledge used and the learning processes occurring during online search and brokering. (3) Each family
offers insights into different types of devices used in the home to search for information.
         For this paper, we analyzed data from V1 and V2 with three families to explore our research questions.
To analyze the data, two researchers used open coding with constant comparative analysis (Merriam & Tisdell,
2015). This iterative open-coding was done for both parent and child interviews and for an analysis of V2 video

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    162                                                    © ISLS
data. Two researchers open-coded the data independently for themes such as technology and language brokering,
information problem-solving, relationships, perceptions of learning, and strategies and challenges to searching.
We coded and compared the themes to develop further categories for analysis and then systematically compared
and contrasted the themes between researchers. Following open-coding, we used axial coding to make connections
between funds of knowledge categories and subcategories. We performed a constant sorting and comparative
analysis until theoretical saturation was reached and no new codes were generated. Finally, we looked at these
themes and interpreted them using a funds of knowledge analytical lens. Data on search tasks from our second
visit allowed us to triangulate interview data from our first visit to provide a rich analysis of our data.

Findings
For each family, we provide a case description for context and describe a search task in-depth. We then discuss
each case using a funds of knowledge analytical lens (Moll et al., 1992) to help us document the learning and
knowledge in practice that is a part of online search and brokering as a daily household routine (Gutiérrez,
Morales, & Martinez, 2009). We highlight the funds of knowledge that each family member brings into the
collaborative information problem search process from their home and community lives (Moll et al., 1992). Each
family engages in online search and brokering differently with devices, set-ups, and strategies. All quotes are
translated from Spanish. We use     [ ] to indicate typing  on digital devices. All names used    in the     cases are
pseudonyms, with NameA for adult, and NameC for child.
Family 2. NormaA and MiaC
Case Description. MiaC is NormaA's 10-year-old youngest daughter who helps her mom with searches on a more
regular basis compared to her older sisters. MiaC is a developing yet savvy searcher, often struggling with spelling
search words but consistently recognizing the need for descriptive terms to narrow her search. At the time of the
study, NormaA indicated she did not feel confident with technology but was aware of technology resources
through her local community networks. In V1, we learned NormaA and MiaC engaged in collaborative online
search and brokering when NormaA discovered someone had taken money out of her bank account fraudulently.
The woman from the bank taught MiaC how to access NormaA's online banking information for her. During V2,
we saw this financial search information problem revisited. For one of the tasks, NormaA wanted to find the closest
bank near her home. MiaC clicked the search bar (Figure 1, left), and began to type using the tablet screen keyboard
and her two index fingers, [the cosest bank]. MiaC paused as the search engine suggestions came up for the closest
bank of america and the closest bank of america to me. MiaC continued to type into her search [the cosest bank of
america] and pressed the search button to generate results. MiaC scanned the results and clicked on the Google
visual map (Figure 2, right). MiaC hovered her finger over the options and explained to her mom what the results
meant. MiaC noted Option A is the closest because it appeared first.

                 Figure 1. Norma and Mia searching for the closest bank using Google Maps.
Case analysis. Knowledge of linguistic translational practices
In this case, we notice how NormaA and MiaC use their funds of knowledge about each other's assets to complete
their financial information search task of finding the bank nearest to them. MiaC built on her cultural repertoires
of linguistic practice as she (a) translated her mom's inquiry about finding the closest bank from Spanish to
English; (b) searched using key descriptive terms in English that would narrow her search for banks nearest her;
(c) scanned the information presented in English; (d) relied on visuals and maps to find answers; and (e) translated
the results back to NormaA. After the search was completed, MiaC explained she did not understand maps, but
NormaA used her knowledge of spatial geography and relied on her lived experiences of navigating this area to
understand  where the bank was.     NormaA   and MiaC  helped  each  other process,  translate, and  increase   their
collective understanding of finding and reading a map. We see knowledge of linguistic translational practices used
in their intergenerational, bilingual, online search and brokering practices. In this example, we see MiaC engaging
in a range of practices that challenge deficit notions of students' repertoires developed across non-school settings
(Gutiérrez et al., 2009). As MiaC collaborative searches with and for her mom, she uses linguistic knowledge,
problem-solving and search knowledge, and translation knowledge. Each of these funds of knowledge MiaC uses
to search could become future resources for her learning across settings and practices, inside and outside the
classroom (Gutiérrez et al., 2009).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   163                                                     © ISLS
Family 17. CarmeloA and MateoC
Case Description. MateoC is CarmeloA's 12-year-old youngest grandson who helps CarmeloA with most of his
searches. CarmeloA owns a restaurant and is a lifelong learner who desires to learn more about technology. MateoC
is a visual and audio  searcher who  feels comfortable with   technology   and  uses google voice to search    for
information. Similar to MiaC, MateoC struggles with spelling and instead prefers to say rather than type a word.
In V1, CarmeloA told us that he searches the internet to buy things for his restaurant and preferred images to make
sense of information online. In V2, we observed CarmeloA and MateoC search together for new industrial stoves
knobs for CarmeloA's restaurant. CarmeloA wanted to buy goods on Amazon for his restaurant. MateoC clicked
on the Amazon app on a smartphone and clicked on the search bar (Figure 2, left). He moved his fingers from the
search bar to the keyboard. MateoC showed CarmeloA how to go to the search bar. Carmelo took the smartphone
and typed [buttons for] in Spanish. MateoC interrupted and asked if this was for clothing, but CarmeloA explained
this was for stoves. When Carmelo finished typing, the Amazon app returned images of what Carmelo was looking
for. As the discussion continued, there was a disconnect between what MateoC thought they were looking for.
MateoC typed word [butten] into the Amazon search bar (Figure 2, center). MateoC said the search was not giving
him what he wanted. CarmeloA took back the phone, left the Amazon app, clicked the Google app, and typed [how
do you spell buttons in English]. CarmeloA said, "There it is! This is how I do it. But it takes me a long time." At
this point CarmeloA asked MateoC to teach him how to search using voice to be more agile. MateoC clicked on the
voice icon on Google search (Figure 2, right) and told him to just talk. CarmeloA took the phone up to close to his
mouth and said, "I want to look for buttons for the stove," but the search did not work. MateoC explained, "You
have to push this button and then go. You push it and go." CarmeloA used the voice assistant again, "I want to
look for buttons for the stove." CarmeloA looked and smiled at the search result images of the knobs he was
looking for, having learned a new technology skill (Figure 2, right).

   Figure 2. Carmelo and Mateo searching for stove knobs using the Amazon app and Google voice assistant.
Case analysis. Knowledge of problem-solving strategies
In this case, we believe CarmeloA and MateoC rely on each other's funds of knowledge to explore different search
strategies when they face the challenge of not knowing the translation between buttons and knobs in Spanish.
Carmelo relies on his lived experiences running the restaurant to explain to MateoC what he was looking for.
MateoC sets the search up for CarmeloA by (a) previously configuring the Amazon app settings to Spanish; (b)
showing him where to enter his search terms; and (c) clarifying what it is they are looking for to make sure the
language translation is correct. When they get stuck, CarmeloA uses his previous knowledge related to persistence
to show MateoC how he uses the Internet to problem-solve translational challenges. Further, this example shows
how each other's funds of knowledge are taken up as they explore alternative search strategies moving from the
Amazon app, to Google search, to Google search voice assistant. CarmeloA observes MateoC using the Google
voice assistant and learns how to do it himself through MateoC's scaffolds. The two help each other conceptualize
the problem, explore different internet resources to push away from challenges, and learn new language and
technology skills. We see knowledge of alternative strategy exploration being taken up by CarmeloA and MateoC
as they expand   their knowledge  of technology  to uncover    the    shared meaning  of knobs/buttons in     their
multisensory (auditory and visual), intergenerational, bilingual, and online search and brokering practices.
Family 22. RomeliaA and AmyC
Case Description. AmyC is RomeliaA's 15-year-old daughter. RomeliaA is a stay-at-home mom and relies on
AmyC to search for information related to the needs of others in the home. RomeliaA watches videos on YouTube
to learn how to do things like braid hair or find new recipes. AmyC is a searcher who uses multiple strategies in
action as she searches for her mom using her knowledge about viruses, advertisements, and web browsing. When
the two engage in collaborative online search and brokering together they often sit side-by-side, co-viewing on
the family desktop computer. During our first visit, we learned RomeliaA wished she knew how to help her
husband search for construction jobs. In V2, we observed how AmyC and RomeliaA search for construction jobs
for the father. AmyC asked, "What jobs do you want to help find for papa?" (Figure 3, left). RomeliaA responded,
"Like companies, like companies that have jobs." AmyC typed, [construction companies hiring near me] and
clicked on the second search result, Monster.com. RomeliaA noted, "Make sure the search results are local." AmyC
narrowed the search by selecting the U.S. state and typed [construction] in the Monster.com search box. The
search results come up and AmyC translated the job descriptions from English to Spanish for her mom. As AmyC

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  164                                                   © ISLS
simultaneously interpreted, translated, and scanned the results, she also explained why she was not clicking on
job postings that require a technical or engineering degree. However, AmyC noted she was stuck. RomeliaA
suggested adding the word siding and Amy typed in [constructing citing (sic)], which did not result in what they
needed. AmyC asked, "citing, right?" They stepped away from the computer and look for other resources to refine
their search terms. RomeliaA pointed to the father's contracting certification that showed how to spell siding the
correct way (Figure 3, right). Amy typed, [construction companies hiring siding installers in (U.S. state)]. She
translated the information to her mom. RomeliaA asked, "How much do those jobs pay?" Amy noted it was about
$20 an hour. AmyC asked, "Do you want jobs for him or for his company?" RomeliaA stated, "I want to look for
jobs for a contractor, not jobs that hire by the hour, I want to look for big jobs because he has his company."

    Figure 3. Romelia and Amy searching for construction siding jobs using online and physical resources.
Case analysis. Knowledge of search resources
RomeliaA and AmyC discuss, contribute, and move from online resources to resources in the home to move past
challenges. When AmyC began the search, RomeliaA used her geospatial knowledge and lived experiences of
finding a job to ask Amy to narrow the search for local jobs. AmyC used her knowledge to (a) click on a job search
engine; (b) scan the job postings; (c) translate linguistically the search results; and (d) explain her interpretation
of the job  descriptions. When   the  two  got  stuck,  RomeliaA  offered new search     terms  (siding) while  AmyC
continued to scan and interpret website search results. Using knowledge of alternative resources available to them
beyond the Internet they collectively (a) step away from the computer; (b) find the father's contracting license;
and (c) correct their spelling of their search terms. They build on each other's funds of knowledge to conceptualize
the problem, find alternative resources to spell the search term, and explain what type of job they are looking for
based on the father's qualifications. We argue knowledge of search resources moves fluidly between the two as
they translate across language, across physical and online, and across technical linguistic practices.

Discussion
Funds of Knowledge in Online Search and Brokering. In this study, we found that each individual family member
contributes their own knowledge to collectively build household knowledge resources. Each child is a part of a
larger social structure within the home where they rely and share their knowledge with siblings, parents, and
grandparents. Across all families, we observed how MiaC, MateoC, and AmyC's role as the primary searcher in
their home carried "the trace of prior social relations," building on their prior actions while co-creating new
knowledge with adults (Bakhtin, 1981; Vossoughi, Jackson, Chen, & Roldan, Under Review; Vygotsky, 1978).
The adults usually have knowledge for the search conceptualization such as geospatial understanding, spelling
clarifications, or knowledge of family resources. The children usually have critical technology proficiency and
linguistic translational knowledge    to search, scan,  process, gather, and translate   online information.   During
collaborative searches, each family member continually builds on the knowledge of each other's assets. This
knowledge informs the ways in which children and adults set up future learning opportunities for each other within
online search and brokering practices.
        Further, we highlight how family members developed resilience, as they faced structural and systemic
challenges  to searching   for  information    (language, access to social resources,    schooling).  Resilience was
reinforced through funds of knowledge and resource sharing as family members relied on each other's knowledge,
strategies, and skills when met with a challenge during their search process (Berkes & Ross, 2013). Across all
families, we observed resilience at the level of the individual and the household as interrelated, with family
members actively developing their shared resilience through capacity building and collaborative learning while
engaged in online search and brokering (Berkes & Ross, 2013). The families persisted and relied on their funds
of knowledge     (translational practices,   problem-solving,   search resources)     collaboratively to  solve  their
information problems when they got stuck or tried to problem-solve through the unknown. For the majority of the
adults in this study, the United States is not their home country. With this information, we can see the funds of
knowledge   related to   resilience, problem-solving    through  new   situations, and  strategies to   move  beyond
challenging  situations  while  engaging  in   online search and brokering in our     data. Building  on sociocultural
theories of learning, we offer this analysis as a way to help us construct classrooms that draw on the funds of
knowledge   that students  bring from    their home   and everyday  experiences    to promote  holistic  and equitable
development and learning (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003).
        Collaborative Learning Processes in Online Search and Brokering. In contrast to highly individualized

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     165                                                   © ISLS
instructional systems (e.g., formal school), we demonstrate learning processes in-the-home are often informal,
collaborative, highly social, and highly relevant to solving real-life information access challenges. Through our
thematic analysis of the funds of knowledge that adults and children draw on while they engage in collaborative
online  search   and brokering  with   their families, we  offer a  nuanced  understanding   of computer   supported
collaborative learning processes happening within the home. We contribute to studies of joint media engagement
(Takeuchi & Stevens, 2011) by identifying the funds of knowledge Latino families draw on to problem-solve and
co-create solutions that extend beyond play to solve critical family needs. Joint media engagement is not just
about learning together through gaming, entertainment, or educational technologies. Instead, we highlight the
ways that  family   members   work    together as a group  to  solve  information problems   using online  connected
technologies. Work within CSCL notes that group cognition forms as a result of collaborative knowledge building
in which meaning is created across the utterances of different people (Stahl, 2006). In our cases, all of the adults
and youth act in a joint activity to problem-solve for their family needs. The shared construction of meaning
occurs  as   both  adult  and child   engage   through  intersubjectivity of   language, technological  interactions,
information problem-solving, and family funds of knowledge. For many of these families, the group remains at
the synchronous level, in which adult and child work together around an interactive device (e.g., desktop, tablet,
laptop, smartphone) to collaborative solve their family information needs. We believe our research in this area
contributes to CSCL as there is a need to identify how technology and online information problem-solving for
family needs supports how people learn, and uncovering what challenges lie ahead.
         Implications for Educators. As online search and brokering plays a major part of family practices, our
work highlights the funds of knowledge that are evident as parents and children search together, which educators
can utilize in the classroom to design instructional materials that are relevant to students' family responsibilities.
Overall, while our findings focus on a specific group of Latin American families with English language learner
parents  from    a lower-socioeconomic   status,  family information   search  and collaboration   happen  across  all
contexts and   ages.  For example,    other  immigrant  English  language learner  families  might search  for health
information for elderly family members together. Individuals must use similar processes of finding information
together, making sense of that information, and translating that information by closely drawing on their funds of
knowledge at each step of the information problem-solving model. By examining a) the funds of knowledge
families use in online search and brokering and b) the computer supported collaborative learning processes in
online information search, we are better able to provide instructional design implications to help schools, libraries,
and community       centers attend  to culture   in understanding    students' learning. Our  work   opens    up  new
opportunities to bridge home and school through the computer supported collaborative learning process that are
embedded in children's every day practices. Our findings can help educators consider family roles when designing
curricula. Future work could examine the unique challenges of English language learning students and how their
search practices might fluctuate across formal and informal contexts.

Conclusion
We argue that an intergenerational online search and brokering process is different compared to collaborative
online information problem-solving that happens between classroom peers or between co-workers. Our research
shows how both parents and children draw on their funds of knowledge when they search collaboratively, with
and for their family members, to build their collective knowledge of technology and problem-solving. Through
the metaphor of a jigsaw puzzle, we can begin to understand how collaborative problem-solving takes first, the
identification of knowledge and skills and secondly, the learning processes behind figuring out how to can arrange,
turn, and shift the puzzle pieces, in this case the funds of knowledge, to solve the information problem at hand.
The CSCL     community    can benefit  from   an  understanding  of how   online search  and brokering  is a  form of
collaborative learning around technologies, given it is the daily reality for millions of bilingual children.

References
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays by mm bakhtin (m. holquist, ed.; c. emerson & m.
         holquist, trans.). Austin: University of Texas Press.
Berkes,  F., &   Ross, H.   (2013). Community     Resilience: Toward   an Integrated  Approach.  Society   &  Natural
         Resources, 26(1), 5­20. https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2012.736605
Brand-Gruwel, S., Wopereis, I., & Walraven, A. (2009). A descriptive model of information problem solving
         while using internet. Computers & Education, 53(4), 1207­1217.
Brown, B. B., Bakken, J. P., Nguyen, J., & Von Bank, H. G. (2007). Sharing information about peer relations:
         Parent and adolescent opinions and behaviors in Hmong and African American families. New Directions
         for Child and Adolescent Development, 2007(116), 67­82.
Eksner,  H.  J., &  Orellana, M.   F. (2012).  Shifting in the  zone: Latina/o  child language  brokers and   the co-

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     166                                                  © ISLS
        construction of knowledge. Ethos, 40(2), 196­220.
Foss, E., Druin, A., Brewer, R., Lo, P., Sanchez, L., Golub, E., & Hutchinson, H. (2012). Children's search roles
        at home: Implications for designers, researchers, educators, and parents. Journal of the American Society
        for Information Science and Technology, 63(3), 558­573.
Foxen, P., & Mather, M. (2016). Toward A More Equitable Future: The Trends and Challenges Facing America's
        Latino Children. Retrieved from http://publications.nclr.org/handle/123456789/1627
Gee, E., Takeuchi, L., & Wartella, E. (Eds.). (2018). Children and families in the digital age: learning together in
        a media saturated culture. New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Gutiérrez, K. D., Morales, P. Z., &  Martinez, D. C.    (2009). Re-mediating literacy: Culture, difference,    and
        learning for students from nondominant communities. Review of Research in Education, 33, 212­245.
Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.
        Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19­25.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Confronting the challenges of participatory culture: Media education for the 21st century. An
        occasional paper on digital media and learning. John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
Katz, V. S., & Gonzalez, C. (2016). Toward meaningful connectivity: Using multilevel communication research
        to reframe digital inequality. Journal of Communication, 66(2), 236­249.
Merriam, S. B., & Tisdell, E. J. (2015). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. John Wiley
        & Sons.
Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitative
        approach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 132­141.
Morris, M.  R. (2013). Collaborative search revisited.  Proceedings of the conference  on computer  supported
        cooperative work. ACM, 2013.
Nasir, N. S., & Hand, V. M. (2006). Exploring Sociocultural Perspectives on Race, Culture, and Learning. Review
        of Educational Research, 76(4), 449­475.
Nasir, N. S., Rosebery, A. S., Warren, B., & Lee, C. D. (2006). Learning as a Cultural Process: Achieving Equity
        Through Diversity. In The Cambridge handbook of: The learning sciences. (pp. 489­504). New York,
        NY,   US: Cambridge University Press.
Nelissen, S., & Van den Bulck, J. (2018). When digital natives instruct digital immigrants: Active guidance of
        parental media use by children and conflict in the family. Information, Communication & Society, 21(3),
        375­387.
Orellana, M. F., Dorner, L., & Pulido, L. (2003). Accessing assets: Immigrant youth's work as family translators
        or para-phrasers. Social Problems, 50(4), 505­524.
Pew      Research      Center.      (2018).     Hispanic/Latino        Demographics.      Retrieved           from
        http://www.pewresearch.org/topics/hispaniclatino-demography/
Pina, L. R., Gonzalez, C., Nieto, C., Roldan, W., Onofre, E., & Yip, J. C. (2018). How Latino Children in the US
        Engage in Collaborative Online Information Problem Solving with their Families. Proceedings of the
        ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 2(CSCW), 140.
Sobel, K., Bhattacharya, A., Hiniker, A., Lee, J. H., Kientz, J. A., & Yip, J. C. (2017). It wasn't really about the
        Pokémon: Parents' Perspectives on a Location-Based Mobile Game (pp. 1483­1496). ACM Press.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, Mass:
        MIT Press.
Stahl, G., Koschmann, T. D., & Suthers, D. D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning.
Takeuchi, L., & Stevens, R. (2011). The new coviewing: Designing for learning through joint media engagement.
        Presented at the New York, NY: The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop.
Vossoughi, S., Jackson, A., Chen, S., & Roldan, W. (Under Review). Embodied pathways and ethical trails:
        Studying learning in and through the choreography of social relations.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Interaction between learning and development. Readings on the Development of Children,
        23(3), 34­41.
Yip, J.C., Gonzalez, C., & Katz, V. (2016). The learning experiences of youth online information brokers. In C.
        K. Looi, J.L. Polman, U. Cress, & P. Reimann, P. (Eds.). Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners:
        The International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) (Vol. 1, pp. 362 ­ 369).
Zong, J., Batalova, J., & Hallock, J. (2018). Frequently Requested Statistics on Immigrants and Immigration in
        the United States. Migration Policy Institute.

Acknowledgments
We thank the families that allowed us into their homes and the individuals that contributed to this research.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  167                                                 © ISLS
