Collaboration on a Massive Scale ­ Conceptual Implications of the
                                                    Crowd

          Norma Reichelt, Christine Bussian, Christoph Richter, Heidrun Allert, and Lars-Arne Raffel
       reichelt@paedagogik.uni-kiel.de, bussian@paedagogik.uni-kiel.de, richter@paedagogik.uni-kiel.de,
                           allert@paedagogik.uni-kiel.de, lars.raffel@email.uni-kiel.de
                      Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Institute of Educational Science

          Abstract: The question of how to engage large user groups in web-based learning arrangements
          is consistently raised in CSCL discourse. Recently the interest in crowd phenomena of joint
          knowledge creation and inquiry as well as their adaptability within institutionalized learning is
          brought together under the term of mass collaboration. This paper proposes a conceptualization
          of the crowd since learner involvement, sociality, collaboration and knowledge construction,
          coordination and regulation efforts, as well as assessment must be fundamentally thought anew,
          when we take a step away from a small group setting. Thus, we put forward a design framework
          that provides perspectives on CSCL environments on a massive scale and thereby challenges
          our understanding of collaborative learning.

Introduction
In the last years, the masses have played a decisive role in raising social, economic, political and environmental
issues and   mass movements     like Occupy,  the  Arab Spring  or #blacklivesmatter   have  drastically  established
unprecedented    ways  of public discourse   and engagement.   In  science and   education, large accumulations   of
learners, researchers or civic participants are addressed in open education initiatives like Massive Open Online
Courses (MOOCs) or Open Educational Resources (OERs) and get involved in open science or citizen science
projects. Further, it is also relevant to mention phenomena of joint development and creation (for example open
source software development or the global online encyclopedia Wikipedia) as well as various possibilities for
distributed financing, fundraising or forms of investigative journalism (for example the investigation platform
Bellingcat). With these new forms of participation we notice new forms of collaboration and knowledge practices
that are  inseparably  linked with   technological developments    especially in the fields of social  software  and
web2.0/3.0 applications like social network sites and microblogging services. Herein lie promising challenges and
opportunities for CSCL research and development to further evolve in the light of technological advancement and
novel forms of interaction. The relevance of web 2.0 dynamics and tools has already been extensively discussed
within the CSCL community, particularly in the discourses on collaborative knowledge building (Lu et al. 2010;
Scardamalia   et  al. 2012).  Also,  the quality of massiveness    has been   introduced  under   the term   of mass
collaboration as one of the future-oriented topics for the design of and the research on collaborative learning
environments (Cress et al. 2016; Fischer 2016; Jeong et al. 2017).
          This paper contributes to the ongoing discourse. Firstly, we try to conceptualize the socio-technical
construct behind the above-mentioned phenomena, that we further refer to as the crowd. We distinguish the crowd
from a community and outline it as a distinct entity with specific qualities. In this way, the crowd serves as a
productive anchor point to envision innovative learning scenarios and learning environments that are designed to
transcend conventional classroom or distant learning settings towards participatory, engaging and fast paced forms
of  interaction. Secondly,   we put  forward   a design framework    for CSCL    scenarios  that  allows  to  discuss
implications of the crowd for the development of a learning environment that supports large groups of learners to
establish collaborative  knowledge   practices.  Building on  four forms   of mediation  (Paavola  et al. 2012),  we
introduce five   design areas -  learner involvement,   coordination and   regulation, sociality, collaboration  and
knowledge construction, assessment and feedback - under which we deepen our understanding of the crowd for
learning contexts. Finally, we discuss in what way and to what extent the crowd as an organic entity and as an
institutionalized and formalized educational setting - as most CSCL scenarios suggest - can be integrated with
one another productively. Additionally, forms of crowd inquiry and crowd insight must be specified, especially
in comparison to conventional scientific knowledge practices. Thus, this paper provides clarification regarding
the  current and  highly  relevant   social phenomenon    of crowds  and   systematically   opens it  up  for further
theorization and the development of computer supported collaborative learning environments.

Conceptualizing the Crowd for a CSCL context
In the following section, we discuss the crowd from two complementary angles. We ask how the crowd can be
understood in its procedural nature - mainly in its formation, its internal coherence and its actions - and how we

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    168                                                   © ISLS
can describe it in its fundamental structural and socio-technical properties. To ensure integrability within the
current CSCL   discourse, we   structure  our  argumentation   by  building  on  the   state of the art  of the  mass
collaboration approach and  by  deriving  it closely from   widespread   and acknowledged       concepts,  namely   the
Community of Practice (CoP) (Lave & Wenger 1991) and the Community of Interest (CoI) (Fischer 2001; Fischer
2007). As stated above, mass phenomena are quite different in nature. Not only explicit cases of education or, in
a broader  sense, knowledge    creation come   to mind  but  also  instances of  civic  engagement,    socio-political
participation and activism. While in the field of institutionalized education massiveness remains an ongoing
challenge, at the same time we can observe the emergence of informal large-scale accumulations of respective
reach, vigor, creative power, productivity and voice. Following, the latter serve as a starting point to conceptualize
the crowd and discuss it from a CSCL point of view. Therefore, with the crowd, we are facing a complex social
entity, characterized by a highly dynamic nature and intricate internal structure, making use of diverse sets of
socio-technical tools and infrastructures and bridging between online landscapes and physical arenas.
         From an educational perspective, these current mass phenomena lack a theoretical framework which
approaches the  crowd  as a distinct type   of socio-technical  entity. Large-scale  interactions,  in  an admittedly
expansive understanding, are mainly discussed in connection to the CSCL concept of mass collaboration (Cress
et al. 2016; Fischer 2016; Jeong et al. 2017). Despite the marginal conversation about the crowd as a theoretical
construct and the use of the term itself, the discussion on how participants come together and engage in large-
scale collaborative efforts offers a valuable starting point to establish an understanding of the crowd. Under the
term of mass  collaboration we  are  able to   distinguish the collaboration in  massive  scale  environments    from
interactions in small groups or teams. Mass collaboration, in the broadest sense, is described as a large gathering
of people in order to work or learn together (Fischer 2016). These social entities are understood as knowledge
communities which Jeong et al. (2017) use as an umbrella term to describe a union of people in which knowledge
is shared, picked up by others and in some cases newly constructed (Cress et al. 2015). For such knowledge
communities, Jeong et al. (2017) list three distinct characteristics in terms of their interaction. Firstly, when such
knowledge communities come together at arguably large scale, this form of interaction results in the collaboration
among participants from various backgrounds and different geographical locations (Jeong et al. 2017; Fischer
2016). Secondly, despite the differences in knowledge background and geographical location, the participants of
knowledge communities manage to organize their work in order to collaborate on artifacts (Jeong et al. 2017).
Lastly, the product of mass collaboration usually entails knowledge creation based on collective work efforts
(Jeong et al. 2017). Although this definition includes an underlying notion of a crowd, by taking a closer look, it
becomes clear that the crowd and the community are not considered separately. Yet, we have reason to believe
that the crowd bears its own distinct features which we discuss in more detail in the following.
         Knowledge   communities  understood    in the context  of massiveness     are defined  by  bearing a   shared
"mission" (Jeong et al. 2017) in order to achieve a productive way of working together. We argue that when
considering the crowd, this shared "mission" has to be viewed from two complementary perspectives. A shared
concern on the one hand is what incites masses of participants to form and maintain a crowd while joint efforts
on the other hand are their unified actions. To illustrate this distinction: For the social justice crowd phenomenon
#blacklivesmatter the  unified rage  about  police brutality   against citizens of african-american    decent   can be
regarded as a shared concern and the various activities within the movement (for example using the hashtag across
the whole social media landscape or participating in rallies and demonstrations) represent the joint efforts of the
crowd. Shared concerns in our understanding of crowds are able to initially and virally vitalize exceptionally large
amounts of people and keep their unified momentum going. Whether or not crowds eventually dissolve without
a shared concern or with a concern losing its force of attraction over time - just like CoIs dissolve, after a project
has ended (Fischer 2007). Another possible scenario could be the gradual stabilization or institutionalization of
certain domains of a crowd in more sustainable communities. Also, communities may not only be seen as a
remnant of crowd activity but as a relevant factor when it comes to virally spreading a concern or collectively
joining efforts. In this reasoning we assume that crowd and community aspects interplay in a certain way for
productive large-scale collaboration,   the  complex   synergy  of those   socio-technical    entities has  yet to  be
empirically explored in more detail.
         To further distinguish the crowd from communities, we consult the conceptions CoP and CoI. For one
thing, a CoP is characterized by a shared social practice as a constituting element. It implies specific properties
such as long-lasting, ongoing participation and holding together the members through the attribution of certain
roles (e.g., newcomer/oldtimer). The internal structure of a CoP has an underlying notion of being potentially
open to anyone while practically offering restricted access for people that can constitute themselves as a member
by enacting and upholding the communities' shared practices or by becoming part of it by progressively adapting
(Lave & Wenger 1991). This notion of community is typically used to describe social unions of people from
similar (knowledge) backgrounds which are defined by a form of biased communication as the members only

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   169                                                     © ISLS
communicate amongst each other, building up on a common background (Fischer et al. 2007, p. 14). Since the
crowd as pointed out is mainly held together by its shared concern and joint efforts, the diversity among its
participating individuals may reach far beyond that of a CoP. Although CoIs (primarily described as focusing on
a specific mutual interest) include the notion of diverse members as well (Fischer 2001), it is important to point
out that CoIs fail to pick up the argument of viral temporality and the inherent momentum that we would ascribe
crowds. CoIs per definition present a "community of representatives of communities" (Fischer et al. 2007, p. 13)
for example in interdisciplinary project teams. In contrast to these conceptions of community, a crowd does not
exhibit the procedural characteristics of moving from peripheral to full and core membership (as conceptualized
by Lave & Wenger 1991), for example engaging in an ongoing process of enculturation by upholding a shared
practice. Rather, in a crowd, various perspectives on shared issues are brought together and expressed side by
side, not in a way of successively becoming a part of something by adapting to a set of enacted practices but in a
way of being momentarily involved. Certainly shared practices play an important part in connecting the various
members of a crowd and securing their mutual understandings to some extent. Nevertheless we would argue that
there is a declining significance of inherent processes of establishing convergence for the social entities at hand.
Within the concept of CoPs there is a strong focus on reenacting a given internal structure. This is also discussed
for CoIs with the difference that a diversity in participants calls for processes of negotiating and establishing
common ground to a greater extent (Fischer 2007). For massive-scale interactions however it can be put into
question if common ground and a widely accepted consensus provide an underlying mechanism of agreement at
all or if antagonisms and notions of dissent can coexist in a unified crowd without endangering the overall efforts.
         To this point we have established the crowd by building on a community perspective. To add to this we
have to further take into account the crowd not only as a social entity but as a socio-technical one. Crowds are
inextricably connected with modern informational and communicational technology. Especially Web 2.0 and 3.0
applications play a significant role when it comes to the aspect of virality, various forms of contributions and the
modes of communication within a crowd. In this, crowds are not bound to one service alone but act across a
diverse  range of social media   platforms   in particular. Additionally,   crowd   efforts are not limited  to virtual
environments but also cover joint activities within offline spaces.
         Given the fact that we establish a conceptualization of the crowd against a pedagogical background,
naturally the aspect of learning must not be neglected. Therefore, we concern ourselves with the question what an
approach to learning in crowd settings could look like. One specific model, that we assume to be adaptable in a
crowd context, is the rhizomatic learning approach (Cormier & Stewart 2010). We see a great chance in further
refining the concept of rhizomatic learning - which in its core means the distribution of knowledge in digital
environments without hierarchical forms of dispersion - in close correlation with our notion of the crowd as a
specific case of application.
         Concluding, this attempt to provide a first heuristic discussion of the crowd, we can summarize the
following procedural and structural qualities: The crowd in our understanding is a mass phenomenon that virally
emerges around a concern that touches all participants in their own way and initiates them to contribute to joint
actions. The   crowd's  members   are    diverse. They   face  the shared   concern  from   potentially very  different
perspectives  while simultaneously   being   connected   and   activated by their smallest  intersection, their mutual
affectedness. Therefore, the crowd's temporality is solely bound to its own momentum. The crowd is potentially
open for everyone to join. Participation involves solely an act of contribution and no process of growing into a
shared practice. In this sense, the content of a contribution may differ broadly in regard to the individuals behind
them but  they are  not endless  in their  variation.  Rather, forms of   meaningful  participation are   connected to
overstretching practices that are reproduced or emerge within the crowd's socio-material manifestation (e.g.,
posting  on a  social network  platform),   social events  (e.g., taking  part in a demonstration)   and  the crowd's
operational area (e.g., writing an article for an online encyclopedia). In this, the crowd proposes a promising new
take on education in a digital society.

Collaboration on a massive scale - a design framework
Thus far we have proposed a first conceptualization of the crowd that ties in the current CSCL discourse. Now,
the next question is how to approach this insight from a developmental perspective to envision innovative CSCL
scenarios on a massive scale. More precisely, the question is to which extent learning activities in the crowd raise
design issues that resemble or go beyond those, pertinent to other CSCL scenarios and environments.
         To identify crucial themes of interest for computer supported collaboration and learning in general, we
conducted   an exploratory    literature review   into notable research   discourses that   bring together  notions of
collaboration and knowledge creation, namely CSCL research and research on open education. To pinpoint the
consequences of massiveness, we then enriched our findings with insights from additional domains that address
scenarios of large-scale participation and creation, like citizen science and open source software development.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      170                                                   © ISLS
Within  these   domains   we   focused   on   (1) collaborative   scenarios in  general  while   keeping  in  mind      the
transferability to, as well as consequences for the crowd context and (2) particular scenarios that involve arguably
massive participation.

Table 1: Design Framework for CSCL Scenarios

 Formational       Pragmatic                                       Epistemic                       Reflective
 Mediation:        Mediation:               Social Mediation:      Mediation:                      Mediation:
 Learner           Coordination &           Sociality              Collaboration & Knowledge       Assessment &
 Involvement       Regulation                                      Construction                    Feedback
 Recruiting        Dynamic                  Communality            Common ground                   Many-to-many
 Participation     Static                   Social awareness       Resources                       Peer-to-peer
 Engagement        Intrinsic                Communication          Knowledge objects               Instructor-based
 Motivation        Extrinsic                Authorship             Knowledge artifacts             Creation of value
 Sustainability    Process awareness        Accountability         Shared insights                 Institutionalization
                   Decision making          Responsibility         Currents of inquiry             Formalization
                   Didactics                                       Epistemic frames
                   Technology                                      Subjects
                   Negotiation                                     Social permeability
                   Established practice
                   Hierarchy

To be able to map and compare critical elements of crowd-based learning scenarios in relation to other CSCL
settings, we build on the multidimensional model of mediation, suggested by Béguin & Rabardel (2000) and
adapted to the field of CSCL by Paavola et al. (2012). According to Paavola et al. (2012), CSCL scenarios can be
described  and  analyzed     along four  dimension  or  types  of mediation.   These   types of  mediation  include     (a)
epistemic mediation, the procedural means through which knowledge is created collaboratively, (b) pragmatic
mediation, the procedural means through which the collective efforts are coordinated and regulated, (c) social (or
collaborative) mediation, the procedural means through which social relations and networks are (re-produced), as
well as (d) reflective mediation, the procedural means through which the collective efforts are assessed, evaluated
and advanced. The literature review however pointed to a set of design issues, which goes beyond the types of
mediation suggested by Paavola et al. (2012). These issues relate to what Jeong et al. (2017) have discussed as
different "forms  of joint   interaction that occur  in large-scale community      settings" (p. 134). We  take  up     the
relevance of categorizing such phenomena to describe how people work together and interact with each other by
abstracting it to a more nuanced idea of learner involvement which is concerned with those processes and means
by which actors are recruited and participation is motivated and ensured. We subsume these issues under the
notion of  (e)  formational  mediation,  the  procedural means    through   which  involvement    and  participation    are
ensured. Table 1 provides an overview of the design issues we have identified with regard to these five types of
mediation. The table can be understood as generic framework for the description, analysis, design and evaluation
of computer supported collaborative learning scenarios and environments. In the following, we will use this
framework as a vantage point to further discuss the particularities of crowd-based learning scenarios.

Formational mediation ­ Learner involvement
The first question for the setup of collaborative learning is that of how to address and involve participants and
who those participants are. The recruiting of learners, so to say. Thinking along the lines of a crowd setting that
transcends a given and formalized union of a classroom, recruiting implies that a critical mass of individuals has
to be attracted, for crowd dynamics to develop at all. The actual process of rallying a crowd can only be understood
in regard to the party responsible for the recruitment - for example a research team in a citizen science context
(Chu et al. 2012), a MOOC provider (Haywood 2016, p. 75) or the crowd itself in its own momentum. Following
this argument, the internal structure of a crowd comes into view, since different activities call for different levels
of diverse or shared perspectives or practices among the involved individuals (Bonney et al. 2016) - regardless of
the externally given or internally established origin of mutual objectives. Therefore, the participants and their
individual qualities can be of high importance as well, because for being successfully involved in the joint effort
they might  need  to have    certain knowledge    and  competences   at their  disposal (Kobori   et al. 2016)  or   their
contributions need to achieve a specific standard to be considered of value or compatible at all (Ghosh & McAfee
2011). Adding to the consideration of recruitment, a distinction between participation and engagement seems
reasonable. Within the frame of participation we can ask in what ways participants are able to take part in a
meaningful way, which forms of contribution are compatible and if members face some kind of participational

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      171                                                    © ISLS
threshold. Engagement on the other hand addresses the ongoing and active involvement of participants and is
therefore a vital topic within the open education and open science discourse (Walji et al. 2016; Sprinks et al.
2017). Considering the social entity of a crowd we must challenge the idea that ongoing and active involvement
constitutes a desirable participant. On the contrary, we should be mindful of punctual - and maybe minimal - acts
of contribution and dissemination in consideration of the crowd's shared efforts and concern.
        Following this contemplation, the view on motivation changes as well. Participant motivation is a leading
topic for all kinds of educational and participatory scenarios (Rogat et al. 2013; Eveleigh et al. 2014) while the
explicit implications for crowd-based learning have yet to be discussed. In the light of heterogeneous participants,
diverse forms of participation and various modes of engagement as well as shared concerns and efforts as a
constituting element of a crowd, motivation has to be conceptualized between these contrasting poles of enormous
variability of being part of a crowd and presumably more common reasons to be involved at all.
        Finally, we have to question the live-cycle of a crowd, for example its sustainability. With the constitutive
factor of a shared concern and a joint effort, a crowd may dissolve when those inherent impulses are no longer
given or may partially evolve in more stable forms of communality like a community or an organization. Besides
this, processes of institutionalization of crowd phenomena, the compatibility of temporal arbitrariness of crowds
and often temporally ridged educational structures have to be considered when imagining learning in a crowd-
based environment.

Pragmatic mediation ­ Coordination and regulation
The various ways in which collaborative processes are coordinated and regulated are an ongoing issue within
CSCL  discourse (Ludvigsen    et al. 2018).  Assuming  an  inseparable   relation between  didactic   prompts  and
interventions and technical affordances, we have to ask how participants are able to interact with the environment
and with each other in a meaningful way. Especially when designing for a crowd the question arises how didactics
and technical guidelines can support the joint efforts without restricting or preventing the crowd's constitutive
momentum. In short, how can an emergent property like virality be facilitated at all? It is also relevant to consider
the coordinating and regulating aspects of a learning scenario between the poles of static and dynamic structures
and intrinsic and extrinsic determinations. Is a structure for example pre-established or does the environment
enable the participants themselves or an external instructor to question, adapt and change their ground rules of
collaboration? With the quantity and the diversity of crowd participants in mind, we further have to ask if equal
negotiation and unanimous decision making is possible or even necessary for the crowd to be able to act and for
people to join. Rather it seems essential to establish some kind of process awareness to help participants to find
ways for at least minimal or perhaps more elaborate forms of contribution. Process awareness here serves as an
ideal concept, because within the crowd's complexity and its emergent evolution it is an impossible task to
concurrently describe it entirely. Finding the fine line to foster a crowd's dynamic without crippling it with a tight
pedagogical frame and ensuring access for learners despite its complexity seems to be one of the main challenges
when designing crowd scenarios for educational context.

Social mediation ­ Sociality
We have outlined the crowd as a socio-technical entity that is on the one hand diverse, complex and to an extent
unbound and  on the   other hand  temporally  constituted  under a joint  concern  and  with a mutual   cause. By
accommodating such qualities, it can be clearly distinguished from other forms of communality that are addressed
in CSCL scenarios as we argued in the previous paragraph.
        Another concept that relates to sociality within the fields of computer supported collaboration is that of
social awareness (Dourish & Bellotti 1992). It addresses possible ways for users in a virtual environment to
perceive themselves as part of a social unit and consequently take note of each other. In this regard we raise
questions at three levels. How is an individual able to become aware of all the other participants in the crowd
entity, given the fact that so many people are involved in different ways at different levels (Jeong et al. 2017)?
How does a notion of being part of a mass-movement emerge and what shapes this experience? And lastly, how
can social awareness  as a  concept  address the crowd as   an entity that may    not be attached  to one specific
environment but stretches over multiple virtual spaces and spreads into the offline world as well?
        When   members    of a   crowd communicate    with  each   other,  it can reasonably   be  concluded   that
communication exceeds dialogical forms. Such exceeding communication modes - which we assume to be highly
relevant for crowd settings - can be observed in social networking or microblogging applications (e.g., in follower-
followee relations, under shared hashtags or through @mention functionalities). With those mass-environments
in mind, communication modes like one-to-many broadcasting (Page 2012) or pushing of pre-existent content
without adding to it (Kaplan & Haenlein 2011) have to be considered in their consequence for the development
of means of communication within learning scenarios for the crowd.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  172                                                  © ISLS
            Another important factor that has to be thought anew in crowd settings is that of authorship which also
implies the question of accountability and responsibility. We assume that in part, participants maintain visibility
as authors as such. Additional scenarios though are anonymous forms of participation as well as rather content-
less acts of meaningful participation (e.g., liking or reblogging/retweeting) that are immanent in crowds. In this
case the question arises who can be held responsible for contents, statements and actions. If we consider a joint
effort   of a crowd   as manifestation  of its work,    is it even   possible  to ascribe authorship, responsibility   or
accountability to a single person? Or must a crowd as entity be held accountable or responsible somehow?

Reflective mediation ­ Assessment and feedback
Assessment and feedback structures are among the most recurring and discussed issues in the CSCL community,
not just as final evaluation method, but especially as an advancing act within the process of collaborative learning.
In  this regard the   concept  of peer-to-peer interaction    is of particular importance  and  investigated in  its own
qualities   (Reinholz  2016)   as well as  in  its differentiation   from  instructor-based  feedback   and  assessment
mechanics (Harney et al. 2017). Additionally, many-to-many assessment scenarios have been explored within the
field of open education and MOOC development, with the expectation of bringing together different levels of
expertise, experience and prospects to evaluate contributions (Clougherty & Popova 2013). For crowd-based
collaboration we have to ask how hierarchy-driven, peer-driven and in particular crowd-driven feedback and
assessment dynamics take shape and in which way they can be fostered or are emerging organically during
massive-scale interactions. In the open, complex and diverse socio-technical structure of the crowd, the ways in
which the ascription of value unfolds in regard to the joint concern and efforts can therefore only be anticipated
as an issue of future investigation. We assume that in addition to evaluating and reflecting functions of assessment
and feedback, we will observe aspects of admission, such as generally including contributions as meaningful or
disregarding them as irrelevant. In comparison to institutionalized educational settings, we assume that there are
no explicit and formalized forms of valuation (e.g., examinations, grades or standards of education) existent in
the crowd.    Nevertheless,    we ask  ourselves   if processes   of formalization  -  beyond  the shared   practices  of
participation - play a role in crowd environments and how they can be explored further.

Epistemic mediation ­ Collaboration and knowledge construction
Lastly, we have to consider the crowd from an epistemic standpoint and discuss the circumstances of collaborative
knowledge practices. To understand such processes, we have to determine the crowd's resources which ultimately
create the foundation for knowledge construction. These resources include a certain diversity in perspectives,
different approaches to problem solving and by sheer mass of participants, a major workforce.
Within a heterogenous crowd we can assume participants from various epistemic backgrounds to bring in their
disciplinary practices and standpoints or, as Shaffer (2006) suggests, their epistemic frames. For a crowd setting
it has to be revised, if an epistemic diversity only presents itself as a resource for multifaceted knowledge creation
or if it may interfere as a participatory obstacle or even a gatekeeper. Diversity may call for the negotiation of
common ground. But, as we have already discussed that common ground in a crowd context is sufficiently ensured
by the shared concern and that beyond that, integrability of contributions only arises by the participatory act of
contributing itself. Thus, different perspectives and approaches can coexist under a shared concern and are realized
through joint efforts without necessarily coming into conflict with one another.
            Framing crowd activities as an epistemic endeavor the question arises what can be considered as the
outcome of a collaborative knowledge work. What shapes do crowd insights might take and are they for example
of a more collective or a more individual nature. Clarification is needed on how such insights can become visible
at all. How can a multitude of contributions together form a coherent current of inquiry? To further elaborate on
the shared    concern  from an  epistemic  perspective,    we see   great potential in adapting Knorr   Cetina's (2001)
concept of Knowledge Objects and partial artefacts. Especially the notion of partiality we see as a starting point
to examine the role of scattered contributions in relation to the collective epistemic process of a crowd.
            Finally, recalling the observation     that crowd    phenomena     are  socially motivated, the  matter    of
permeability comes into focus. We have to ask in what way integrability beyond the educational context of crowd
insights can be established not only for scientific societies but for civic discourses. This can be understood in two
different ways: For one, the crowd can be enriched and motivated by sources beyond the specific educational
context, but also, its insights can be regarded in their societal accessibility.

Implications and discussion
With this paper we have put forward two contributions to the consideration of massiveness within CSCL contexts.
Building on the discourse around mass collaboration and the concepts of CoPs and CoIs, we have conceptualized
the crowd as a first attempt to establish a productive connection between current mass phenomena and educational

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       173                                                   © ISLS
design. Within a framework of five areas of mediation we then took this conception of the crowd as a vantage
point to raise issues of collaborative mass scenarios in a more detailed way. Drawing conclusions from this
approach, we see the crowd as an opportunity to evolve computer supported collaborative learning alongside
current technical and societal processes of transformation. Nevertheless, or possibly for exactly this reason, the
crowd presents itself as a challenging design target.
        We have outlined the crowd as a highly complex entity with an emergent nature and an inner momentum
that is primarily fueled by the mutual affectedness of its participating individuals. The open question remains how
an educational design can address all those issues in a way that fosters a crowd's formation and productive
interactions within the scope of pedagogical expectations and constraints without inadvertently suppressing the
dynamics. How can we achieve to cultivate an organic entity inside institutionalized education? Or do we rather
have to envision a new form, a guided crowd, as a formalized variety alongside informal crowd phenomena?
        In the light of the crowd, the aspects of learning, of collaboration and of inquiry require a reconsideration
as well. We can ask where learning processes arise while taking part in crowd activities and which understanding
of learning seems suitable to describe and facilitate those instances (e.g., rhizomatic learning). Further, we may
have to widen our understanding about subjects of learning all together and consider not only the individual learner
but the crowd as a collective learning entity. It is also worthy of discussion whether or not present conceptions of
collaboration are suitable to describe joint efforts where interpersonal activity is not a constituting circumstance,
or if crowd phenomena can lead to an extended theorization of collaboration all together. Another fundamental
challenge lies within the CSCL objective to foster forms of inquiry derived from scientific practice. An idea of
crowd-based inquiry may help to broaden the perspective of meaningful collective knowledge creation, especially
in close relation to societal and cultural issues.
        Finally, to entirely grasp the crowd, we have to acknowledge it not only as a socio-technical entity but
in its performativity. The crowd as such only exists as long as individuals engage and contribute in a certain way.
Only from this joint action the crowd emerges and is produced and reproduced in its particular features and only
by contribution, participants can perceive themselves as being a part of it. Thus, understanding the crowd as a
performative act is marked by an inherent contingency that proposes highly relevant implications not only for the
design of educational crowd scenarios but for their scientific exploration as well.

References
Béguin,  P. &  Rabardel,    P. (2000) Designing      for instrument-mediated    activity. Scandinavian  Journal of
        Information Systems, 12, 173-190.
Bonney, R., Phillips, T.B., Ballard, H.L., & Enck, J.W. (2016b). Can citizen science enhance public understanding
        of science? Public Understanding of Science, 25(1), pp. 2-16.
Chu, M., Leonard, P. & Stevenson, F. (2012). Growing the base for citizen science. In: Dickinson, J.L. & Bonney,
        R.  (Eds.), Citizen science: public  participation    in environmental research.  Cornell University Press,
        Ithaca, pp. 69-81.
Clougherty, R. J. & Popova, V. (2013). Crowdsourcing to Assess MOOCs: A Position Paper. MOOCs FORUM,
        1(P), pp. 10­13.
Cormier, D., & Stewart, B. (2010). Life in the open: 21st Century learning & teaching. Atlantic Universities'
        Teaching Showcase, 24, pp. 24-31.
Cress, U., Stahl, G., Ludvigsen, S. & Law, N. (2015). The core features of CSCL: Social situation, collaborative
        knowledge    processes  and  their design.    International Journal of Computer-Supported    Collaborative
        Learning, 10(2), pp. 109-116.
Cress, U., Jeong, H.  &  Moskaliuk,   J. (2016).    Mass Collaboration  as  an Emerging   Paradigm  for Education?
        Theories,   Cases,  and  Research   Methods.     In U.   Cress, J.  Moskaliuk &    H. Jeong  (Eds.), Mass
        Collaboration and Education (pp. 3-27). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Dourish, P.; Bellotti, V. (1992): Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces. In: M. Mantel und R. Baecker
        (Hg.): CSCW '92 Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on Computer-supported cooperative work.
        New York, pp. 107-114.
Eveleigh, A., Jennett, C., Blandford, A., Brohan, P. & Cox, A.L. (2014). Designing for Dabblers and Deterring
        Drop-outs in Citizen Science. In: Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors
        in Computing Systems, CHI '14. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 2985-2994.
Fischer, G. (2001). Communities of Interest: Learning through the interaction of multiple knowledge systems. In:
        S. Bjornestad, R. Moe, A. Morch, & A. Opdahl (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th IRIS Conference, pp. 1-
        14. Bergen: Department of Information Science.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     174                                                 © ISLS
Fischer, G., Rohde, M., & Wulf, V. (2007). Community-based learning: The core competency of residential,
        research-based universities. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1),
        pp. 9-40.
Fischer, G. (2016). Exploring, understanding, and designing innovative socio-technical environments for fostering
        and supporting mass collaboration. In: Cress, U., Moskaliuk, J. & Jeong, H. (Eds.), Mass collaboration
        and education, pp. 43-63. Cham: Springer International.
Ghosh, A. & McAfee, P. (2011). Incentivizing high-quality user-generated content. In: Proceedings of the 20th
        International conference on World Wide Web. ACM, pp. 137-146.
Harney, O. M., Hogan, M. J., & Quinn, S. (2017). Investigating the effects of peer to peer prompts on collaborative
        argumentation,  consensus   and perceived    efficacy in collaborative learning. International Journal of
        Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(3), pp. 307-336.
Haywood, J. (2016). Learning from MOOCs: lessons for the future. Wenner Gren Symposia, 88(6), pp. 69-79,
        Portland Press.
Jeong, H., Cress,  U., Moskaliuk,   J. &  Kimmerle,   J. (2017).   Joint interactions in large online  knowledge
        communities:    The  A3C    framework.   International   Journal  of  Computer-Supported    Collaborative
        Learning, 12(2), pp. 133-151.
Kaplan, A. M.; Haenlein, M. (2011): The early bird catches the news: Nine things you should know about micro-
        blogging. In: Business Horizons 54 (2), S. 105­113.
Knorr Cetina, K. (2001): Objectual practice. In: T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina und E. & von Savigny (Hg.): The
        Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory. New York: Routledge, S. 184­197.
Kobori, H., Dickinson, J.L., Washitani, I., Sakurai, R., Amano, T., Komatsu, N., Kitamura, W., Takagawa, S.,
        Koyama, K., Ogawara, T. & Miller Rushing, A.J. (2016). Citizen science: a new approach to advance
        ecology, education, and conservation. Ecological Research, 31(1), pp. 1-19.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Lu, J.; Lai, M.; Law, N. (2010): Knowledge Building in Society 2.0: Challenges and Opportunities. In: Khine M.
        S.  und Saleh  I. M. (Hg.):   New  Science   of  Learning. Cognition,  Computers   and   Collaboration in
        Education. New York: Springer, pp. 553-568.
Paavola S., Engeström R., Hakkarainen K. (2012). The Trialogical Approach as a New form of Mediation. In:
        Moen   A., Mørch   A.I., Paavola S. (Eds.)   Collaborative Knowledge    Creation. Technology   Enhanced
        Learning, vol 7, pp. 1-14. SensePublishers, Rotterdam.
Page,  R. (2012): The  linguistics of  self-branding and micro-celebrity   in Twitter: The  role of hashtags.  In:
        Discourse & Communication 6 (2), S. 181­201.
Reinholz,  D. (2016).  The assessment   cycle: a model   for  learning through  peer  assessment. Assessment   &
        Evaluation in Higher Education, 41(2), pp. 301-315.
Rogat, T. K., Linnenbrink-Garcia, L., & DiDonato, N. (2013). Motivation in collaborative groups. International
        handbook of collaborative learning, 250-267.
Ross, J., Sinclair, C., Knox, J., Bayne, S. & Macleod, H. (2014). Teacher experiences and academic identity: The
        missing components of MOOC pedagogy [MOOC Special issue]. MERLOT Journal of Online Learning
        and Teaching, 10(1), pp. 57-69.
Scardamalia,  M.; Bransford, J.; Kozma,   B.;  Quellmalz,  E.  (2012): New    Assessments  and Environments    for
        Knowledge Building. In: P. Griffin, B. McGaw und E. Care (Hg.): Assessment and Teaching of 21st
        Century Skills. New York: Springer, pp. 231-300.
Shaffer, D.W. (2006). Epistemic frames for epistemic games. Computers & Education, 46(3), 223­234.
Sprinks, J., Wardlaw, J., Houghton, R., Bamford, S., & Morley, J. (2017). Task Workflow Design and its impact
        on performance and volunteers' subjective preference in Virtual Citizen Science. International Journal
        of Human-Computer Studies, 104, pp. 50-63.
Walji, S., Deacon, A., Small, J., & Czerniewicz, L. (2016). Learning through engagement: MOOCs as an emergent
        form of provision. Distance Education, 37(2), pp. 208-223.

Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results has received funding from the Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF) under grant agreement n° 16DHB2119 and was carried out as part of the project: »SCoRe ­ Student
Crowd Research«. The content of this article does not necessarily reflect the opinion of the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  175                                                  © ISLS
