"I Cannot Explain Why I Like This Shape Better Than That Shape":
                        Intercorporeality in Collaborative Learning
                                         Jacob Davidsen and Thomas Ryberg
                                     jdavidsen@hum.aau.dk, ryberg@hum.aau.dk
                                           Aalborg University ­ eLearning Lab

        Abstract: While the exchange of utterances between collaborators have been viewed as the
        primary   vehicle     for meaning-making    in CSCL,     we have  been   encouraged   by  the CSCL19
        theme     to expand    this  understanding  to include   intercoporeality  as  way    of foregrounding
        bodies    in collaborative   learning. We   find that  collaboration, meaning-making      and  problem
        solving   is  also  occurring   even when    collaborators  are  lacking words    for expressing    their
        thoughts     in talk. Thus,  we  promote   the idea   of viewing   CSCL   as  a field  concerned    with
        intercorporeality     in  meaning-making    practices. Through    a  detailed analysis   of a group    of
        architectural    engineering   students, we  unpack    how  they  prepare  for  a  critique  session   by
        building upon each other's utterances, gestures and manipulations of objects in their design
        studio thus displaying intercorporeal memory and understanding. Based on the analysis we
        discuss three themes related to incorporeality in CSCL: Ecologies of technologies, Historical
        development      of   the bodily-material  resources   and  Subtle  manifestations    of intercorporeal
        understandings.

Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed a re-newed interest in embodied aspects of interaction in CSCL (Davidsen &
Ryberg, 2017; Flood, Neff, & Abrahamson, 2015). To some extent this development has been driven by the
advent of  technologies    for supporting   collaborative learning  such  as  interactive  tabletops  (Higgins,   Mercier,
Burd, & Hatch, 2011), but also from theoretical and methodological orientations towards embodied interaction
analysis (Streeck, Goodwin, & LeBaron, 2011). To some degree, the theoretical pillars of CSCL have included
and mentioned   multimodal       and embodied    elements of  interaction (e.g.  Teasley   &  Roschelle,    1993),  but the
analysis of the role of the body, the environment and the relations between bodies and environment have been
backgrounded in comparison to talk. Encouraged by the CSCL19 theme of 4E learning (Embodied, Enactive,
Extended, and Embedded), we add to the re-newed interest in this more `holistic' research agenda of CSCL by
presenting a  study   on  the  intercorporeality of  collaborative  learning  in `architecture   and  design'  education.
Based in our study we suggest that intercorporeality offers a fresh methodological and theoretical stance on
collaborative learning by zooming in on how bodies affect each other in collaboration. Thus, this is an attempt
to foreground bodies in collaborative learning widening the talk-based focus in CSCL to include and emphasize
intercorporeal memory and understandings.
        In this   paper,  we   study  a  `design studio'  featuring collaborative  activities  amongst   students   in  the
`architecture and    design'  program   at Aalborg  University.  The  setting  and collaborative    activities are  highly
multimodal    and composed       of both talk, bodies  and  materials.   While   many   of the   activities in the  studio
aresupported  by  digital    technologies,  and  other highly    specialized  technologies,   we  want   to  broaden    the
perspective of CSCL by focusing on the material surroundings, bodies, talk, digital and analogue technologies
supporting the collaborative activities. The group of six students are in midst of preparing design concepts for
an upcoming critique seminar with fellow student groups and teachers. In doing so, they are working together in
different collaborative constellations ­ as a whole group and in pairs depending on the type of activity and work
tasks they face. To get a better understanding of how the students are collaboratively preparing for a critique
seminar, we study their intercorporeal work in the studio ­ integrating the Embodied, Enactive, Extended and
Embedded   aspects    into   one  analysis. Further, we   suggest   that intercorporeality   can  function   as   a theory
highlighting the intimate and `inter-kinesthetic' relations between bodies in collaborative learning.
        In the paper we are focusing intercorporeality and in particular on how collaboration, meaning-making
and problem solving is possible even when the participants lack words for expressing their ideas and arguments.
This includes showing how bodies, technologies, objects, gestures, touches, and other bodily-material resources
are contributing to the formulation and understanding of ideas and design concepts in creative collaborative
design processes between students.

From talk to embodiment to intercorporeality in CSCL

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      17                                                       © ISLS
Since the early years of CSCL, researchers have studied the subtle processes constituting collaborative learning
with technologies in face-to-face settings and online learning environments. Much work have focused on talk
(spoken or written) between the collaborators, but there is also a growing body of studies integrating embodied
elements in the analysis of collaboration. Basically, we see a development in the focus of CSCL studies from
talk to embodiment,     but   our goal  with    this paper  is   to  add   an additional    perspective   to  these  established
analytical foci by introducing the idea of intercorporeality in collaborative learning as a way of focusing on the
intimate, `inter-kinesthetic', and affective bodily aspects of collaboration.
         As CSCL is concerned with collaborative activities in both online and physical environments, there is a
range of different methodological and theoretical stances available for analyzing and designing for collaborative
learning  (Wise   &   Schwarz,    2017). On     a general   level    CSCL     is divided    between    three  types  of   studies:
experimental, design and naturalistic (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). Across the types of studies and
characteristics of the learning environments (e.g. face-to-face or online), there is a strong orientation towards
analyzing talk. Stahl (2006, p. 6 italics in original) suggested that "meaning is created across the utterances of
different people", emphasizing the interest in talk and text in CSCL. However, as argued by Flood, Neff and
Abrahamson (2015) there is a need for CSCL to develop ways of "representing and cataloguing choreographies
of embodied interaction" (2015, p. 96) in order to better design for collaborative embodied interaction in CSCL
environments. One example of such a catalogue of embodied interaction in CSCL is found in Davidsen and
Ryberg (2017), who explored children's collaborative activities in front of a shared touch-screen. The authors
suggested that bodily-material resources and in particular hands are used as resources for `communicating and
illustrating', as `cognitive auxiliary tools' and as a way `shepherding' each other.
         Beyond the field of CSCL there is an extended and growing body of research focusing on embodiment
and how the elements in the environment are used by the participants. While these studies are not addressing
collaborative learning per se, they are focusing on the ways people accomplish tasks together in various settings
and how they competently master a practice. For example, in a series of studies in the past 40 years Goodwin
(2017)  has shown     how  people    build upon   each     other's  embodied     interactions   through   different  media   and
resources  at archeological   sites, court  rooms,    oceans   vessels,    etc.  In addition,   a recent  collection  of  papers
(Meyer,  Streeck,  &    Jordan, 2017a)   address     the notion    of intercorporeality     in human     interaction  in  diverse
practices (e.g. families, self-defense training and auto repair workshops). The paradigm of intercorporeality is
first of all rejecting a transmission view of interaction, but it is also opening up the field of embodied interaction
by fleshing out that bodies are not alone ­ they are within an "inter-kinesthetic field" (Behnke, 2008). Meyer,
Streeck  and    Scott   (2017b)   argue    that   intercorporeality     is "not     only  the   presences,    movements,     and
micromovements     of   other (inanimate   or   animate)    bodies   in my    peripersonal    space, but  also the   sedimented
traces of such presences and movements in the architectures and the artifacts around my body" (2017b, p. xvii)
­ what Fuchs (2017) refer to a intercorporeal memory. Meyer et al. (2017) further critique the use of established
concepts  (also frequently    used in  the CSCL      literature)  as  `coordination',    `alignment',   `intersubjectivity'  and
`joint attention' as  they  are not  doing   justice  to   the synchronous,      simultaneous,    improvisational    and   bodily
actions of the participants. For instance, in an analysis of `Intercorporeality at the motor block', Alkemeyer,
Brümmer     and   Pille (2017)    find  that  the    character    and   nature   of    movements     in   the situation   fosters
communication     and   understanding    among    the   members      of the   practice.   The   authors   suggest    that "These
respective movements can be understood as a collective way of thinking, reflecting and problem-solving by
means of gestural demonstration and experimentation" (Alkemeyer et al., 2017, p. 227).
         The paradigm of intercorporeality seems to offer a fresh perspective on collaborative learning mediated
by technology.    With  intercorporeality   the   lens  is  widened   in   CSCL     and  it is a  call to go  beyond    talk and
embodiment    to  start focusing    on  the   intertwined   nature    of   bodies   in   collaborative   activities. Integrating
intercorporeality necessarily also requires a broader view on what can support collaborative learning in CSCL
environments. Instead of solely studying interaction with one technology or application, it is necessary to follow
the methodological and theoretical guidance from embodied interaction analysis and intercorporeality to study
talk, bodies and material surroundings as one complex analytic unit.

Context of the study and data collection
In this paper,  we   examine    a  group   of `architecture    and    design'    students   in their 5th  semester   at   Aalborg
University. The overall pedagogical idea of Aalborg University is based on Problem Based Learning (PBL).
PBL is often considered a pedagogical approach supporting students in obtaining transversal competences such
as collaboration,  communication,      critical thinking    and  problem-solving       skills  (Du,  Emmersen,   Toft,    &  Sun,
2013; Guerra, 2017). Each semester students will work on a group project supervised by a researcher. Besides
receiving  feedback   and  critique  from   the   supervisor   the  group   will  also   present,  discuss   and evaluate    their
project in formal   critique  sessions.  The    project  is finally   evaluated     in a group    exam   where   the group   will

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                          18                                                          © ISLS
present, discuss and reflect upon their work together with the supervisor and an external examiner who will
ultimately assess and grade the project.
         Over    a period   of   six  weeks, we   video   observed   three  groups    working     in  their open learning
environment.     We zoom in on one of the groups. The group was allocated a studio in a large open learning
environment together with 13 other groups at the semester. Each group decorated and furnished the studio for
their specific needs and the group we study in this paper used several notice boards and tables to support their
collaborative activities (Figure 1). Each of the notice boards had different purposes, e.g. a shared calendar, a to-
do-list, printed photos for inspiration, drawings, etc. On the center table, the students gathered for collective
activities, but also to work in pairs or as individuals. On the table in the center, the students had their laptops,
different drawings and styrofoam models. Next to the center table, a smaller table was placed for individual
work. Over time the room would clutter with all sorts of materials in the studio, telling a unique story of the
process of the individual group.

                               Figure 1. Photo of the group members at the center table.

         In the  studio,   we  positioned  4 fixed  video   cameras  and   one of  the students   wore  a   chest-mounted
GoPro on several occasions. As the collected data is extensive (+ 150 hours for this group alone), we have
decided to limit our analysis to a period of two days where the group is preparing for an architectural critique
session. Specifically, we analyze a 33 seconds long sequence, which serve the purpose of illustrating how they
work together in the context of their design studio preparing for a presentation at the critique seminar. Previous
studies  have analyzed     the pedagogical   nature of  critique sessions   in architectural  education     (Lymer,  2009;
Lymer, Ivarsson, & Lindwall, 2009), but in this paper we focus on the work the students do to prepare for the
critique session.  We    find  the preparation   work  particularly interesting for   studying    the intercorporeality of
collaborative learning, as the students have to develop design concepts together for a shared presentation. In
addition, the students are working under a certain time pressure, as there is fixed deadline. The preparation work
requires working    towards    a   somewhat  shared   idea  of the  design  concept    through    collaborative  activities
managed independently by the students. One day prior to the critique session, the group is narrowing down the
number of design concepts they will present. To scaffold this activity the student group split into three pairs ­
each  pair developing    a concept    to present to the other  group   members.    In  this way   they  are  simulating or
rehearsing for the actual critique seminar. In the analysis, we zoom in 33 seconds where Heidi and Sine have
just  presented  their new  idea   to the  other group  members,    and  now   the others   start critiquing  their design
concept.

Contextualizing the sequence
Before the analysis of the interaction, we briefly present the overall structure of the sequence followed by a
transcript (Figure 3). The transcript builds on conventions from Conversation Analysis (Jefferson, 2004) and in
particular the work of Goodwin (2017) in relation to the use of frame grabs in the transcript. Thus, we have
included   frame   grabs from   the  video footage  in  the transcript  to make   the  intercorporeal   and  simultaneous
aspects of the collaborative activity `somewhat' visible ­ each photo is numbered (P.number) for reference in
the analysis.
         Heidi and Sine just finished presenting their design concept, and now the rest of the group members
start critiquing the   design  concept.  The phase  of  critiquing  the design  is both oriented     towards  highlighting
`flaws' and collectively developing better ideas.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       19                                                       © ISLS
           Figure 2. Shape of the building without the triangular tip (marked with the red circle) on the left, the
                              original shape of the building in styrofoam on the right.

       Initially we want to draw attention to the main aspect of the re-design made by Heidi and Sine, who
have changed the overall shape of the building by cutting off the triangular tip (see Figure 2 left). This is a quite
dramatic change, as the group has been working with the other shape for a couple of days (see Figure 2 right).
What follows   is an  extract of interaction, where the group   is discussing the  shape   of the building and in
particular what   the triangular tip should accommodate.    Ina is evaluating the   re-design  by picking  up  the
styrofoam model to express her concerns. Ina is also pointing out that they could maintain the shape of the
building by extending the window section following the original shape. Much of this discussion is oriented to
both the design and the functionality of the triangular tip. While the triangular tip is `fulfilling' the shape of the
building it is also a difficult space to use. Ina suggests incorporating a staircase or a transparent elevator shaft in
the triangular tip, but again the shape is obstructing her idea. Sven and Sine joke about a transparent elevator
with a triangular shape. Now, Ina returns to her defense of the original concept.

Transcript of the extract

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   20                                                   © ISLS
                                     Figure 3. Transcript of the sequence.

Analysis: "I cannot explain why I like this shape better than that shape"
While discussing Heidi and Sine's design concept they use a range of different materials in the environment
(Embedded and Extended); a styrofoam model consisting of several separate layers, existing drawings on the
tables, noticeboards, an Ipad, and pencils for adjusting drawings or making new ones. The ecology of resources
supporting their collaborative activity is diverse and continually configured and arranged to the specific needs of
the activity. The combination of materials, bodies and talk facilitate their preparation for the formal critique
session. While  talk  is of course  crucial   for meaning    making,  it  is also  clear, as   we   shall show,   that
intercorporeality establishes dimensions of sociality and collective knowing not present in their talk.
         In the beginning of the extract (line 1), Ina is stressing that she would like the shape `to be completed'
saying "so  you like (.) cause I really do like   that you  like complete  the shape of   it", while simultaneously
touching  (almost embracing)   the triangular tip of   the styrofoam  model   with her right   hand  (P.1,  2 and 3).
Actually, Ina repeats her touch of the figure twice, which indicates the importance of keeping the triangular tip
and further illustrates what area of the building she is thinking of to the rest of the group members. In line 2, she
says "I cannot explain why I like this shape better than that shape (.) it is just cause I believe it completes the
concept" and then (p. 4) she separates the top layer of the styrofoam model from the rest by twisting it so the
two-dimensional layout of the building is facing her fellow group members (p. 5 and 6). Ina is not utilizing any
scientific or academic terms in trying to convince the other group members about keeping the triangular tip.
Mostly, she is relying on everyday language combined with her bodily manipulation of the styrofoam model in
front of the other group members. When she separates the layers and say "which I believe is very strong right
now" (line 5), she is further linking the styrofoam model with the design concept developed by the group. The
`flat' two dimensional figure of the building is similar to the one on paper in front of Heidi and Sine, which
could indicate that Ina is coupling the two different forms of the models.
         The intercorporeal understanding between the students furthermore become visible as the other group
members build on Ina's insistence on keeping the triangular shape of the building. First Sven, points to the
drawing  in front of Heidi  saying  "it could  be  like  a  raised platform  over  there" (line  6,  P. 7), which  is

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    21                                                    © ISLS
establishing a connection between the styrofoam model in Ina's hands and the drawing on the paper in front of
Heidi. Then Ina adds the idea of something green, saying "yah it could be something wild growing in there" in
overlap with Sven saying "it (.) there could also be something wild was growing". Sven is further embodying
the idea of a tree by moving his hands up into the air showing the shape of a tree (P. 8-12). Ina replicates a
similar movement     raising both her   hands   in the air looking   in the direction  of  Sven  (P. 10).  The   concrete
manifestation of the tree shows that their understanding is "based on embodied intersubjectivity" (Fuchs, 2017,
p. 17). Heidi accepts their suggestion saying "but that you could also do", but then Ina makes the suggestion
more concrete saying "or a tree", which is followed by Heidi saying "yes that that could damn well be a tree".
Sine then says "you just need to say green to Heidi" indicating that Heidi is favoring green/wild elements in
their design. In response to this Heidi, Sine and Sven starts laughing.
          Then, in the final part of the sequence after Heidi, Sine and Sven laughed (line 13), Mette builds on the
interactional work by Ina, Heidi and Sven by referring to a previous drawing (made by Sine) hanging on the
notice board opposite to where the group is located. Mette says "it was actually (.) it is the one you have there
with Sines idea (.) that one with just like a round one" pointing to the area of the notice board (P. 13) (later ­ not
part of this sequence - Ina is including Sine's drawing again, but she walks to the noticeboard and points to the
drawing to integrate it into their discussion). Thus, the collective spatio-temporal history of the group is made
present and relevant for their current work on the functionality of the triangular tip of the building. The original
idea drawn by Sine is a cylinder shape going through the floors of a building (P. 13), which is now transformed
into an idea illustrating a possible functionality of the triangular tip. Mette elaborates "so if you just have that as
a  square (.) square   triangle  (.) it could   very   well  be good"    while   she   is making    imaginary    cuts  and
environmentally coupled gestures (Goodwin, 2007) on the styrofoam model with her left hand. The cuts are
detailing the triangular tip on the styrofoam model and the gestures are showing the idea of adding something
green going through the floors of the building. These imaginary cuts and gestures are repeated twice through P.
18-22 as a way of communicating and illustrating the connection between the drawing on the notice board and
the idea of adding something green (a tree) in the triangular tip.
          Throughout the 33 seconds of interaction the 4Es are in play in several ways: the group is building on
the immediate     presence   of each    other's bodies   (Embodied)     and the  history   Embedded     in   the material
surroundings (Extended and Enactive). In addition, it is visible that the students repeat their movements as a
way  of   arguing,   problem solving    and designing    together. They    display what    could be  referred    to as an
intercorporeal form of knowing (Hindmarsh & Pilnick, 2007). As noted by Jornet and Steier (2015) such bodily
engagements constitute the `infrastructure' supporting collaborative activities over time. Thereby, talk, bodies
and material surrounding mutually provide the ground for their collective designing and thinking ­ from the
initial idea of something green to something wild and then finally a tree. Further, it is also evident that the
students refer to and make use of an ecology of technologies ­ the infrastructure supporting their collaborative
activity is manifest in many different mediational resources.

Discussion
In the following sections, we broaden the analytical focus by discussing three themes, which could have an
impact on the CSCL research agenda: Ecologies of technologies, Historical development of the bodily-material
resources and Subtle manifestations of intercorporeal understandings.

Ecologies of technologies
As argued by Suthers (2006) CSCL is a field consisting of a learning element and a technology element. Based
in our  analysis, it seems that  CSCL    should  not only   be concerned    with digital  technologies  in   collaborative
learning. In  the sequence,  the  students  are  using many    different technologies     and materials to   support  their
collaborative activities. In line with the 4E agenda, it seems relevant that CSCL studies in "natural settings"
(Stahl et al., 2006) should open and widen the analytical focus to more than just one computer application. This
include studying   and  designing  technologies    embedded    in  a particular  environment,   but  also to  accept  that
supporting collaborative learning is complex in nature, i.e. the computer application is not the only variable
influencing the processes of collaborative learning.

Historical development of the bodily-material resources
A crucial moment in the students' collaborative activity is happening when Mette is referring to and including a
drawing   made by    Sine previously.   To  paraphrase   Goodwin     (2017) they   are making   use  of  materials    made
available from the   predecessors    by re-instantiating the drawing    in their current  activity. This  is in  line with
Meyer et al. (2017a, p. xvii) arguing to incorporate the "sedimented traces of such presences and movements in
the architectures and the artifacts around my body" in analyzing intercorporeality. In these face-to-face settings

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       22                                                      © ISLS
it seems highly relevant to study more than the "meaning (...) created across the utterances of different people".
(Stahl, 2006, p. 6 italics in original). Following the line of work informed by embodied interaction analysis
(Streeck et al., 2011) and intercorporeality (Meyer et al., 2017a), we find it necessary to incorporate a more
historical and developmental view of the bodily-material resources that collaborators integrate and build upon in
their collaborative activities. In the sequence with the architecture and design students, we find that students are
making certain bodily-material resources relevant in their interaction for supporting their collaborative work,
e.g. Ina's repeated touch of the triangular tip, Ina and Sven embodying the shape of a tree and Mette's reference
to the spatio-temporal resources in the studio. This indicates intercorporeal understanding and memory in the
collaborative activities.

Subtle manifestations of intercorporeal understandings
The subtle manipulation of the styrofoam model indicates an intercorporeal understanding among the students
and it seems the imaginary cuts and gestures are arguments in their own right in this collaborative activity.
While, the video is allowing access to the subtle bodily manifestations of intercorporeal understanding, we are
still limited in our way of representing these details in a paper format. As argued by Flood et al. (2015) there is a
need for   CSCL  to  develop  ways    of "representing   and  cataloguing  choreographies  of  embodied   interaction"
(2015, p.  96). In most   CSCL   studies  the product  of  representation   is manifested in a transcript (sometimes
including frame grabs from the videos). In this paper, we also rely on a transformation from video to text, which
is hardly  showing  the   repeating gestures  and touches   on   the styrofoam  model.  Thus,  CSCL   need  to further
develop ways of making the subtle manifestations of intercorporeal understandings visible to better understand
the nature of collaborative learning and to design better environments for CSCL in the future.

Conclusion
With this paper we seek to broaden the methodological and theoretical cartography of CSCL by introducing the
concept of intercorporeality in collaborative learning. With intercorporeality we explore the relations between
the Embodied, Enactive, Extended, and Embedded aspects of CSCL. Further, we are able to zoom in on the
relations of bodies and how they affect each other ­ studying their `inter-kinesthetic fields' (Behnke, 2008) in
relation to collaborative activities. In the analysis, we have shown that the students in preparing for a collective
presentation of design concepts are embodied and embedded in their local environment using materials to foster
intercorporeal  understandings.  Furthermore,    that the students   are making  sense  through talk, bodies   and  the
material  surroundings    which show   signs  of their intercorporeal    understanding. Most   importantly, we   made
visible that the students understand each other through their gestures and touches on the shared material (e.g. the
styrofoam  model).   They  are  able  to collaborate  and  problem    solve even  when   they  are lacking  words   for
expressing their ideas. This aligns with the findings from Hahn and Jordan (2017), who suggested that objects
could foster and extend bodily meaning-making processes.
          Historically, CSCL has been concerned with "meaning and the practices of meaning making in the
context of joint activity" (Koschmann, 2002, p. 20) manifested in primarily language. In the future, CSCL could
be oriented towards unpacking the intercorporeal dimensions of collaboration, meaning-making and problem
solving. We believe that this paper is a modest contribution in expanding the theoretical, methodological and
analytical unit of CSCL    to include    and emphasize    how collaborators    make sense and  solve  problems   in an
intercorporeal modus. In future studies, it would be of great interest to revisit some of the established theories in
CSCL (e.g. Group Cognition (Stahl, 2006) and Knowledge Building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994) through the
lens offered by intercorporeality.

References
Alkemeyer, T., Brümmer, K., & Pille, T. (2017). Intercorporeality at the motor block - On the importance of a
         practical sense for social cooperation and coordination. In C. Meyer, J. Streeck, & J. S. Jordan (Eds.),
         Intercorporeality:   emerging    socialities  in interaction    (pp.  203­235).  New   York,  NY:     Oxford
         University Press.
Davidsen, J., & Ryberg, T. (2017). "This is the size of one meter": Children's bodily-material collaboration.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(1), 65­90.
Behnke,   E. A. (2008).   Interkinaesthetic  Affectivity: A   Phenomenological    Approach.  Continental   Philosophy
         Review, 41(2), 143­161.
Du, X., Emmersen, J., Toft, E., & Sun, B. (2013). PBL and critical thinking disposition in Chinese medical
         students  ­ A    randomized     cross-sectional  study. Journal   of  Problem   Based  Learning    in Higher
         Education, 1(1), 72­83. https://doi.org/10.5278/ojs.jpblhe.v1i1.275

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      23                                                   © ISLS
Flood,  V.  J.,   Neff, M.,    &  Abrahamson,      D.  (2015).    Boundary    Interactions:  Resolving     Interdisciplinary
         Collaboration Challenges Using Digitized Embodied Performances. In O. Lindwall, P. Häkkinen, T.
         Koschmann, P. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Exploring the Material Conditions of Learning:
         Opportunities    and   Challenges   for   CSCL    (Vol.  Vol  1, pp.   94­100). Gothenburg:    The  international
         Society of the Learning Sciences.
Fuchs,  T. (2017).    Intercorporeality   and   interaffectivity.   In C. Meyer,   J. Streeck,   &   J. S.  Jordan (Eds.),
         Intercorporeality: emerging socialities in interaction (pp. 3­23). New York, NY: Oxford University
         Press.
Goodwin, C. (2007). Environmentally coupled gestures. In D. McNeill, S. D. Duncan, J. Cassell, & E. T. Levy
         (Eds.), Gesture and the dynamic dimension of language: essays in honor of David McNeill (pp. 195­
         212). Amsterdam; Philadelphia: J. Benjamins Pub. Co.
Goodwin, C. (2017). Co-operative action. Cambridge University Press.
Guerra, A. (2017). Engineering grand challenges and the attributes of the global engineer. Proceedings of the
         45th Sefi Annual Conference 2017, 1222­1235.
Hahn, T., & Jordan, J. S. (2017). Sensible objects: Intercorporeality and enactive knowing through things. In C.
         Meyer,    J. Streeck,  &  J. S.  Jordan   (Eds.), Intercorporeality:   emerging  socialities   in interaction (pp.
         267­287). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Higgins,  S.,  Mercier,    E., Burd,   E.,  &   Hatch,   A.   (2011).   Multi-touch   tables and   the  relationship   with
         collaborative classroom pedagogies: A synthetic review. International Journal of Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 6(4), 515­538. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-011-9131-y
Hindmarsh,    J., &   Pilnick, A. (2007).  Knowing    Bodies     at Work:  Embodiment     and  Ephemeral     Teamwork   in
         Anaesthesia. Organization Studies, 28(9), 1395­1416. https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840607068258
Jefferson, G. (2004). Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction. In G. H. Lerner (Ed.), Conversation
         Analysis:    Studies  from   the first generation    (Vol. 125,  pp. 13­34).  Amsterdam;       Philadelphia:  John
         Benjamins Publishing Company.
Jornet, A., & Steier, R. (2015). The Matter of Space: Bodily Performances and the Emergence of Boundary
         Objects During Multidisciplinary Design Meetings. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 22(2), 129­151.
Koschmann,     T.  (2002). Dewey's     contribution   to the  foundations    of CSCL   research.  In  Proceedings   of  the
         Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning: Foundations for a CSCL Community
         (pp. 17­22). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Lymer, G. (2009). Demonstrating Professional Vision: The Work of Critique in Architectural Education. Mind,
         Culture, and Activity, 16(2), 145­171. https://doi.org/10.1080/10749030802590580
Lymer, G., Ivarsson, J., & Lindwall, O. (2009). Contrasting the use of tools for presentation and critique: Some
         cases    from  architectural  education.    International     Journal  of Computer-Supported        Collaborative
         Learning, 4(4), 423­444. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-009-9073-9
Meyer, C., Streeck, J., & Jordan, J. S. (Eds.). (2017a). Intercorporeality: emerging socialities in interaction.
         New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Meyer, C., Streeck, J., & Jordan, J. S. (2017b). Introduction. In C. Meyer, J. Streeck, & J. S. Jordan (Eds.),
         Intercorporeality: emerging socialities in interaction (pp. xv­xlix). New York, NY: Oxford University
         Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer Support for Knowledge-Building Communities. Journal of
         the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265­283. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327809jls0303_3
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.:
         MIT Press.
Stahl, G., Koschmann,      T.,   &  Suthers,    D. (2006).    CSCL:    An  Historical Perspective    Computer-supported
         collaborative learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 409­
         426). Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Streeck, J., Goodwin, C., & LeBaron, C. (2011). Embodied interaction in the material world: An introduction.
         In J. Streeck, C. Goodwin, & C. D. LeBaron (Eds.), Embodied interaction: language and body in the
         material world (pp. 1­26). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Suthers, D.   D.  (2006).  Technology     affordances  for  intersubjective   meaning  making:    A  research  agenda   for
         CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315­337.
Teasley, S. D., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Constructing a Joint Problem Space: The Computer as a Tool for Sharing
         Knowledge. In C. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer-supported collaborative learning (pp. 229­258). Springer
         New York.
Wise,  A.  F.,  &  Schwarz,    B. B.  (2017).   Visions    of CSCL:    eight  provocations   for the  future of the   field.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(4), 423­467.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         24                                                     © ISLS
