  An Empirical Study of Educational Robotics as Tools for Group
        Metacognition and Collaborative Knowledge Construction
               Chrysanthos Socratous, Cyprus Interaction Lab, Cyprus University of Technology,
                                       chrysanthos@cyprusinteractionlab.com
  Andri Ioannou, Cyprus Interaction Lab, Cyprus University of Technology, Research Center on Interactive
          Media, Smart Systems and Emerging Technologies (RISE), andri@cyprusinteractionlab.com

         Abstract: The affordances of Educational Robotics (ER) for advancing teaching and learning
         has become a widely researched topic. This study aims to identify the major components of
         collaborative knowledge construction in an ER learning environment and to investigate the
         mediating role of ER as mindtools to support group metacognition. Data analysis involved a
         micro-level examination of students' discourse, interaction with the technology, peers and the
         facilitator, using fine-grained analysis of video and audio recordings. The results made evident
         that metacognition,   along    with questioning    and  answering,    were   prevalent elements    of
         collaborative   knowledge     construction around   ER. We    support  that  ER   can  be  used as a
         learning   tool and can    be effective in  supporting  group  metacognition    through   immediate
         feedback,  openly   accessible   programmability    and students' embodied    interaction  with   the
         physical robot. Beyond the instrumental role of ER for supporting metacognitive processes in
         CSCL settings, the study provides initial evidence for a temporal relation of metacognitive
         talk to collaborative talk in group problem-solving.

Introduction
The use of Educational robotics (ER) in educational contexts to support teaching and learning has become an
extensively researched topic. ER is constructible and programmable high-tech devices which can be employed
in education as constructivist learning tools to support teaching and learning through hands-on activities. ER too
early earned an influential role as a research field, motivating the attention of many schools, and universities,
both  from  an  instructive  and    a research point    of view. Jonassen  (2000)    first introduced   the theoretical
background and the motivation for the integration of robotic technologies as cognitive tools which can improve
and enrich the educational process. According to Gaudiello and Zibetti (2013), two features of ER are linked to
their high  educational   potential;   "transparency"   and  "interactivity." "Transparency"    refers  to  the openly
accessible programmability of the robot whilst, "interactivity" refers to the immediacy of the feedback given by
the robot when a student programs and executes the commands (Gaudiello & Zibetti, 2013).
         Many studies have focused on exploring the affordances of ER in promoting several transversal skills
such as problem-solving (e.g., Atmatzidou, Demetriadis & Nika, 2018), collaboration (e.g., Ardito, Mosley &
Scollins, 2014), and computational thinking (e.g., Bers, Flannery, Kazakoff & Sullivan, 2014; Constantinou &
Ioannou, 2018). Still, ER as metacognitive tools have been considered only recently (e.g., La Paglia, Caci, La
Barbera  &  Cardaci,   2010;  Gaudiello    &   Zibetti, 2013)  and the  research   evidence  is inconsistent.   Further
investigation in the area is needed to fully understand the potential of ER in supporting students' metacognitive
processes and especially socially-mediated metacognitive processes in CSCL settings.
         We present an empirical investigation of ER in a CSCL experience aiming at engaging students in
collaboration and co-construction of shared understandings in the mathematics domain. In this work, the whole
experience around using the robot is seen as a metacognitive experience that assists students to become more
aware of their process of thinking and learning. We aim to unfold the elements of collaborative knowledge
construction, identify details of the metacognitive processes during students' interaction with the robot and their
peers, and document the educational potential of ER as tools for supporting group metacognition. Specifically,
the research questions of this study are the following:
     1.  What are the elements of collaborative knowledge construction in an ER learning environment?
     2.  How does ER help to activate group metacognitive processes?
     3.  What is the relationship between collaborative talk and metacognitive talk in ER learning settings?
         In the following    lines, we  present  the theoretical framework     of the study,   findings  from  previous
empirical  studies, methodology,      and findings  from   the present investigation  along    with discussion  of the
implications of this work.

Theoretical framing

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      192                                                   © ISLS
Metacognition
Whilst, over the past years various theoretical models of metacognition have evolved, researchers agree that
metacognition   consists of  three  or at least  two fundamental   processes. According    to  Schraw  and   Moshman
(1995),  metacognition   can   be   divided into  a knowledge   component    (knowledge    of  cognition)  and a  skill
component (regulation of cognition). Other researchers have expanded this model suggesting a three-tier model
of metacognition     namely,   metacognitive    knowledge,  metacognitive    judgments    and  monitoring,   and  self-
regulation and control (Pintrich, Wolters, & Baxter, 2000). More recently Efklides (2011) proposed a complex
interplay between the task level, the person level (where metacognitive knowledge and skills are located) and
the interaction level (where metacognitive experiences take place).
          There are already some studies examining the use of ER to promote metacognition at the individual
level. For example, a study by Keren and Fridin (2014), examined how ER can assist the teaching of geometric
thinking   and promote   children's  metacognitive   development.   Findings  from   the study showed   that students'
performance on geometric thinking and metacognitive tasks were improved because of their participation in ER
activities. Also, to investigate the process of constructing and programming robots as metacognitive tools, La
Paglia  et al. (2010)  found   that ER  may    be conceptualized   as a novel metacognitive    setting that  motivates
learners to monitor and control their own learning actions. Gaudiello and Zibetti (2013) tried to identify and
classify the heuristics that are applied by elementary school students while they interact with and control ER
technologies. The results demonstrated three main types of heuristics: (a) procedural-oriented, (b) declarative-
oriented,  and   (c)  metacognitive-oriented.     Atmatzidou,   Demetriadis,    and  Nika   (2018)   investigated the
development of students' metacognitive skills in ER activities when the facilitators performed different levels of
guidance   (low and   high) in  different age  groups. The  results suggested   that strong guidance   had  a positive
impact on students' development of metacognitive thinking skills independently of their age and gender.
Group metacognition
There is a recent shift in the literature towards the study of group metacognition rather than metacognition as an
individual endeavor. Yet, research on metacognition in group (e.g., CSCL) situations is not well developed,
despite group learning being commonplace in schools and other learning environments (Smith & Mancy, 2018).
Despite the limited research on group metacognition, some findings suggest that metacognition is mediated and
socially shared among group members in collaborative activities (Goos, Gailbraith & Renshaw, 2002) and that
group  metacognition   can  be  considered   as an  extension  of individual metacognition    into group  interactions.
Also, researchers agree that metacognition in group situations consist of students' monitoring, reflecting and
controlling of one-another's knowledge and actions. In CSCL research, the potential role of CSCL tools for
supporting group metacognition has not been examined to date. As Järvelä and Hadwin (2013) explained, the
potential role of CSCL tools for supporting the planning, monitoring, and regulation of collaborative learning
processes  has  been  virtually ignored.    In this work, we   see ER   as CSCL   tools  that  can promote   students'
metacognitive thinking. Most of ER activities are collaborative learning activities, yet, there are virtually no
studies in the CSCL literature that examine the impact of ER on the development of group metacognition as an
essential part of group work.

Methods
Participants
The participants were 14 students (6 male and 8 female) in Grades 4, 5 and 6 (aged 9-11 years old) in a public
primary school in Cyprus. The students worked in 4 groups of 3-4 students each. Each group was formed with
different genders and abilities (i.e., mathematical, technological and problem-solving abilities) to allow different
discourses and problem-solving approaches to develop. The participating students had no previous experience in
robotics.
Procedures
There were two weeks of introductory activities to help students get familiar with the EV3 kit. These activities
were followed by three 80-minutes sessions of STEM-related problem-solving tasks. Students should program a
robot using a tablet, which was connected to the robot via Bluetooth. Each group was tasked with the following
programming problems.
    ·     Program a robot to move from its starting position, through a maze, to the finish position
    ·     Program a robot to move along the outside of the flags without touching them
    ·     Program a robot to draw a hexagon
Students   in  groups could  adopt   any  approach   they wanted   to come   to a solution.   The  teacher acted  as a
facilitator assisting the whole procedure e.g., assessing progress, examining understandings, monitoring group

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      193                                                  © ISLS
work, and suggesting attention to data. When the groups completed their tasks, a debriefing phase took place. In
this case, the groups demonstrated their approach in addressing the problem and answered questions asked by
the facilitator and the students of other groups.
Data collection and analysis
Verbal contributions were recorded via audio recorders next to each group. A camera was also placed in the
room to record the overall student interaction and technology use.
          To answer RQ1, the audio data were transcribed verbatim and analyzed using a fine-grained analysis.
The unit of analysis was the individual participant and the discourse was coded on a turn-by-turn basis. A new
turn was considered to start when the speaker changed. When the speaker shifted the theme of the discussion or
when    a different   kind of   discourse  appeared,   these   were   parsed   into extra  coded    units.  Generally,  a
conversational turn had more than one coding units. For instance, when a student asked a question but also
added one or more statements, this was coded as two or more different coding units. Two independent raters
coded   35%   of the  data to verify  the reliability of coding.   Reliability was  acceptable    (agreement  75%),   and
therefore, the first researcher completed coding the complete dataset. We used the coding scheme reported in
Hmelo-Silver (2003), which conceptualizes the thinking processes and the general cognitive, metacognitive and
social characteristics involved in collaborative knowledge construction.
          To  answer   RQ2    and RQ3,     a group    was  selected   for further  examination    with   a chronological
investigation   of within-group  interaction. We   used   the  CORDTRA      technique   initially presented   by  Hmelo-
Silver, Jordan,  Liu, and  Chernobilsky    (2011) and    later applied in  varied  CSCL    settings by   Ioannou  (2011),
Ioannou,   Brown    and   Artino  (2015),  and   Socratous     and Ioannou   (2018).    CORDTRA      was    examined   in
combination with excerpts of students' discourse to identify details of metacognitive and collaborative processes
and the role of the technology.

Findings
What are the elements of collaborative knowledge construction? (RQ1)
Knowledge
As presented in Table 1, the students rarely referred to prior conceptual knowledge or experience of knowledge
(5.2%). Not surprisingly, the students made comparisons and links referring to observations of previous actions
in the same task.

Metacognition
The students     used a larger   amount   of  metacognitive    utterances  (24.1%).    The  majority     were monitoring
statements. Planning contributions occupied the second largest percentage of metacognitive utterances and were
almost always in response to data derived from the results of previous trials. However, students did not mediate
their planning with, prior knowledge, experience, or existing theories.

Interpretation
Students  dedicated   some    effort in interpreting  data  derived   from  the   robot or  the   tablet display  (6.8%).
Interpreting data was an opportunity to reconsider, test and refine their solutions.

Collaboration
Collaboration    category  included  three   subcategories: conflict,  questioning   and   facilitator's input.  Conflicts
within groups were few and appeared mostly at early stages of the task. When conflicts appeared, they were
more often related to the robot's failure to perform the expected outcomes; conflicts were rarely over a concept.
Student   groups   generated  many   questions   (22.7%),   most   of which    referred to teammates     rather  than the
facilitator. Most  of these   questions were   planning-related    questions   as well  as software-   and  robot-related
questions.   As  shown  by  the relatively large number     of statements  related  to  agreement   with   peers (12.8%),
students' consensus-seeking behavior was frequent. Responses by the students (24.3%) revealed the degree of
consensus within the group. Students constructed simple explanations and brief answers more often than they
elaborated explanations. Facilitator questioning was mainly concerned with software and robot use. The main
operation of the facilitator's input was coded as monitoring (7.4%).

Table 1: Major categories and subcategories frequencies
               Coding categories           N (%)          Coding categories                  N (%)
               Knowledge                   29 (5.2%)      Collaboration                      355 (63.9%)
                 Conceptual knowledge      5 (0.9%)          Conflict                        26 (4.8%)

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      194                                                     © ISLS
               Prior experiences           4 (0.7%)           Conceptual                    3 (0.6%)
               Analogies                   20 (3.6%)          Task-specific                 23 (4.1%)
              Metacognition                134 (24.1%)      Questioning                     126 (22.7%)
               Monitoring                  74 (13.3%)         Clarifications                30 (5.4%)
               Evaluation                  4 (0.7%)           Plan-related                  44 (7.9%)
               Reflection                  19 (3.4%)          Software-related              22 (4%)
               Total planning              37 (6.7%)          Self-answered                 5 (0.9%)
                Theory-driven Planning     2 (0.4%)           General                       2 (0.4%)
                Data-driven Planning       33 (5.9%)          Facilitator                   23 (4.1%)
                Unjustified                2 (0.4%)         Responses                       135 (24.3%)
              Interpretation               38 (6.8%)          Agreement with facilitator    20 (3.6%)
               High-level                  7 (1.3%)           Agreement with peer           71 (12.8)
               Low-level                   31 (5.5%)          Brief answers                 24 (4.3%)
                                                              Simple explanations           16 (2.9%)
                                                              Elaborate explanations        4 (0.7%)
                                                            Facilitator's input             68 (12.1%)
                                                              Monitoring                    41 (7.4%)
                                                              Explaining concepts           3 (0.4%)
                                                              Explaining Software           24 (4.3%)

How does ER help to activate group metacognitive processes? (RQ2)
To answer RQ2, we examined an integrated view of an episode, using the CORDTRA diagram of Fig. 1. On
CORDTRA diagram the numbers on the x-axis represent the chronological order of the coded units, whilst the
y-axis represents the coded categories (records 6 to 29) and the speakers (records 1 to 5). The diagram reveals
the nature of student's talk, including metacognitive talk, and its temporal relation to the use of the robot when
students tried to solve the "Draw a hexagon" challenge. Combining the diagram with discourse excerpts helped
to understand student's interactions across time. We zoomed into an episode in which the students work on
solving the "draw a hexagon" challenge (lines 90-190).

ER activating group metacognitive processes through embodied interaction
For the activity, students   should combine    mathematical   knowledge,     experience   with ER   (i.e., introductory
lessons), and programming skills to solve the problem. First, students started to discuss how they could solve the
problem without having many ideas. A student stated that they should use the gyro sensor while another student
added that they should place a pen holder on the robot. A detailed discussion about where they could set the pen
holder took place in lines 91-99. Here, questioning discourse appeared as an essential aspect of collaborative
knowledge construction. The students' questioning about where to put the gyro sensor and the kinds of turns the
robot should make, triggered the dialogue for the next steps. The students started to research the question using
the robot as a mean for experimentation by adjusting the pen holder in different places on the robot. Students
seemed  to recognize  the    significance of where   they should adjust    the  pen holder; this important  discussion
moved students' thinking forward. The overall experimentation involved their bodies as students held the robot
in their hands and were trying to simulate (with their bodies) possible movements of the robot and thinking of
possible pen footprints on the paper. Students involved their bodies in understanding the difference between
swing and point turn (lines 100-114). Students' embodied interaction with the physical robot triggered further
social interaction and stimulated group metacognitive processes. The students tested and modified their new
ideas, against existing knowledge and new data. Thus, it appears that ER, through embodied interaction, served
as  a tool for  experimentation,    activating  group     metacognitive    processes  and   collaborative   knowledge
construction.

      Student 1   We must draw a hexagon (laughing). Any ideas?
      Student 3   We must use the gyro sensor to turn exactly as degrees as we program it (for accurate
                  angle measure).
      Student 2   Yes, the robot must turn exactly as degrees as we program it.
      Student 4   We also need to adjust a marker to draw the hexagon as the robot moves and turns.
      Student 2   What kind of turns?
      Student 3   Turns.
      Student 1   Pivot turns. The robot must turn very sharp and make pivot turns to draw an angle.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     195                                                    © ISLS
    Student 1    Ok! Where can we apply the marker?
    Student 2    If we put  it here  (holds marker  and robot    and try to make  turns  to draw   a random
                 angle).
    These tests continued until students manage to draw angles formed by two rays rather than curved
    lines. Students placed the marker on different parts of the robot and tried to draw random angles.
    They tried to put the marker in different places (between the wheels, next to the right wheel and on
    the back of the robot) to understand where it would be more efficient to place the marker.

ER activating students' group metacognitive processes through interactivity and transparency
In lines 160-176 of the CORDTRA diagram, students went through an exploration in which they used their
conceptual knowledge   of mathematics   and  programming    in a  real-world situation. Students were  concerned
about how many degrees their robot should turn and, with the teacher's assistance, they managed to connect
their mathematical knowledge and programming skills with a real-world condition. A student influenced by the
introductory robotics lessons used a flowchart describing the required moves of the robot to draw a hexagon
(line 168). Then, they decided to program the robot to turn 120º, as much as the internal angle and observed
their robot turning much more than they expected. Immediate feedback from the robot's moves (i.e., observing
the robot turn more than they expected) made the students think and monitor their thoughts (line 169). Robot's
failure to produce the expected outcome seems to have triggered the group's metacognitive thinking. Thinking
of what they were doing wrong, checking various aspects (lines 169-172) and building on each-other's thoughts,
they excluded various possibilities and proposed a solution to the problem. After that, student 4 contributes a
more advanced thinking to the discussion, suggesting that they should put a smaller value for the turning angle
because with 120º the robot was turning too much. Student 4 proposed to represent the problem on a paper to
calculate the turning angle. Students acknowledged this idea and began to model the problem on a paper. By
representing the problem  on   paper students managed   to find  the correct value for  the turning  angle. Then,
Student 1 made his thinking visible showing on the paper the correct angle (line 174). Student 2 built on the
previous thought proposing  the solution to  the  problem  (line 175). Therefore, the   process of socially-shared
metacognition emerged in this group when Student 4 provided a metacognitive regulation statement (i.e., "If the
robot turns 120º left, it will get into the hexagon. Let's draw the hexagon on a paper to find the angle"). The
other group members acknowledged this contribution and developed a solution to the problem.
         The transparency features of ER helped the students think, apply and check their ideas to overcome the
problem. Easy changes to the software and hardware, at no cost, helped the students to avoid frustration, and
through the open and accessible programmability of the robot, they managed to overcome the obstacles. The
robot's programming, the expected results, and the actual results of its actions served as a metacognitive tool and
as a data reference that students could use to negotiate their developing solution. The students identified gaps in
their knowledge and collectively discussed, elaborated, and improved their solution. Regulatory statements that
were produced due to the interactivity and transparency features of the robot promoted group metacognition and
facilitated collaborative knowledge construction.
    Student 3    Now, we will program the robot to move forward, then make a turn for some degrees
                 then again forward and then turn, etc.
    Student 2    Ok, we have to think about how many turns and how many degrees.
    Student 1    Six turns and six forward. I do not know how many degrees.
    Teacher      What do we know about the total internal angles of polygons?
    Student 4    It depends on how many different triangles are formed into the hexagon that does not
                 overlap each other.
    Student 2    How many different triangles does a hexagon have?
    Student 3    I will draw a hexagon to find how many triangles are formed.
    Student 3    4 different triangles. So, multiplies by 180º each equal 720º
    Student 1    Divide by 6 angles of a hexagon (thinking). Equals 120º. So, we will program the robot
                 to move forward and then turn 120º for 6 times.
                      (The team programmed the robot and is going to test the program).
    Student 2    No, it is turning too much. Perhaps we calculate the angles wrongly. Let's check it.
    Student 3    Or, the sensor is not working
    Student 2    Gyro sensor looks ok!

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  196                                                  © ISLS
      Student 1  (They are doing the calculations) The angle is correct 120º. Must be something else.
      Student 4  Yeah, but I think we just have to take a smaller angle. 120º are all the internal angles of
                 the hexagon. he robot moves on one of the sides of the hexagon. If the robot turn 120º
                 left, it will get into the hexagon. Let's draw the hexagon on a paper to find the angle.
             (They draw a hexagon with a robot, representing it with a dot, on one of its angles)
      Student 1  The robot is this dot and must turn here (showing with his finger). So the turning angle
                 is this one, we must find this one (showing on the paper).
      Student 2  This angle is supplementary of the internal angle. So its 180-120 = 60.
      Student 4  Yes, that is. The robot must turn as much as the supplementary of the internal angle,
                 only 60º not 120º.

                          Figure 1. CORDTRA diagram of students' contributions.
What is the relationship between collaborative talk and metacognitive talk? (RQ3)
Both in the previous excerpt and the one below, the students made their metacognitive thinking visible mainly in
mutual interaction with their teammates. Student 1 tried to explain their failure to solve the challenge proposing
that the flags were small, so the sensor could not detect them. This contribution triggered the thinking of Student
3, leading him to suggest a new idea that is, the use of two ultrasonic sensors instead of one. Student 1 pointed
out his disagreement over the proposed idea and documented his position using the experience of a previous
failing effort outside the current activity. Then, Student 1 contributed a metacognitive statement to justify his
position proposing that they do not know well how to handle an ultrasonic sensor and so, he proposed a trial and
error plan. Student 3 ignored Student's 1 plan highlighting that with two sensors, it would be easier for the robot
to detect the flags. When they failed, Student 3 accepted to use the alternative plan but he first proposed to
measure the distances among the flags so that they did not use a trial and error plan. In the excerpt below, the
students compared their thinking with the thinking of their peers and this involved the use of collaborative talk
in parallel with metacognitive talk. Also, as shown in the CORTDRA (Fig. 1), collaborative and metacognitive
talk seemed to  have  a temporal relationship between them.   For example,   contributions      that were coded as
collaborative talk were usually followed by one or more metacognitive contributions vice versa.
      Student 2   We will use the ultrasonic sensor to avoid the flags.
      Student 3   Ok then. Put the ultrasonic sensor. (They executed their plan, but they failed).
      Student 1   The flags are small, so the sensor cannot detect them.
      Student 3   We can use two ultrasonic sensors. What do you think?
      Student 1   No, we tried to use the ultrasonic sensor once, and we failed. We do not know how to
                  handle it. Let's program the robot to move, and then we can adjust the values.
      Student 3   If we put two sensors, it will be easier for the robot to detect the flags.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  197                                                    © ISLS
     Student 2       Ok! Let's try with two sensors.
     Student 1       Ok then. (They executed their plan using two sensors, but they failed).
     Student 1       I told you, we do not need the sensors.
     Student 3       One more trial with two sensors and then, if we fail, we can move with your plan.
                     (They changed the position of the two sensors and tried again, but they failed).
     Student 3       Ok. Let's do what you said, but first, we can measure the distance between the flags to
                     calculate the value of rotations.

Discussion
The study presents evidence that CSCL activities using ER can engage students in collaborative knowledge
construction with prevalent elements of metacognitive processes, questioning, and answering. Indeed, students'
discourse demonstrated logical reasoning coupled with metacognitive statements enabling the students to predict
and to plan the flow of actions required to solve the problem. Monitoring elements of metacognition seem to be
activated in an ER learning environment, engaging students in the process of exploration for the acquisition of
knowledge. The large volume of monitoring elements of metacognition can be explained as the ER's value in
encouraging    procedural  knowledge   rather  than    declarative knowledge    i.e.,  student learning     by doing   and
understanding strategies of problem-solving rather than concepts.
         During the ER activity, intensive collaboration was enacted in the form of questioning and answering
while metacognition was enacted in the form of monitoring and planning. Many researchers have identified
questioning   (e.g., Hmelo-Silver   &  Barrows,   2008)  and   reflective  thinking   (e.g., Baker    &  Lund,   1997)  as
important kinds of discourse in knowledge building situations. Contributions of prior knowledge were limited,
although this might not be replicated in a setting where learners have prior experiences with ER. Our findings
confirm previous evidence about ER promoting collaborative knowledge construction (Chambers, Carbonaro,
Rex & Grove, 2007; Socratous & Ioannou, 2018). This work contributes further in that it presents a fine-grained
analysis of the phenomenon to strengthen the scientific evidence in the area. While previous studies rely heavily
on the study of metacognition as an individual endeavor, using self-reported data (e.g., Atmatzidou et al., 2018),
this study documents metacognition as a result of group work, while it occurred in-situ.
         Metacognitive elements, coded as monitoring, evaluation, reflection, and planning, are activated in ER
activities through   embodied  interaction  with the   physical   robot. Indeed, when   a    robot is being    used in the
activity, it enables students' physical action and simulation of the robot's expected actions. Such activities seem
to encourage expression and personal involvement in the learning process, whilst supporting teamwork which is
important for the metacognitive process. Moreover, the transparent software design and the direct interactivity
(feedback) coming from the robot's moves in response to students' programming, seem to facilitate the group's
metacognitive   thinking.  In fact, when   the robot   failed  to  perform the   expected    outcomes,    monitoring   and
planning   elements   of metacognition   were  documented      on  our   chronological diagrams.      Metacognition    was
necessary   for students  to  understand   how the   tasks were    performed   and to  be    able  to identify  problems,
negotiate modifications and operating changes to solve the problems. Embodied interaction with the physical
robot, combined with feedback coming from the robot, acted as an extension of students' mind, scaffolding
knowledge     construction by  re-evaluating   their solutions.   From   this perspective,   ER   can  be   considered  as
"scaffolding embedded technological tools" (Chambers et al., 2007).
         Our research has provided some initial evidence for a temporal relationship between collaborative talk
and metacognitive talk in a problem-solving ER environment. The study further presents an instrumental role of
ER technology in supporting metacognitive processes in CSCL settings. Metacognitive and collaborative talk
appear to mediate each-other in this CSCL, ER setting. We understand that this evidence is not clear yet. Further
development     of our  understanding  of  ER  as  metacognitive    tools, will  help  us    develop  strategies to  fully
maximize their effectiveness in group problem-solving CSCL tasks.

Conclusions
Coding and plotting student's discourse around an ER experience in CSCL settings can shed light on the value
to the technology for collaborative knowledge construction and group metacognition. In this work, fine-grained
analysis   of student's  discourse made  evident  that metacognition,    along  with   questioning    and answering,   are
prevalent  elements   of collaborative knowledge     construction  in  ER  activities. What    is  more,  the  role of the
technology seems to be instrumental; namely, the embodied interaction, direct feedback and openly accessible
programmability enabled by the robot were tightly coupled with group metacognitive processing and overall
collaborative   knowledge    construction. In  conclusion,  this   work  extends  the  evidence    on   the value   of ER
integration in learning environments and CSCL activities. The study contributes in that it presents a fine-grained

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      198                                                      © ISLS
analysis of the phenomenon to strengthen the scientific evidence in the area. While previous studies rely heavily
on the study of metacognition as an individual endeavor using self-reported data (e.g., Atmatzidou et al., 2018),
this study documents metacognition as a result of group work, while it occurred in-situ. Future work should
extend on the nature of the problem, the teacher's scaffolding, the students' roles and the characteristics of the
technology    which   might  further    endorse  collaborative   knowledge     construction   and metacognition      in CSCL
settings.

References
Ardito, G., Mosley, P., & Scollins, L. (2014). We, robot: Using robotics to promote collaborative and mathematics learning
          in a middle school classroom. Middle Grades Research Journal, 9(3), 73.
Atmatzidou, S., Demetriadis, S., & Nika, P. (2018). How Does the Degree of Guidance Support Students' Metacognitive and
          Problem Solving Skills in Educational Robotics? Journal of Science Education and Technology, 27(1), 70-85.
Baker, M., & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a CSCL environment. Journal of computer assisted
          learning, 13(3), 175-193.
Bers, M. U., Flannery, L., Kazakoff, E. R., & Sullivan, A. (2014). Computational thinking and tinkering: Exploration of an
          early childhood robotics curriculum. Computers & Education, 72, 145-157.
Chambers,  J. M.,   Carbonaro,    M., Rex, M.,   & Grove,  S. (2007).   Scaffolding knowledge   construction through    robotic
          technology: A middle school case study. Electronic Jrl for the Integration of Technology in Education, 6, 55-70.
Constantinou, V., & Ioannou A. (2018). Development of Computational Thinking Skills through Educational Robotics. In
          European Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning - ECTEL. Retrieved December 2018 from http://ceur-
          ws.org/Vol-2193/paper9.pdf
Efklides, A.  (2011). Interactions   of metacognition with   motivation  and affect in self-regulated learning:  The   MASRL
          model. Educational psychologist, 46(1), 6-25.
Gaudiello, I., & Zibetti, E. (2013). Using control heuristics as a means to explore the educational potential of robotics
          kits. Themes in Science and Technology Education, 6(1), 15-28.
Goos, M., Galbraith, P., & Renshaw, P. (2002). Socially mediated metacognition: Creating collaborative zones of proximal
          development in small group problem solving. Educational studies in Mathematics, 49(2), 193-223.
Harel, I., & Papert, S. (Eds.). (1991). Constructionism. Westport, CT, US: Ablex Publishing.
Hmelo-Silver,    C.  E.   (2003).  Analyzing   collaborative  knowledge    construction:  Multiple   methods     for  integrated
          understanding. Computers & Education, 41(4), 397-420.
Hmelo-Silver,    C.   E.,  &  Barrows,    H.  S.  (2008).  Facilitating  collaborative  knowledge    building. Cognition   and
          instruction, 26(1), 48-94.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Jordan, R., Liu, L., & Chernobilsky, E. (2011). Representational tools for understanding complex
          computer-supported    collaborative  learning   environments.  In Analyzing   interactions  in CSCL (pp.     83-106).
          Springer US.
Ioannou, A. (2011). Online collaborative learning: The promise of wikis. International Journal of Instructional Media, 38(3),
          213-223.
Ioannou, A., Brown, S.W., & Artino, A.R. (2015). Wikis and forums for collaborative problem-based activity: A systematic
          comparison of learners' interactions. The Internet and Higher Education, 24, 35-45.
Järvelä, S., & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). New frontiers: Regulating learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 25-39.
Jonassen, D. H. (2000). Computers as mindtools for schools: Engaging critical thinking. Prentice Hall.
Keren, G., & Fridin, M. (2014). Kindergarten Social Assistive Robot (KindSAR) for children's geometric thinking and
          metacognitive development in preschool education: A pilot study. Computers in Human Behavior, 35, 400-412.
La Paglia, F., Caci, B., La Barbera, D., & Cardaci, M. (2010). Using robotics construction kits as metacognitive tools: A
          research in an Italian primary school. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 154, 110­114.
Pintrich, P. R., Wolters, C. A., & Baxter, G. P. (2000). 2. assessing metacognition and self-regulated learning.
Schraw, G., & Moshman, D. (1995). Metacognitive theories. Educational psychology review, 7(4), 351-371.
Smith, J. M., & Mancy, R. (2018). Exploring the relationship between metacognitive and collaborative talk during group
          mathematical    problem-solving­what   do  we   mean   by  collaborative metacognition?. Research  in   Mathematics
          Education, 20(1), 14-36.
Socratous,   C.,  &    Ioannou,    A. (2018).  A   Study   of    Collaborative  Knowledge     Construction   in    STEM    via
          Educational Robotics. In J. Kay & R. Luckin (Eds.), Rethinking Learning in the Digital Age: Making the Learning
          Sciences  Count,   13th International  Conference   of the Learning  Sciences (ICLS)  2018 (Vol.   1,  pp.  496-503).
          London, UK: ISLS.

Acknowledgments
This work    is  part of  a  project  that has   received funding    from the  European'    s Horizon    2020    research and
innovation programme under grant agreement Nº739578 and the government of the Republic of Cyprus through
the Directorate General for European Programmes, Coordination and Development.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         199                                                       © ISLS
