Disciplinary Task Models for Designing Classroom Orchestration:
             The Case of Data Visualization for Historical Inquiry
                         Josh Radinsky, University of Illinois Chicago, joshuar@uic.edu
                       Iris Tabak, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, itabak@bgu.ac.il
                       Monika Moore, University of Illinois Chicago, mmoore49@uic.edu

          Abstract: Incorporating data visualizations into college classrooms can enhance disciplinary
          learning, when accompanied   by associated  meaning-making    practices.      However,  tools not
          specifically designed for CSCL may lack supports for collaboration and disciplinary reasoning.
          Therefore, it is necessary to design supports into classroom orchestration. In this paper we
          examine the design of such orchestration to scaffold historical reasoning with geospatial data
          visualizations. The orchestration of a sequence of small-group tasks scaffolded progressively
          more complex reasoning about historical waves of immigration, which the instructor leveraged
          to support students' reasoning at multiple levels in whole-class discussion. Our analyses point
          to these kinds of orchestrated scaffolds as a valuable direction for CSCL research and design.

In proposing productive research directions for CSCL (Ludvigsen, Cress, Law, Rosé, & Stahl, 2016; Wise &
Schwarz, 2017), a number of scholars converge on broadening the purview to tools beyond the products of CSCL
design research. Specifically, Reimann (in Ludvigsen et al., 2016), foresees greater attention to sophisticated
representational systems used for everyday and professional goals. Ludvigsen (2016) further calls for research to
identify practices for arriving at shared meanings through interactions with these representational systems, and
studies that highlight when and why collaboration might be useful (Wise & Schwarz, 2017).
          In this paper we explore ways to incorporate such systems and their accompanying knowledge-building
practices into the  post-secondary classroom. College classrooms   are environments        in which learners can be
introduced to disciplinary inquiry for the first time. This includes being exposed to a discipline's professional
vision (Goodwin, 1994) ­ being apprenticed by an instructor to see information (texts, data) through a particular
lens that enables discipline-relevant insights and reasoning. This is a process that often proves challenging for
college instructors (PCAST, 2012). Merely using representational tools in instruction does not guarantee that
learners will see data through the eyes of the profession, especially when the tools lack support for collaboration
and disciplinary meaning making (e.g., Fischer et al., 2013; Raes, Schellens, De Wever, & Vanderhoven, 2012).
Incorporating these tools poses a number of design challenges: how to create coherence between existing curricula
and the forms of thought introduced by the tools; how to help learners see and interpret representations through
disciplinary eyes; and how to manage the complexity inherent to these tools. Meeting these challenges requires
design work around these tools themselves.
          We propose that integrating disciplinary models with classroom orchestration is a productive way to
incorporate existing representational systems into instructional settings. We examine this in a college history
education class using a data visualization tool. The study addresses the questions: How can data visualization
tools be incorporated into the college classroom to support historical inquiry? How can classroom orchestration
facilitate learners' ability to engage in geo-spatial reasoning for historical inquiry?

Theoretical framework

Classroom orchestration and distributed scaffolding
Research in CSCL and the Learning Sciences often argues that the meanings, purposes, and learning value of
tools are mediated by the activity structures in which those tools are used. Classroom orchestration (Dillenbourg,
Prieto, & Olsen, 2018) is a process by which teachers or other instructional designers plan, deploy and regulate
multiple resources in the classroom to facilitate learning and achieve a productive workflow (Prieto, Holenko
Dlab, Gutiérrez, Abdulwahed, & Balid, 2011). A central role for teachers in classroom orchestration is to assess
progress and achievement, and make changes and adaptations on the fly to better align interactions with learning
goals (Kaendler, Wiedmann, Rummel, & Spada, 2015). This alignment of multiple resources and interactions to
support learning has been described as distributed scaffolding (Puntambekar & Kolodner, 2005; Tabak, 2004).
          Classroom orchestration and distributed scaffolding can support learners in specific reasoning processes,
such as learning to interpret data through a particular disciplinary lens, or professional vision (Goodwin, 1994).
Members   of a  professional community  are likely to converge   on similar interpretations,     while  members  of
different communities may focus on different aspects and arrive at different meanings, even when observing the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   200                                                    © ISLS
same representation (Bowen, Roth, & McGinn, 1999). Learners may be able to approach novel representational
systems and derive meaning from them, but they may struggle to produce the types of explanations that typify a
particular field or discipline. Therefore, a pivotal role for distributed scaffolding and orchestration is in helping
learners to focus on particular attributes, and to interpret representations in particular ways, such as by teachers
interpreting representations in disciplinary terms alongside learners (Tabak, 2004; Tabak & Reiser, 2008).

Moderating discussion through levels of visualization
Classroom orchestration  can also involve regulating classroom   discourse. Discussions around      modeling  or
visualization tools can occur at three levels (Radinsky, Milz, Zellner, Pudlock, Witek, Hoch & Lyons, 2017). At
the interface level, discussion centers on how to manipulate the tool and extract information and visualizations.
At the modeling level, discussion centers on the signs, symbols, images and quantities that are represented in the
tool and their relationship to the phenomena being represented. Discussions at this level can be about relationships
among variables and the interpretation of patterns. At the represented-world level, discussion centers on the
phenomena in the world that are modeled through the visualization. Discussions at the represented-world level
arise from the representations, but speak in the language of the modeled phenomena rather than the images,
symbols or quantities that are displayed. The goal is to push discussion beyond the interface level, to concentrate
on the modeling level to ensure that new understandings are constructed, and then to the represented-world level
so that the knowledge that is constructed is about the phenomena of interest. Although the instructional aim is to
move from the language of representation to the language of historical phenomena, it is critical that classroom
guidance regulate the connection between discussion at both levels, so that the reasoning stays anchored in data.

Data visualizations and historical reasoning
Historical reasoning involves the construction of narratives of the past that are grounded in observations from
historical records (Seixas, 2017). This requires skills such as chronological reasoning, contextualizing historical
data, corroborating observations across multiple sources of information, and reasoning about texts as sources
(Seixas, 2017). Using a data visualization tool for historical inquiry involves more than extracting and interpreting
information; it requires viewing the data as historical records of people whose experiences can be only partially
and imperfectly inferred from observations of these data. Geographic information systems (GIS) are a class of
visualization tools that has been part of a fundamental spatial shift in many of the social and natural sciences, but
has held a more problematic place in the discipline of history. Though some historians find an ontological or
epistemological mismatch between the quantified and spatialized representations of GIS and the tentative and
contingent nature of historians' professional vision (Owens, 2007), there is a small but growing group of historians
who embrace GIS tools because of their affordances for observing phenomena at spatial and temporal scales
beyond what many traditional historical sources allow (Knowles, 2008). The present study explores a design for
apprenticing students in historical reasoning that takes advantage of commonly-available GIS tools.

Using disciplinary task models to design orchestration with a "webmap"
The visualization tool used in this study, Immigration Explorer, is what Baker (2005) describes as "webmaps":
online, public-use GIS providing access to geospatial historical data with minimal functionality for manipulating
the representation, instead emphasizing ease of access and simplicity of use. This was a free resource available
on a public-access URL created in 2009 by the New York Times for browsing historical census data for the years
1880-2000. The webmap displayed the total population of each county in each census decade; the number of
people who were identified as foreign-born; and the number of foreign-born people from each of 23 countries-of-
origin. The data were visualized as spheres of varying size, representing the number of county residents born in
each country-of-origin. Figure 1 shows an example map of the census count of people born in Mexico living in
each U. S. county in 1970, 1980 and 1990.

    Figure 1. Immigration Explorer maps showing Mexican-born population by U. S. county, 1970-1990.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 201                                                  © ISLS
The design: Orchestration of sequential collaborative data interpretation activities
The simplicity and accessibility of this tool allowed for ease of integration into the classroom but required any
distributed scaffolding for historical reasoning to be designed into the orchestration of the classroom activity,
since no such supports were built into the tool. The design of these "wrap-around" classroom supports, to foster
reasoning that is both historical and geo-spatial, is the focus of the present analysis.
       Learners   required considerable   support in order  to   engage in meaningful       historical inquiry  while
developing nascent models of multiple population patterns shifting over time. Therefore, the tacit conceptual
moves involved   in this reasoning process  were  mapped   onto   group activity structures    to design  classroom
orchestration. This provided learners with a series  of manageable   tasks that  combined     to  form  richer, more
complex interpretations of historical data. The final products of the group work could subsequently be used by
the instructor in a whole class discussion to piece together, through a series of prompts, queries, and restatements,
the initial building blocks of an historical account. This laid the conceptual groundwork for their subsequent
interpretation of a series of historical case studies of migration (beyond the scope of the present analysis).
       Five phases of activity with different group configurations guided students toward using the webmap to
construct historical narratives about patterns of migration from different countries-of-origin (hereafter, CoO):
   1.  Whole-class    introduction    of the mapping       tool: whole-class discussion      showing    how    to use
       Immigration Explorer (interface level), introducing historical census data as a resource for historical
       reasoning (modeling and represented-world levels).
   2.  Small-group investigation of one CoO in one region: in groups of three, students select one CoO group
       and make observations of that group's changing population pattern in one region over time. For example,
       they might examine the changing Chinese-born population in northern California from 1880 to 1930.
   3.  Same-group comparing changing patterns for the same CoO in different regions: in the same groups
       of three, students compare the patterns of population change of the same CoO in one region with another
       region, e.g., comparing Chinese-born population patterns in northern California to the very different
       patterns of Chinese immigration in the Midwest, around Chicago.
   4.  New "jigsaw" groups compare "waves of migration" for different CoO: students form new groups
       of three that each include an "expert" on a different CoO population. In these "jigsaw" groups (Johnson
       & Johnson, 1982), students take turns teaching the patterns they observed for their population, and then
       consider similarities and differences across these CoO's patterns of migration.
   5.  Whole-class sharing and discussion of group findings: groups present their findings and with the
       instructor's help articulate connections and interpretations towards constructing historical narratives.
       Instructor scaffolds bridge from modeling level to represented-world reasoning.
At each of the small-group phases (see Figure 2) there are challenges for reasoning at all three levels (interface,
modeling, and represented-world). Phase 2 allows a group to focus on only one region and one CoO as they
practice with the tools, attempting to describe change over time. Phase 3 adds the challenge of doing this for two
regions of the USA, but with the same CoO map. Phase 4 requires the use of three different CoO maps, and pushes
them to reason about different spatio-temporal patterns for different immigrant groups, potentially over centuries.
       Whole-class discussion led by the instructor (Phase 1) provides modeling of the language of careful and
specific observations (e.g., "the population of people born in Mexico grew quickly in this area from 1970 to
1990"), prior to students practicing these kinds of observations in small groups (Phase 2), and prior to repeating
this same skill while attending to multiple regions of the map (Phase 3). The decade slider provides support for
noticing population changes without having to change maps, and both regions they are comparing are visible in
the same map. Students then take responsibility for sharing those observations with a new group, and making
similar comparisons across different maps displaying different CoO's (Phase 4). Finally, the instructor-mediated
whole-class discussion   (Phase 5) allows  for a  more   formal   sharing of the  cross-group     observations    and
comparisons, allowing communal scrutiny of their findings. This affords scaffolding, modeling, and shaping of
students' language by the instructor, referring back to the worked example from Phase 1.
       Though fairly straightforward as a "jigsaw" lesson, the rationale for this sequence embodies a set of
propositions about learning that have value for CSCL researchers. As Vogel, Wecker, Kollar and Fischer (2017)
note, "CSCL scripts are particularly effective for domain-specific learning when they prompt transactive activities
(i.e., activities in which a learner's reasoning builds on the contribution of a learning partner) and when they are
combined with additional content-specific scaffolding (worked examples, concept maps, etc.)" (p. 477). The
phases of activity reflect the conceptual steps that a historian might take in constructing an inquiry comparing
waves of migration for different populations. For a single learner, conducting these steps would be taxing. By
reducing the complexity of the task within the original group (comparing patterns within a single map display)

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  202                                                     © ISLS
and then pooling resources by forming new comparison groupings, students are able to consider multiple, multi-
level comparisons, without having to produce such complex comparisons from scratch. The whole-class, teacher-
mediated sharing affords joint attention to reasoning across multiple regions, populations, and decades, modeling
data not simply as numbers, but as representations of historical movements of people through space and time.

 Figure 2. Orchestration "jigsaw" design constructs multiple, multi-level comparisons of historical migrations.

Methods

Participants and setting
Participants were  15 Masters students (12 female,   3 male)  in a teaching licensure program.   The lesson was
conducted in a course taught by the first author, as an action research project, documented by a research assistant,
and following IRB-approved procedures for consenting, data gathering and analysis. The course was a pre-service
methods class for history and social studies teachers, and the focal lesson was part of a module on historical
inquiry and  migration. The larger instructional unit  built conceptual understandings of    migration, including
specific cases of migration drawn from students' families and a variety of texts, leading to an analysis of case
studies from a historical text (not described here). The focus of this lesson was on different geographic and
temporal patterns of immigration to the United States.

Data collection and analysis
We report on a subset of the data collected for the larger research project: a video recording of the focal lesson
(65 minutes). The classroom video was transcribed for speech and gesture by one research assistant, second-
passed by another. All student names are pseudonyms. In addition, a pre-instruction reflection interview with the
instructor (first author) was documented, articulating the logic of the sequence of group activities in the lesson.
This was used to articulate the design rationale and intended trajectory of classroom talk.
        The transcript of the final presentations and discussions was coded for descriptive and comparative
discursive moves at the interface, modeling, and represented-world levels, following conventions described in
(Radinsky et al, 2017), and a grounded-theory open-coding approach was used to identify the range of historical
and geospatial descriptions, comparisons and explanations that emerged. This produced a set of 35 distinct codes,
which are being developed into a coding scheme for ongoing analysis of project data. For the analysis presented
here, qualitative descriptions of the unfolding spatial and historical observations, comparisons, and explanations
were used    to examine the ways   the orchestration   design supported instructional opportunities  to  scaffold
disciplinary learning with the Immigration Explorer webmap.

Findings
Due to space limitation, we present only details from the discussions that occurred in the whole-class segment
following the jigsaw activity (Phase 5). We report on interactive presentations from two jigsaw groups: Lisa,
Penny and Maritza, who studied immigrations from Vietnam, Sweden and Mexico, respectively; and Tina, Nancy
and Cory, who studied immigrations from Sweden, Mexico and India, respectively.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   203                                                 © ISLS
Lisa's group: Comparing quantities and rates (modeling level)
Lisa, Penny and Maritza presented each CoO group's pattern in order, starting with Vietnam. Lisa described how
"we noticed the biggest county in 1980 was Orange County ... we looked at Orange County and Chicago for
comparisons." Using these two counties in different regions of the country to construct their comparison, they
noticed a pattern of the Vietnamese-born population doubling: "So from 1980 to 1990 it doubled in Orange County
[California] and Cook County [Illinois, where Chicago is located]. And then from 1990 to 2000 it doubled also.
Umm that was pretty much all from Vietnam."
          When they moved on to present the data for Sweden, Penny followed Lisa's lead at the modeling level
in presenting data for a single county (Douglas County, Minnesota), and then constructing a rate of change for
that population in that county: "we went back to 1880 and we found um, a population of over 2,000 people ...
And every 20, every 20 years ... every 20 years it decreased." Penny moves from naming quantities to giving a
qualitative description of the changing map representation as she changes the time: "1940, we only have a little
over 800, um, people in Douglas County and 20 years after by 1960 its in the 300s. And the bubble just continues
to disappear and I don't find it, by the time we get to 2000, I don't find it. I don't find it anymore." Lisa then
connected the patterns for the two groups: "So as you're ­ as the Swedish population in Minnesota was decreasing
by half every 20 years the Vietnamese population was doubling every 10 years. So that was a cool comparison
we thought of in our group."
          Maritza's presentation of the pattern for people born in Mexico picks up on a different part of Lisa's
initial description: the absence  of data  for some  decades.    She narrates their  inquiry process as a series of
discoveries of the limitations of the data, then shifts to add their observations about Hawaii: "we looked it up in
Wikipedia that Hawaii didn't become a state until 1959. So that explains why there's no data here."
          Three things are notable here: (1) their construction of the task of making observations as reporting
single-county data values (rather than qualitative descriptions of regional patterns); (2) their use of data values to
construct and compare rates of population change over time (doubling each decade, halving every 20 years); and
(3) the emphasis on incomplete data. The instructor engages the exploration of some of these opportunities during
the presentation, grounding the conversation in the modeling level (comparing quantitative patterns) that the group
has highlighted. For example, when Maritza says "Once again, it [the data] disappears from Texas," the instructor
adds: "And from the whole South. You see that? The whole South disappears," gesturing to the map to highlight
the missing data Maritza has mentioned. This move takes up Maritza's language ("disappears"), adds to the
observation in a way that better reflects the scale of the pattern ("the whole South"), and invites intersubjective
attention to the data ("You see that?", gesturing).
          A more active engagement occurs when Lisa presents the group's "cool comparison" of rates of change
(doubling versus halving). The instructor endorses their positive self-evaluation ("Very cool"), and then asks the
rest of the class to re-represent that comparison of rates-of-change:

          Instr:   Very cool. Imagine of what ways we can visualize that, other ways we can show that change.
                   Can   anybody  show  that with   your hands?  What  Lisa  just said? Like  if you were going  to
                   describe that change what would it look like?
          Penny:   [points up with one hand and down with the other]
          Instr:   So Penny went like this. [mimics Penny's hand motion, eliciting general laughter] What does
                   this mean? [repeats gesture]
          Edita:   Increase, decrease.
          Instr:   Edita what are you going to show us again?
          Edita:   [two flat hands, raising one and lowering the other] One decreased ­
          Instr:   Anyone got another one?
          Erica:   Like this? [opens one hand and closes the other, eliciting general laughter]
          Instr:   This is great. A way to visualize these numbers changing helps everybody.

This collaboratively-constructed sequence of re-representations of the group's reported data patterns (doubling
versus  halving)  is explicitly endorsed as  something   that is "great" and  "helps everybody."   This presents an
opportunity to reflect on multiple ways to communicate these phenomena, encouraging students to think beyond
direct quantitative comparisons, in ways that support reflection on the phenomena they are modeling, and their
own ability to model it in different ways.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    204                                                  © ISLS
Tina's group: generating migration concepts (represented-world level)
Tina begins with a concise statement that bundles together a number of historical observations:

       Tina:    Our group we have Mexico, India and Sweden - Sweden. And then we said that - that Mexico
                has the most um, population compare to India and Sweden. And then in Sweden people actually
                stayed in the middle first but then um, India they come from California and New York, those
                port| areas first.

       In contrast to the previous group, this statement foregoes a process of recounting each CoO's data
separately and avoids  reading out   specific numbers       for individual counties. Instead, it presents summary
comparisons that include multiple populations: Mexico had more population than either India or Sweden; Swedish
and Indian immigrants came to different geographic areas "first" ("the middle" for Sweden, versus "those ||port||
areas" for India). This begins to bridge the modeling level with the represented-world level ­ using the patterns
to begin to imagine the experiences of actual people in historical places. The instructor, sensing that there are
multiple moves worth highlighting here, invites careful attention to Tina's observations:

       Instr:   I want everyone to get what Tina is saying. I want everyone to get this. Can someone repeat
                what she said? [no one volunteers immediately] [to Tina] OK, will you come up please and
                show us? I want everyone to get it. I don't want to let her off the hook until we all understand.
                She is comparing patterns now and she is not just using the numbers. So listen to how she
                describes it. So I've got Sweden right here. You want to do this? [motioning her to come up to
                the projecting computer]
       Tina:    [coming to computer] Alright, OK. So Sweden [selects Sweden, 1880] I think in the beginning
                is all in the middle [circles data pattern on display with mouse] but then if we compare to India
                [changes menu to India] there's no data over here until 1970 [changes year to 1970]. And then
                they all in the coastal areas - is that how you say it? Like New York [circling northeast data
                pattern] and California [circling southwest data pattern] compared to uh, Sweden again [selects
                Sweden, changes year back to 1880].
       Tina:    In the middle, in the middle [circling data pattern in central Midwest]
       Instr:   And you said "at the beginning"
       Tina:    Yes
       Instr:   So you compare when they start to show up, even though that's in different years.

Having brought Tina's group's complex spatial observations into the shared space of the projected display, the
instructor again invites other students to re-represent it:

       Instr:   Can someone please restate what was the comparison that Tina made ... - the immigration
                patterns from people from Sweden, India and Mexico. How did she compare them? ...
       Nate:    So she compared them by uh, genesis point I guess. So when their populations first started to
                show up on the map, the sort of concentrations.
       Instr:   Can someone explain what Nate means by genesis point? He just gave us an awesome phrase
                that we can use. What is a genesis point for immigration? He's going to copyright it quickly so
                let's make sure we know. What does he mean by genesis point? Do you guys get this? If not
                please ask Nate to explain himself.
       Beth:    Like where they moved? Where they moved to? Entry point
       Instr:   Beth, say that again
       Beth:    Their entry point
       Instr:   Their entry point. Anyone else have another way of saying it?
       Marie:   The beginning of the census for uh, that specific region group um, on the map
       Instr:   The beginning of that census group on the map. You guys got it? Ok, so now ... so you said
                they each had a different genesis point.
       Nate:    Yeah, even though that was separated by years their uh, they had starting populations in areas
                and then spread out from there.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  205                                                    © ISLS
Several classmates are encouraged here to develop multiple ways of describing the phenomenon Tina's group
introduced. The instructor's moves push the students beyond simply describing the patterns as midwestern and
coastal, which locate more within the modeling context. By emphasizing her words "at the beginning," he brings
out an important concept for historical reasoning about migrations: "So you compare when they start to show up,
even though that's in different years." This moves the discussion from the modeling level to the represented-world
level by pushing the comparison toward language that is relevant to phenomena of migration, leading to the
development and uptake of Nate's concept of "genesis point" for an immigrant population, which is what enables
Tina's group to make a geospatial comparison of the Swedish and Indian immigration patterns, despite their being
separated in time by a century. Nate explains, "even though that was separated by years ... they had starting
populations in areas and then spread out from there." As the class continues to examine this idea, Erica shifts to
the represented world, connecting these patterns and her prior knowledge to a possible, partial explanation: "It
seems like India's might be connected to hub airports because you have like Chicago, and is that Detroit?"

Discussion
The learning opportunities created in this lesson proceed from the seeding of historical and spatial reasoning
practices embedded in the progression of small-group activities. Like any CSCL design, the space of learning
opportunities is mediated by the real-time decisions of the teacher, but the design of the learning environment
provides distributed scaffolds and other resources that shape opportunities for disciplinary learning.

Scaffolding multi-level disciplinary reasoning in group activity structures
All groups were able to bring back to the whole-class discussion descriptions of different CoO groups' changing
population patterns. As the analysis demonstrates, there were notable differences between the two focal groups'
representational practices in their presentations. Lisa's group remained mostly at the modeling level of reporting
numbers and comparing quantitative changes for individual counties ­ valuable visualization practices that were
taken up by the instructor and used to scaffold multiple representational moves in the classroom. Tina's group's
comparisons of data patterns moved from the modeling level to the represented-world, enabling the instructor to
engage the class in generating concepts for comparing regional migration patterns, even at different points in time.
         Neither of these learning opportunities would have been likely in a lesson using this kind of webmap
without the progression of distributed scaffolds orchestrated in the lesson. Although not all groups were able to
provide descriptions that could be readily used to construct a historical narrative, enough groups were able to do
so in order to provide the instructor with fodder to demonstrate how to use their observations in taking this next
step. The instructor drew on the building blocks generated by the jigsaw groups to reposition their observations
from discussions at the modeling level to discussions at the represented-world level. The progression from group
presentations to the seeds of historical narratives in the culminating discussion suggests that the orchestration
design, mapping multiple, multi-level comparisons into a sequence of group tasks, was effective in managing
complexity and enabling novices to co-construct historical interpretations of complex visual data.

Re-representation of patterns for disciplinary reasoning beyond the tool
Our analysis points to a promising strategy for fostering deep learning when using visualization tools. The aim of
teaching with visualization tools is to move beyond the language of numbers, shapes or colors, to narrate the real-
world phenomena they are meant to represent, so that learners develop knowledge about the phenomenon that
endures even in the absence of the visualization tool. The interactive discussion here built on the jigsaw activity
to encourage students to re-represent not only the data, but the patterns and phenomena they were co-constructing
to  compare migrations,  both  verbally  and gesturally. Asking  learners to re-represent  patterns  and  concepts
prompted   co-construction of  the ideas being discussed,  free of  the complexity  of the  data  interface, while
providing opportunities for formative assessment to guide the ongoing lesson. The outcomes of this strategy seen
here suggest the value of further examining its potential for supporting deep learning and transfer.

Conclusion
Following recent calls by leaders in CSCL (Ludvigsen et al., 2016; Wise & Schwarz, 2017) we examined how
the design  of classroom   orchestration could reap the  educational potential of   sophisticated representational
systems, which  are used   in professional and everyday   contexts, in  the college classroom. We      propose that
disciplinary task models can serve as a guide for making orchestration design decisions. We demonstrated how
mapping configurations of group work to the conceptual reasoning moves that professionals make in using these
tools could lead to disciplinary learning goals while using everyday tools like webmaps that were not designed as
learning environments.  Understanding    how   to orchestrate the classroom   to cultivate students'   disciplinary

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  206                                                   © ISLS
thinking with tools that may not have built-in collaboration and reasoning scaffolds holds promise as a valuable
area to explore  in future   CSCL    work. Focusing    on  such tools may  offer advantages    beyond the   support of
disciplinary learning.   Various  visualization tools  are becoming   prevalent  in daily life in online news,  social
networking, and other sites, making competency in interpreting these visualizations an important skill for civic
participation. Using such tools in their everyday form in the classroom may lead to better transfer to everyday
settings. In addition, as Roschelle et al have argued (2008), an alternative strategy for assuring the products of
CSCL research have impact at scale is that rather than "scale up," CSCL innovations be integrated into materials
and tools that are already used at scale. Using disciplinary models to design orchestration around tools that are
already widely available may be a way to achieve advances in college disciplinary learning at scale.

References
Bowen, G. M., Roth, W. M., & McGinn, M. K. (1999). Interpretations of graphs by university biology students
        and practicing scientists: Toward a social practice view of scientific representation practices. Journal of
        Research in Science Teaching, 36(9), 1020-1043.
Dillenbourg, P., Prieto, L. P., & Olsen, J. K. (2018). Classroom orchestration. In International handbook of the
        learning sciences: Routledge.
Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., Wecker, C., & Zottmann, J. (2013). Collaboration scripts in
        CSCL. The international handbook of collaborative learning, 403-419.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
Kaendler, C., Wiedmann, M., Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2015). Teacher competencies for the implementation of
        collaborative learning in the classroom. Educational Psychology Review, 27(3), 505-536.
Knowles, A. K. (2008). Gis and history. In A. K. Knowles & A. Hillier (Eds.), Placing history: How maps, spatial
        data, and gis are changing historical scholarship (pp. 1-25). Redlands. CA: ESRI, Inc.
Ludvigsen,   S., Cress,  U., Law,    N., Rosé,  C. P., &   Stahl, G.  (2016). Future-looking   conversations in  cscl.
        International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 11(3), 255-262.
Owens,  J. B.    (2007). Toward    a geographically-integrated,   connected   world  history:  Employing  geographic
        information systems (GIS). History Compass, 5(6), 2014-2040.
President's Council of Advisors on Science & Technology Strategy to Improve K­12 STEM Education. (2012).
        Engage to excel: Producing one million additional college graduates with degrees in science, technology,
        engineering, and mathematics. Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President.
Prieto, L. P., Holenko Dlab, M., Gutiérrez, I., Abdulwahed, M., & Balid, W. (2011). Orchestrating technology
        enhanced learning: A literature review and a conceptual framework. International Journal of Technology
        Enhanced Learning, 3(6), 583-598.
Puntambekar, S., & Kolodner, J. L. (2005). Toward implementing distributed scaffolding: Helping students learn
        science from design. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(2), 185-217. doi:10.1002/tea.20048
Radinsky, J., Milz, D., Zellner, M., Pudlock, K., Witek, C., Hoch, C., & Lyons, L. (2017). How planners and
        stakeholders     learn with  visualization tools:  using  learning sciences  methods    to examine   planning
        processes. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, 60(7), 1296-1323.
Raes, A., Schellens, T., De Wever, B., & Vanderhoven, E. (2012). Scaffolding information problem solving in
        web-based collaborative inquiry learning. Computers & Education, 59(1), 82-94.
Roschelle, J., Tatar, D., & Kaput, J. (2008). Getting to scale with innovations that deeply restructure how students
        come to know mathematics. In E. K. Anthony, R. A. Lesh, & J. Y. Baek (Eds.), Handbook of design
        research methods in education (pp. 369-395). New York, NY: Routledge.
Seixas, P. (2017). A model of historical thinking. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 49(6), 593-605.
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: A complement to emerging patterns of distributed scaffolding. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 13(3), 305-335.
Tabak, I., & Reiser, B. (2008). Software-realized inquiry support for cultivating a disciplinary stance. Pragmatics
        & Cognition, 16(2), 307-355.
Vogel, F., Wecker, C., Kollar, I., & Fischer, F. (2017). Socio-cognitive scaffolding with computer-supported
        collaboration scripts: A meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review, 29(3), 477-511.
Wise, A.   F., &  Schwarz,     B. B. (2017). Visions   of  CSCL:   Eight provocations   for   the future of the field.
        International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(4), 423-467.

Acknowledgments
Funded in part by the I-CORE Program of the Planning and Budgeting Committee (LINKS center) and The Israel
Science Foundation grant 1716/12, and by NSF grants DRL-0953448 and INSPIRE-1248052.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      207                                                  © ISLS
