        Data Wrangling Practices and Process in Modeling Family
    Migration Narratives with Big Data Visualization Technologies
                        Shiyan Jiang, Carnegie Mellon University, shiyanj@cs.cmu.edu
                        Jennifer B. Kahn, University of Miami, jkahnthorne@miami.edu

         Abstract: Big data technologies are powerful tools for telling evidence-based narratives about
         oneself  and  the world.   In    this paper, we   examine    the sociotechnical   practices of   data
         wrangling--strategies for selecting and managing datasets to produce a model and story in a
         big data interface--for   youth   assembling  models   and   stories about family   migration   using
         interactive data visualization tools. Through interaction analysis of video data, we identified
         ten data wrangling practices and developed a conceptual model of the data wrangling process
         that contains four interrelated recursive stages. These data wrangling practices and the process
         of data wrangling are important to understand for supporting future data science education
         opportunities that facilitate learning and discussion about scientific and socioeconomic issues.
         This study also   sheds light    on how  the  family  migration  modeling  context   positioned   the
         youth as having agency and authority over big data.

         Keywords: data wrangling, modeling, storytelling, family migration, data science education

Introduction
As  the interdisciplinary field of  data  science  has grown,   large-scale   datasets, also known   as   big  data, and
interactive data visualization  tools have   become   increasingly open   and  accessible,  creating opportunities   for
learning. Assembling models and narratives with big data is an important STEM practice for many professions
(Kosara & Mackinlay, 2013) and for participating in civic discourse (Philip, Schuler-Brown, & Way, 2013). The
role of big data and visualizations in public conversations can be attributed to these technologies' capacities to
support critical inquiry (boyd & Crawford, 2012). These tools are especially powerful for enriching narratives
about the social and scientific world and providing evidence to challenge or confront misinformation.
         Opportunities for youth to engage in data science activities that support analyses of social and scientific
issues from local and global perspectives are needed. However, few studies have closely investigated how youth
engage with big data interfaces at the level of discursive and embodied interaction. In this paper, we examine
the sociotechnical practices of data wrangling (introduced in Kahn, under review), the strategies for selecting
and managing datasets, for youth assembling models and stories about family migration with public big data
using interactive visualization tools. We consider data wrangling as necessary for storytelling and modeling with
big data, and  an examination    of   the active  interactions between    youth modelers    and visualization   tools is
necessary for understanding data wrangling. Our analysis addresses the following research questions: 1) What
are the enactive practices that describe participants' data wrangling interactions with big data visualization
tools? 2) What is the conceptual process of data wrangling to assemble family data storylines?

Theoretical framework
First, this research follows an interactionist perspective (Greeno, 1994) that views learning as occurring through
participation situated in activity (Bandura, 1986; Greeno & Engestrom, 2014; Lave & Wenger, 1991). Second,
we  approach  family   storytelling with    big  data as a representational,   sociotechnical   activity  that involves
coordination  of bodies   and tools   (Hall  &  Nemirovsky,    2012). Third,  learners'  capacities, dispositions,   and
histories are central in our learning environment design and study of learning processes.
         Furthermore, our study builds on a collection of data science education studies that have found that
interactive, multivariable data visualization tools support learning across STEM and social studies disciplines
(e.g., Philip, Olivares-Pasillas, & Rocha, 2016; Polman & Hope, 2014; Radinsky, Hospelhorn, Melendez, Riel,
&  Washington,   2014;  Rubel,  Hall-Wieckert,    &   Lim, 2017)  and  understandings    of  statistical concepts (e.g.,
Engel, 2017; Harrison, Yang, Franconeri, & Chan, 2014). These studies also call for more opportunities for
youth to develop critical data literacy by using visualization tools to ask/answer questions and make inferences
about data in personally and culturally meaningful ways (Borner, Peppler, Kennedy, Uzzo, & Heimlich, 2017).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      208                                                    © ISLS
Methods

Context and participants
We report on a single iteration of a design-based research program focused on exploring how youth and young
adults learn to tell stories and build models about social and scientific issues with big data. Previous iterations
found that making personal connections to large-scale phenomena represented by big data could be productive
for generating critical perspectives. In turn, this design iteration sought to explore the benefit of embedding
storytelling and modeling  with  big  data in a personal   context and  to better understand  the role  of  big data
interfaces in relating personal experiences to a larger scale­­the scale of the phenomena being represented by
the big data. Conceptually, our design was thus intended to support learning across temporal, spatial and social
scales (Hall &   Leander, 2010). We   chose   family migration   because the  sharing of  family  histories benefits
(Fivush, Bohanek, & Zaman, 2011), and migration continues to be a pressing issue globally, nationally, and in
our communities. We hoped that this study would offer insight into how to facilitate learning and productive
dialogue around such a timely matter.
        In the current study, middle and high school youth (N = 17; self-identified as 6 male; 11 female; 13
African-American; 3 White; 1 Asian; Mean hours of attendance = 13; sample included 6 sibling pairs) created
family data storylines to explore reasons for personal family mobility (What moved my family?) as well as
national and global migration (What moves families?) in a free summer workshop at a city public library. Youth
represented family decision-making and social conditions with online modeling and mapping tools and related
the lives of their ancestors to their own experiences and futures. The three weekly workshop sessions (2 days per
week, 5 hours per day) culminated in a public community exhibit.
        Assembling family data storylines involved the following tasks: First, participants chose a side of the
family to focus on. Second, participants chose one of two interactive web-based data tools accessed via their
laptop's Internet browser: Social Explorer (Figure 1) or Gapminder (Figure 2). Both tools were selected because
they afford (Gibson, 1979/1986) interactivity, as opposed to static data displays. Social Explorer is a historical
thematic mapping tool that uses US demographic data. It accesses hundreds of variables from Census and other
demographic datasets that go as far back as 1790. Data can be encoded as multiple visualization types--as dots,
with colorful shading, with bubble size--and at national, regional, and local scales. In Social Explorer, users can
also create  different side-by-side temporal  and spatial  comparisons.  Gapminder    is a multivariable,   dynamic
graphing tool that uses public global socioeconomic data. It has five possible quantities or variables that can be
selected. Y-axis, x-axis, color, and bubble size each have over 500 health and wealth indicators or measures to
choose  from.  Timescales  of datasets vary:  Some   start as early  as 1800, and   others only  have  one  year  of
available data.  In Gapminder,   users   can also alternate  between    logarithmic and  linear scales, and   select
particular country bubbles to leave data trails over time. Third, participants selected variables from each tool's
available datasets, like education level or household income in the US Census. Participants captured screenshots
of models or maps and inserted them into a Microsoft PowerPoint, accompanied by slides or texts that explained
data selections and what participants learned from the data.

Learning environment design
Our learning environment design aligns with a 4E learning model. First, our design recognizes STEM modeling
as distributed and embodied activities (Hall & Nemirovsky, 2012; Hutchins, 1995). We thus included activities
beyond interacting with computers. For example, once or twice in each workshop session, the day started with a
"four walls" game that set up comparisons between experiences of the youth and that of their ancestors, related
to circumstances    surrounding  family    migration  (i.e.,  family size,  educational    attainment,  occupation,
neighborhood racial diversity). We asked questions such as: "How far along in school did your family member
go?" (Wall 1: Grade school, Wall 2: High school, Wall 3: College and beyond, Wall 4: No formal schooling),
which was followed by "How far along do YOU expect to go?" In Sessions 2 and 3, we performed a walking-
scale timeline that, like the four walls game, asked participants to stand in for their family in historical time.
These  embodied  comparison   activities asked  the participants to  consider the historical social conditions  that
motivated or forced their families to move and that possibly could be explored with the data tools.
        Second, we consider our design to be an example of extended learning with big data. Learning was
distributed across workshop activities and family members. Youth assembled their storylines with siblings who
were in the workshop and with parents, via phone calls, text messages, visits during the workshop day, and at-

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   209                                                   © ISLS
home conversations over intervening nights and days, in which pieces of family story were filled in or changed
or corrected by family members.
         Third, our design embedded the sociotechnical practices of data science in a personal topic (family
migration) and in a common, cultural, collaborative activity (family storytelling).
         Finally, as described earlier, the focus for the current analysis is on enactive learning, or how the youth
participants interacted with designed activities and context for storytelling and modeling with big data.

Data collection and analysis
We video and audio recorded all activities and recorded participants' work on laptop computers with screen
capture software. Our qualitative analysis took an interactionist approach (Greeno, 1994; Azevedo & Mann,
2018)  towards   engagements   between    individual   agents and   the learning  environment.  This   approach, with   a
focus on both bodily interactions with the physical environment and tools as well as conceptual practices and
perceptions  of  participants, supports     the study  of  enactive and   multimodal,    embodied learning.   We    used
interaction analysis methods (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) to understand participants' data wrangling strategies.
As we reviewed participant trajectories (Jiang, 2018) across activities, we developed analytic memos around
what appeared to be--through continuous or constant comparisons (Glaser, 1965) of individual participants--
conceptual  and  technical   practices to   describe  participants' data  wrangling.  We   then  selected   episodes   for
microanalysis, in which we analyzed gesture, discourse, and tool use as sources of knowledge and learning. We
often  recreated maps    or   models   in   Gapminder   or  Social  Explorer   to  better understand    participant data
explorations. The comparison of participants also focused on critical reflections on the data (i.e., data quality,
data stakeholders), social history, and family migration. We reviewed and compared participant records until no
new categories of data wrangling practices emerge (Strauss & Corbin, 1994). After identifying the categories of
practices, we  reanalyzed    the selected   episodes   for microanalysis  to  trace  the  trajectories of practices  and
developed themes around the process of data wrangling.

Findings
We define   data wrangling    as the  practices  that  manage   multiple  datasets and   measures in   order to connect
narratives with aggregate data. Data wrangling in an open data interface appears to involve the application of
technical and statistical knowledge as well as an individual's social values and sense of identity. For instance,
many of the participants' interactions with the data tools involved locating places that held personal meaning for
them, whether in their family histories or own experiences, or selecting datasets that they identified with. In
previous iterations, we have called this "getting personal with big data" (Kahn & Hall, 2016). Consequently, in
our instructional context, data wrangling served as the means for participants to establish self­society relations
(Kahn, under review).

RQ1: What are the enactive practices that describe participants' data wrangling
interactions with big data visualization tools?
We identified ten sociotechnical practices that comprise data wrangling for youth: 1) filtering data; 2) selecting
indicators or variables;  3)  data   visual encoding;  4)  interpreting  data points; 5)  identifying  data  patterns; 6)
pursuing data surprises; 7) reasoning about data relationships; 8) countering data; 9) approximating data; and
10) making data predictions. These practices tended to be in the service of building comparisons to tell a story
about both family history and broader socioeconomic trends (e.g., a comparison of origin place A to destination
B that  shows  better economic     conditions   in B). Below,   we  introduce  and  define  each practice   and provide
several brief illustrations.
        In filtering data, participants either select a country bubble and all others fade in Gapminder or locate
specific locations in a map in Social Explorer using the zoom feature (e.g., Figure 1). This practice results in
highlighting specific data points or locations through a change of data visualization, but there is no change to the
dataset being  used   to build   the data   visualization. Making   such  selections  is  challenging  in an open   data
interface, when there are hundreds of datasets and variables to choose from. Consequently, personal connections
tended to drive participant selections from the beginning, such as when youth selected a country in which their
family members lived or zoomed into their neighborhoods on a map.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       210                                                   © ISLS
         Figure 1. A participant is viewing the violent crime rate of her neighborhood in Social Explorer.

         Selecting indicators or variables involves participants' changing default indicators or variables by
following specific constraints. This practice changes the dataset being used to build the data visualization. While
the constraints guiding indicator selections varied among participants, the most common constraints included a)
finding a dataset based on a predeveloped storyline, such as one participant's selection of Mean Years in School
for Men 25 Years and Older in Gapminder to explore whether her father moved to the U.S for better educational
opportunities; b) following a scale, such as one participant's successive selections of Household Income Less
Than $10,000, Less Than $50,000, and Less Than $200,000 in Social Explorer; c) identifying oneself or people
that participants were familiar with in the data, such as one participant (13 years old, female) selecting Female
Population Aged 10-14 Years in Gapminder.
         Data  visual encoding     is the practice of interpreting or   understanding  the relationship   between   two
representations in which data is mapped into visual structures (e.g., color legends). For instance, in a choropleth
map, areas   are shaded  in proportion    to the   measurement    of variables  (e.g., dark    colors represent higher
population density while light colors represent lower population density). Data visual encoding usually occurred
when participants were trying to a) understand how the data is encoded in different visual representations, such
as when one participant said, "Sure are a lot of crime rates" after hovering her mouse over a dark red area in
Social Explorer; or b) change the details of visual encoding to leverage the data visualization for storytelling
purposes. For example, in order to support the claim of moving due to safety concerns, one participant changed
visual encoding from "one dot represents the value of 10,000" to "one dot represents the value of 5,000" in
Social Explorer to make the differences in the number of crimes between two states more visible. As another
example, guided by a researcher, one participant changed the x- and y-axis scales from linear to logarithmic in
Gapminder to explore potentials of each visualization in explaining family story. Although the participant did
not understand   the statistical concept, she  was  aware  of  the change   in visualization.  A persistent  challenge
across interfaces for youth was differentiating between data encoding for rates or percentages and counts.
         Interpreting data points refers to the practice of interpreting a single data point at one time. This
practice was   marked  by highlighting    with the  cursor tooltip   or  selecting (filtering) a particular bubble   in
Gapminder or discrete geographic area in Social Explorer and by providing verbal explanations of the meaning
of the numbers in the tooltip in discourse, as illustrated below.

         Excerpt 1 [Week 1, Day 1]
         Francine (hovers mouse over US bubble in Gapminder, turns to her tablemate): See, right here. It's
         United States. It's about how much money they earn, 53.4, and how long they live, 79.1. (1)

         Identifying data patterns represents the practice of describing a data trend, such as the trend of a
variable for a single geographic    area  over time (e.g., for a   state 1920­1970)    or the  trend  of a variable for
multiple areas at one point in time (e.g., a regional trend in the year 2000). For instance, in the excerpt below,
participant Sage, whose mother came from Thailand and father was born in the US, described a data pattern for
life expectancy while watching an animation in Gapminder in which she compared the two countries.

         Excerpt 2 [Week 1, Day 2]

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    211                                                     © ISLS
       Sage: It's going down a little bit for the United States (Figure 2a).
       Sage (while seeing a drop in life expectancy in Thailand and in the US in 1919 [Figure 2b]): Oh, no!
       Sage: Life expectancy is going up quite a bit in both countries now (Figure 2c).

              (2a)                             (2b)                                     (2c)
  Figure 2a, 2b, 2c. In Sage's Gapminder model, the US and Thailand are selected, and time plays from 1800
   through 2015. Life expectancy (y-axis) and income (x-axis) generally increased over time for the US and
          Thailand, except for a dramatic drop in life expectancy in both countries in 1919 (2b).

       Pursuing data surprises involves participants' actively looking for or noticing outlier data, typically
represented by a divergent bubble trail in Gapminder or a very light or dark region in Social Explorer. For
instance, while noticing the drop in Figure 2b, Sage went to search online for possible reasons for a dramatic
decrease in life expectancy in Thailand in 1919. This example indicates the close relationship between the
practices of identifying data patterns and pursuing data surprises.
       Reasoning about data relationships refers to when participants describe relationships between two or
more variables or covariation to explain family migration. In most cases, participants had difficulties relating
two variables and tended to examine indicators (e.g., household income, educational attainment) independently.
       Countering data involves sharing a personal experience or account that does not align with the data.
For example, Francine explained that her father went to school every year while noticing that the average
number of years of schooling for men in Sudan, according to Gapminder, was only 3 years in the 1980s.
Another participant, Naimah, who assembled a Social Explorer comparison showing an increase in the Black
population in the North and a decrease in Black population in the South between 1920 and 1970, noted that
Social Explorer did not include how "moving from South Carolina affected [her] family's connections, and how
it was a milestone in [her] history." We view this kind of critique as a challenge to what the Census takers deem
as important for understanding social history. This practice shows that participants had agency and authority in
questioning big data, which challenges the contention that personal experience serves to confirm data for youth
(Enyedy & Mukhopadhyay, 2007).
       Approximating data describes when participants make selections that are approximations for the data
they were looking for when there is no data for the exact year, category, indicator, country or place that they
desire. For example, for Naimah, survey years 1920 and 1970 roughly corresponded with the birth of her
paternal great-grandparents in South Carolina and their decision to leave (1920) and her grandparents' return to
the South (Alabama) from Illinois (1970). These approximations can be understood as emergent fixes to manage
uncertainty (Star, 1985) or missing data in data wrangling.
       Making data predictions represents the practice of imagining what the data could show in the future.
In our analysis, this practice did not occur while participants interacted with Gapminder and Social Explorer,
although participants considered their own futures in our activities. For instance, in her family data storyline,
Hannah compared the percentage of persons 25 years and over with some college experience or more between
Chicago and Oakville in 1990 to examine whether her father moved to Oakville for college. She subsequently
included a slide in her family storyline describing where she wanted to attend college in the future.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 212                                                    © ISLS
RQ2: What is the conceptual process of data wrangling to assemble family data
storylines?
We   developed    a conceptual   model   (Figure 3)  of the   data wrangling   process  that  contains  four  interrelated
recursive stages: 1) finding my family and me in big data, 2) understanding my family and me in relation to the
society, 3) challenging big data with authority and agency, and 4) constructing a big data model to share my
family story. During the stage of finding my family and me in big data, participants selected data and indicators
related to   themselves.    They described   how    historical  events   affected   family   migration  in  the  stage  of
understanding my family and me in relation to the society. In the stage of challenging big data with authority
and   agency,  participants   critically analyzed    data when     the   data  was  not   consistent   with  their initial
understandings    of family  stories and  actively explored    alternative  indicators  that might  contribute  to family
migration.   They   selected indicators  and  visualizations   that  aligned   with the   family  story in  the  stage  of
constructing a big data model to share my family story. Participants tended to start with finding data related to
themselves in this process (finding my family and me in big data), which is a "first move" in data wrangling, and
ended with constructing models for assembling their family data storylines (constructing a big data model to
share my family story), which they presented to their peers and were displayed in a public exhibit.
         The four stages are recursive, and participants moved back and forth between these stages. Although
participants' conceptual    movements    between   these  stages   indicate a  variety of  paths in the process    of data
wrangling, some movements were more challenging for the youth. For instance, Sage engaged in comparing
different variables (e.g., income) between Thailand and the U.S in the stage of finding my family and me in big
data. Her mother moved from Thailand to the U.S for love, which is an abstract concept that she had difficulties
in finding variables to represent in the stage of constructing a big data model to share my family story. In her
case, the  movement    between   these   two  stages   rarely  occurred  after several  failures in  finding  appropriate
variables to represent the abstract concept.

               Figure 3. A conceptual model of data wrangling to assemble family data storylines.

Discussion and implication
Our study illustrates what data wrangling looks like in an informal learning setting and how students engaged
with  various sociotechnical   practices  in the process.  Participants   engaged   in learning  about  their families  to
learning about society through data wrangling. Typically, one practice went hand-in-hand with other practices
(e.g., interpreting the meaning of a dark red county involves both the practices of visual data encoding and
interpreting data points) in interrelated recursive stages.
         The study shows that the "first move" in data wrangling tends to be finding data related to oneself
while youth   navigate  data  visualization  tools  to assemble    their family  storylines.  This  finding supports   the
current  understanding   of  the youth's   interactions  with  big  data   while  contributing   new  insights:  Whereas
research  in data   science and  STEM    education  has  evidenced   the  value  and   challenges  of culturally relevant
pedagogy   (e.g., Enyedy    & Mukhopadhyay,      2007),   this study illuminates   that getting  personal  with  big  data
provides an entry point and access to interactions with big data technologies. While other instructional designs
with these tools reduced the number of indicators available for exploration (e.g., Radinsky et al., 2014), we
found that it is important to provide a rich and inclusive dataset to offer equitable learning opportunities in data

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      213                                                     © ISLS
wrangling. This finding suggests that future designs could engage youth in exploring big data technologies with
intentional scaffolds for getting personal with data.
          Also, this  study  addresses   tensions  of  confirming    data presented in  Enyedy    and    Mukhopadhyay's
(2007) study, in which youth use data to confirm pre-existing conclusions without questioning the model. Our
study demonstrates that family data storylines fostered the youth's authority and agency over big data, and this
produced  both   questions   about  and   challenges   to the  big data.  This finding  has implications    for designing
learning  activities with  big   data in which   youth    have their own   voices. The   literature supports   this design
principle and   studies   have shown    the importance    of  building  a close relation  between   the  self  and  digital
artifacts (e.g., Philip et al., 2016). Future research can pursue other personal contexts for big data exploration,
such as daily mobility datasets or personal health data.
          In addition, our study presents several challenges that need to be addressed in data wrangling practices
in future studies. The first challenge is ensuring the understanding of statistical concepts, such as the difference
between   counts  and   rates, as well   as the  understanding  of   how  to make   a reasonable    comparison,  such    as
zooming two maps to the same level to set up comparisons. A second challenge is engaging youth in discussions
of whether variables in a dataset can be used to measure abstract concepts (e.g., love). A third challenge is
encouraging more data exploration when the model does not correspond with family stories. In one such case,
data wrangling consequently went unresolved (i.e., no data was included in Isis's final family data storylines).
          Although each youth assembled their own family data storyline on an individual laptop, participants
frequently interacted with tablemates, who were often their siblings, when they discovered data that they were
personally connected to, such as data representing the city where participants lived. Future research is needed to
investigate   how to  support   getting  personal  with   data in  more   collaborative learning  settings, such    as data
modeling activities designed for intergenerational families or teams of peers. In addition, this study shows that
youth had more exchanges with each other when they encountered trouble in data wrangling, such as when they
encountered    data  that did  not  align   with their initial understandings   of why   their families   moved.    These
exchanges, particularly between siblings, entailed negotiations of authority in interpreting data and telling the
family history, such as Isis told her older sister Naimah, "I do not need you to tell me about my father's story."
Much more needs to be learned about the effect of agency and authority on peer interactions with big data.
          Our findings regarding data wrangling practices and process should be the starting point in research on
designs for learning and instruction that promote modeling narratives with big data visualization technologies in
different contexts.  For   example,   future studies   can  examine   whether   some    practices (e.g., identifying   data
patterns) are more influenced by the tool affordances (e.g., bubble trail in Gapminder) while some practices
(e.g., pursuing data surprises) are more universal across data wrangling activity and interfaces. Although these
practices were used with two interfaces (motion charts and web maps), we expect they would apply to other data
interfaces involving multimodal, multivariable dynamic representations (e.g., stacked graph and radar chart).
We believe that big data technologies are valuable instructional tools for offering learning opportunities and
communication with others about important social and scientific issues.

Endnotes
(1) All names are pseudonyms.

References
Azevedo, F. S., & Mann, M. J. (2018). Seeing in the dark: Embodied cognition in amateur astronomy practice.
          Journal of the Learning Sciences, 27(1), 89-136.
Bandura, A. (1986) Social foundations of thought and action: A social-cognitive view. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
          Prentice-Hall.
Borner, K., Peppler, K., Kennedy, B., Uzzo, S., and Heimlich, J. (2017). "Data Visualization Literacy: Research
          and Tools That Advance Public Understanding of Scientific Data" NSF - National Science Foundation
          Available at https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1713567
boyd, D., & Crawford, K. (2012). Critical questions for big data: Provocations for a cultural, technological, and
          scholarly phenomenon. Information, communication & society, 15(5), 662-679.
Engel, J. (2017). Statistical literacy for active citizenship: A call for data science education. Statistics Education
          Research Journal, 16(1), 44-49.
Enyedy, N., & Mukhopadhyay, S. (2007). They don't show nothing I didn't know: Emergent tensions between
          culturally relevant pedagogy and mathematics pedagogy. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2),
          139-174.
Fivush,   R., Bohanek,    J. G.,  &   Zaman,  W.  (2011).   Personal   and intergenerational   narratives   in  relation to
          adolescents' well-being. New directions for child and adolescent development, 2011(131), 45-57.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       214                                                     © ISLS
Gibson,  J.    J.  (1986).  The ecological    approach   to visual  perception.   Hillsdale,   NJ: Erlbaum.   (Original work
         published 1979)
Glaser, B. G. (1965). The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis. Social problems, 12(4), 436-445.
Greeno, J. G. (1994). Gibson's affordances. Psychological Review, 101, 336­342
Greeno, J. G., & Engeström, Y. (2014). Learning in activity. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of
         the learning sciences (pp. 128­147) (2nd ed.). London: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, R.    &      Leander, K.    (2010,  July).   Scaling  practices   of  spatial analysis   and  modeling.    In Hall, R.
         (Symposium         Chair).   Scaling  practices of  spatial    analysis and  modeling.    International Conference
         of the Learning Sciences.
Hall, R.,   &     Nemirovsky,     R. (2012).  Introduction   to   the  special issue: Modalities   of   body  engagement  in
         mathematical activity and learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 207-215.
Harrison,   L.,    Yang,   F., Franconeri,   S., &   Chang,  R.   (2014).   Ranking   Visualizations    of Correlation  Using
         Weber's Law. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 20(12), 1943-1952.
Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speeds. Cognitive Science, 19(3), 265-288.
Jiang, S. (2018). STEM+ L: Investigating Adolescents' Participation Trajectories in a Collaborative Multimodal
         Composing Environment. ProQuest LLC.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Kahn, J. (under review). Learning at the intersection of self and society: The family geobiography as a context
         for data science education. Journal of the Learning Sciences Special Issue: Situating Data Science.
Kahn,   J., &     Hall, R. (2016,    April). Getting personal   with   big data: Stories with   multivariable  models   about
         global     health  and   wealth.    Paper presented   at  the  American    Education   Research   Association  2016
         Annual Meeting, Washington D.C.. Available in the AERA Online Paper Repository.
Kosara, R., & Mackinlay, J. (2013). Storytelling: The next step for visualization. Computer, 46(5), 44-50.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, England:
         Cambridge University Press.
Philip, T.  M.,    Olivares-Pasillas,   M.   C., &  Rocha,  J. (2016).   Becoming     racially literate about data  and data-
         literate    about     race: Data    visualizations in  the   classroom   as  a  site  of  racial-ideological  micro-
         contestations. Cognition and Instruction, 34(4), 361-388.
Philip, T. M., Schuler-Brown, S., & Way, W. (2013). A framework for learning about big data with mobile
         technologies       for   democratic   participation:   Possibilities,   limitations,  and unanticipated    obstacles.
         Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18(3), 103-120.
Polman,     J. L.,  &   Hope,  J. M.  (2014).    Science news   stories  as boundary    objects affecting   engagement  with
         science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 51(3), 315-341.
Radinsky,      J., Hospelhorn,    E.,  Melendez,    J. W.,   Riel,  J., &   Washington,   S.   (2014).  Teaching    American
         migrations with GIS census webmaps: A modified "backwards design" approach in middle-school and
         college classrooms. Journal of Social Studies Research, 38(3), 143-158.
Rubel, L. H., Hall-Wieckert, M., & Lim, V. Y. (2017). Making Space for Place: Mapping Tools and Practices to
         Teach for Spatial Justice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(4), 643-687.
Star, S. L. (1985). Scientific work and uncertainty. Social studies of Science, 15(3), 391-427.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                          215                                                     © ISLS
