  Promoting and Tracing High School Students' Identity Change in
                   an Augmented Virtual Learning Environment

                      Hamideh Talafian, Mamta Shah, Amanda Barany, and Aroutis Foster
              Ht343@drexel.edu, mamta@drexel.edu, amb595@drexel.edu, aroutis@drexel.edu
                                      School of Education, Drexel University

         Abstract: This paper illustrates the application of Projective Reflection (PR) as a theoretical
         framework in an ongoing NSF-CAREER study to trace learning as identity change among 20
         high school   students. A   9-week  augmented   virtual learning   environment (AVLE)      course,
         Virtual City Planning, was created and implemented in a science museum classroom. In-game
         and  in-class student   data  and  mentor    observations  were  collected and    analyzed   using
         Quantitative Ethnography (QE) techniques to identify patterns of identity exploration enacted
         over time. This paper offers group findings to illustrate general trends of identity exploration
         during the AVLE, and one illustrative case study to provide an in-depth look at an integrated
         identity exploration trajectory. This work concludes with a discussion of the need for promoting
         identity exploration as an educational goal, and a means to support learners to adapt to the
         changing workforce of tomorrow. The affordances of AVLEs are discussed to advance research
         in this nascent area.

Introduction
Educational research has increasingly emphasized ways to develop learner skills in identity exploration, or the
intentional repeated examination of who a learner is and who he/she wants to become (Kaplan & Flum, 2012),
which can lead to identity change in targeted directions over time (i.e. change towards a future in a STEM career)
(Foster, 2014).  Virtual learning   environments  (VLEs)   such  as games   have  been increasingly   identified and
researched for their potential to support change in both cognitive (i.e. knowledge) and affective (i.e. motivation)
elements of self (e.g. Kamarainen, Metcalf, Grotzer, & Dede, 2015). To rigorously leverage these affordances,
however,  research points  to   the need   for robust conceptual   and design    frameworks for    developing  game
environments (DeVane, 2010), and the purposeful inclusion of real-world pedagogy that can supplement game
content as part of an integrated learning experience (Clark, Tanner-Smith, & Killingsworth, 2015). We refer to
this merging of a primarily virtual environment with real-world augmentations as an augmented virtual learning
environment   (AVLE)   (Milgram,    Takemura,   Utsumi &   Kishino, 1994),   which  integrates the benefits of   both
worlds to comprehensively      provide identity exploration  opportunities. Rowsell  &  Abrams'    (2011)  I/identity
framework offers a useful starting point with its "multidisciplinary approach to mediating I/identity in the 21st
century," with consideration for both individual (i)dentity change, or "an embedded sense of self that inherently
fuels and/or shapes one's behavior" (p. 4), and collaborative aspects of (I)dentity change that are "rooted in
practices and overt forms of meaning-making" (p. 4) offered by AVLEs.
         Thus, in this paper, we illustrate one way of conceptualizing learning as a process of exploring possible
role selves through experiences in AVLEs to gain the knowledge and skills to reconstruct oneself through a theory
called as Projective Reflection (Foster, 2014). The paper describes the application of Projective Reflection in an
ongoing NSF-CAREER study that informed the design and implementation of Philadelphia Land Science (PLS),
a text and  web-based    VLE    for exploring   environmental  science   and urban  planning   roles.  The  in-game
experiences mediated by PLS were augmented by an external in-class curriculum to further scaffold students'
exploration of the two roles. Thus, the combination of PLS + the external curriculum was referred to as the Virtual
City Planning AVLE, which was offered to 20 high school students over a 9-week period in a science museum in
a northeastern US city. Data corpus included in-game logged data, research memos, pre-post interview questions,
written and visual artifacts created in-game and during external individual and group curricular, reflection and
discussion activities. These data sources were used to examine the following research question: "To what extent
did participants engage in an integrated identity exploration in Virtual City Planning as a result of exploring the
roles of an environmental  scientist   and urban  planning?"  Implications   are discussed to  advance  educational
research on  framing,  facilitating and tracking  learning and  identity in  AVLEs  through    the use of  emerging
frameworks such as Projective Reflection.

Theoretical framework
Projective Reflection (PR) is a theoretical framework that conceptualizes learning as identity exploration that
facilitates learners' engagement in self-transformation or identity change in AVLEs and explicates the process of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    216                                                  © ISLS
learning as identity exploration over time (See Figure 1) (Foster, 2014). Four theoretical constructs in PR support
identity exploration, and   structure assessments     of learners' cognitive  and  affective  change   over time:  (1)
knowledge, (2) interests and valuing, (3) self-organization and self-control, and (4) self-perception and self-
definition (Foster, Shah,   &   Barany,  2017).  Six     questions are   used to  synthesize  these  changes    into a
comprehensive characterizations of a learner's initial current self, their exploration of possible selves (measured
repeatedly across the experience), and the new self at the end of the intervention (Foster, 2014): 1) what the learner
knows ­ current knowledge, 2) what the learner cares about ­ self and interest/valuing, 3) what/who the learner
expects to be throughout the virtual experience and their long term-future self, 4) what the learner wants to be ­
possible self, 5) how the learner thinks ­ self and interest, and 6) how the learner sees him/herself ­ self-perception
and self-definition (see Table 1).

Figure 1. The Projective Reflection framework for conceptualizing learning as a process of identity change
                                                      over time.

Over the duration of an intervention, a learner is encouraged to engage in targeted and intentional reflection
on aspects of self along the four PR constructs, including (a) her/his starting self at the beginning of a learning
experience, (b) repeatedly throughout the exploration of possible selves as supported by the AVLE, and (c)
her/his new self at the end of the intervention. Furthermore, AVLEs are designed to have opportunities for
participants to play, engage in curricular activities, reflect and discuss in relation to the roles explored both in the
game and   outside  (Foster &   Shah,   2016). For    each student,   the process  of tracing  change  is carried  out
chronologically, guided by the six questions which allow us to explicate the extent to which the learner explored
a possible role by developing intentional changes in their knowledge, interest and valuing, self-perception and
self-definition, and self-organization and control skills- indicating the extent to which the identity exploration was
comprehensive  or   integrated. In this paper, we  report  the   case of  a female student as  an   elucidation of one
integrated identity exploration trajectory over the 9-weeks from the start of her participation in Virtual City
Planning (weeks 1-2), during the course (weeks 3-7), and the end of the course (weeks 8-9). Group patterns of
identity exploration are also identified to not only better understand the case study, but also to highlight the overall
changes in the four constructs informing identity exploration as a result of engaging in the AVLE over the 9
weeks.

Methodology
This research was conducted as part of an ongoing 5-year NSF CAREER project awarded to advance theory and
research on  promoting  identity   exploration and change     in science  using virtual learning environments    using
Projective Reflection (Foster, 2014). Building on this broader agenda, researchers designed and implemented an
AVLE that featured the weekly use of the VLE Philadelphia Land Science (PLS) and supportive real-world
augmentation in the classroom (for more information see Shah et al., 2018). The resulting AVLE, titled Virtual
City Planning was offered to a total of 54 Philadelphia high school students who participated in weekly STEM
career programming at their local science museum. Virtual City Planning was offered to facilitate learning as
identity change by engaging participating students in real-world activities on environmental science and urban
planning.  Philadelphia Land    Science  (PLS)  allowed    players to explore   roles related to urban  planning   and
environmental science careers as they connect to the Philadelphia context and redesigned/rezoned the map of the
city with different stakeholders. In PLS, groups of students were synchronously guided by online and in-person
mentors to collaborate with their peers in redesigning the map of the city. Building on the strengths of PLS, the
research  team designed  real-world   features  (i.e. non-digital  design   and reflection activities) that leveraged
affordances of classroom context to further support identity exploration.
         Three versions  of Virtual   City Planning      were offered  from  September,   2016   to May,  2017,    each
successively refined from the previous offering (9-weeks in Fall with 20 students, 8-weeks in Winter with 19
students, and 4-weeks in Spring with 19 students) to strengthen the extent to which the activities in the AVLE
could support students' process of projective reflection (Cobb, Confrey, DiSessa, Lehrer, & Schauble, 2003). This
paper focuses on the first iteration of Virtual City Planning, which was enacted over nine weekly 90-minute

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     217                                                   © ISLS
sessions with 20 students in the science museum. 60% of them were females (n = 12), 30% were males (n = 6)
and the other 10% preferred not to reveal their sex (n = 2). They attended a local magnet school which focused
on STEM preparation and had several programs for teachers' professional development and students' STEM
enrichment integrated with/within the museum.

Procedures and data collection
Data sources included logged in-game data, classroom artifacts, and researcher observations. Once collected,
data was organized chronologically by student to track PR changes from the beginning, at repeated points during,
and at the end of the AVLE.
    Over the 9-weeks, Virtual City Planning allowed participants to learn about the process of proposing a
rezoning proposal for the city of Philadelphia that addresses the competing and complementary needs of four
stakeholders in a well-balanced manner. Activities in Philadelphia Land Science and outside of it were designed
to facilitate intentional shifts in what learners know,   how   they think, what  they care about, how    they  see
themselves, what they want to be and expect to be in relation to environmental planning and urban science. For
the first half of the course, learners were assigned to one of the four stakeholder groups to explore specific
environmental   and/or  economic    needs of  the city. The   four  stakeholders were  Philadelphia   Institute for
Environment    Preservation,   Philadelphia Economic    Affairs  Coalition,  Environmental  Council   for  Greater
Philadelphia, and Bridgeway Community Action Group. In the second half of the course, students were jigsawed
in a manner that every new group had a representative from each of the four stakeholder groups; thus, simulating
the real-world scenario of multiple interests and expertise coming together to address real-world issues. The two
parts of the course prepared students towards the goal of proposing a rezoning plan.
    In Session 1, we engaged players in learning about their teams and understanding the expected workflow of
PLS. In this session, we also gathered data to establish students' starting self by way of an intake interview in
PLS, background survey, and a focus group discussion. Sessions 2 and 3 required participants to research the
stakeholders' concerns from various factions of the city (commercial, residential, environmental, civic, social)
and understand what is expected of the urban scientists in the `request for a re-zoning proposal.' Sessions 4 and
5 engaged players in creating models to create and test the extent to which their re-zoning proposal balanced the
needs of the stakeholders on an interactive map of Philadelphia using a mapping tool called iPlan. They received
feedback from the stakeholders and their mentors which lead to iterative refinements in sessions 6-8. Data were
obtained from sessions by way of in-game logged data (chats, notebook entries, iplan maps, researcher memos)
to understand what each participant was focusing on more or less along the four constructs as he/she was
exploring the role assigned and those that emerged naturally, and how the participant was engaged in the identity
exploration process individually, in participation with PLS, and within the classroom setting (interaction with
peers, mentors). Finally, in session 9, players worked towards finalizing a written document explaining the re-
zoning plan and representing the plan on a map. Data was collected to establish participants new self by way of
an in-game exit interview, and a focus group discussion.

Data analysis
Data was coded both inductively and deductively to answer the question of "To what extent did participants
engage in an integrated identity exploration in Virtual City Planning as a result of exploring the roles of an
environmental scientist and urban planning?" Overall, Quantitative Ethnography (Shaffer, 2017) was adopted to
guide the  data analyses   procedures. First, researchers   engaged  in a deductive  coding process   for each  case
(Krippendorff, 2004) using the qualitative analysis software MAXQDA. Lines of student data were coded as
illustrating  self-reflection on demonstration of the   four  PR constructs, with  the agreement reached    by  two
graduate-level coders. Thereafter, qualitatively coded chronological data was quantified using a binary approach.
Each line was coded for the occurrence (=1) or non-occurrence (= 0) of four constructs in order to prepare the
data for Epistemic Network Analysis. Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA) (Shaffer, 2017), a tool that can be used
with Quantitative Ethnography, was employed for modeling the structure of connections in the data to look for
discernable patterns between the identity of participating students demonstrated at the start, during, and at the end
of their participation in Virtual City Planning. This association structure between the changes in their knowledge,
interest and  valuing, self-organization  and  self-control and  self-perception and self-definition, was  modeled
mathematically by creating an adjacency matrix based on their co-occurrence in the course over time, by the three
data points. As such, ENA offered a unique way to recognize the patterns of identity exploration at both the group
(Big I) and individual levels (Little i) for engaging in projective reflection as a result of Virtual City Planning. We
referred back to the interactions and activities coded in the data to close the interpretive loop and thus fully
understand the phenomenon mirrored in the model for each student and the group at large.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     218                                                 © ISLS
Findings
Group findings are presented in this section as the themes across four constructs of PR: knowledge, interest and
valuing, self-organization and self-control, and self-perception and self-definition. Then, individual findings for
one case "Andrea" will be illustrated by Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA) and explained.

Group findings
Change across knowledge
Based on the results of the inductive-deductive qualitative coding of student data, three thematic patterns related
to student knowledge changes were identified: (1) demonstrations of core content knowledge and problem-solving
and critical thinking, (2) shifts from general to specific knowledge demonstrations over time, and (3) connecting
new information to existing awareness of situated context.
         Demonstrations of core content knowledge and problem-solving and critical thinking. The majority of
codes applied to student data identified instances in which students demonstrated core content knowledge gains,
such as an understanding of what urban planning is and how it is conducted. These trends exist largely due to the
design of the AVLE. For example, the intake survey prompted James to describe what urban planners do, to which
he responded: "They collect data about the places around us and get important people to change it." Similarly, as
a result of the design of the AVLE, a large proportion of codes identified instances in which learners engaged in
problem-solving and critical thinking by generating solutions to in-game problems, or by offering justifications
for their design choices. For example, Alice explained her choice to add more industrial zoning to downtown
Philadelphia, saying "people need more places to work and find jobs to work" which supports the affordances of
AVLEs for developing meta-knowledge skills.
         Shifts from general to specific knowledge demonstrations over time. A review of shifts in knowledge
demonstrations over time within individuals reveals a general shift from broad understandings of urban planning
and environmental    science  towards more  specific  recognition  of  the complex   relationships between  domain
variables over time. For example, changes in Kimberly's responses to the question "What factors might an urban
planner need to consider when planning/designing a city?" reveal increased specificity and a deeper understanding
of urban planning processes from engagement in the AVLE. In week 1, she wrote that urban planners "need to
factor in the needs of other people" while in week 9 she was able to explain how "[urban] planners must think
and fit the needs of stakeholder. Stakeholders focus on things they like to see or not like to see for specific cases."
         Connecting   new    information to existing  awareness   of  situated context. As students   demonstrated
increases in urban planning and environmental science over time, they also regularly connected the urban planning
problems, processes, and AVLE context (Philadelphia) to the knowledge of similar issues as they experience them
in their own communities.    For example, as Ali encountered the economic and environmental issues emphasized
in the AVLE, he was able to reflect on the issues he had noticed in his own neighborhood (pedestrian safety). He
later applied his new knowledge of how to identify problems and design solutions to his own context: "if I would
want to change things, I would put more safety signs on streets to make people feel safe. my changes may help
because driving lately has been more of a problem because people are frightened of others on either the highway
or just a simple street." These connections demonstrate the potential of the augmented AVLE for promoting
deeper learning   integrated into learners' understandings    of their own  interest and  values,  patterns of self-
organization and self-control, and self-perception and self-definition.
Change across interest and valuing
After the analyses of qualitative data for interest and valuing, two themes emerged: (1) change from personal
interest to less personal goals and interests, (2) overlapping changes in interest and knowledge.
         Change from personal interest to less personal goals and interest. The students' interest and valuing
changes showed a significant difference from the beginning to the end of the AVLE. Yet, the direction of the
change from more personal goals and interests in the beginning weeks to less personal interest was an evident
trend in all students. Deductively, many of the students' reflections and responses to survey questions were coded
personal interest in initial weeks, while   similar questions toward   the end  of the  AVLE led   to more  "global
relevance codes" which demonstrates a shift to less personal goals when the player recognizes how tools and
content related to a community or society and satisfies the needs of the group members. For example, when
Andrea was prompted with the question of "How the design of Philadelphia has affected you?" in post-survey she
responded: "... [environmental issues] can impact us by changing the city it can make a better environment. If we
change the ecosystem to be better, it can make Philly look good and it will be healthier for us" which shows a
well-suited response for "global relevance" as well as "personal relevance". This was just one example of many
responses demonstrating students' less personal interests toward the end of the AVLE.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    219                                                  © ISLS
         Overlapping changes in interest and knowledge. Another evident theme in students' responses regarding
interest and valuing was that change in this construct happened in concert with a change in knowledge, they
demonstrated their interest using new words and expressions which were inductively coded as knowledge, too.
For example, when Ellen was asked to report her team's recommended value of bluebirds which are among
endangered species in the Northeast, she answered "The recommended value of bluebirds is 2270 bluebirds. The
stakeholders believe this is the perfect amount because if there were more there would be too much environmental
space and not as much housing. However, if there were less than the city would not have the environmental space
that it needs." A justification which shows Ellen both has the knowledge of keeping endangered species in her
surrounding environment and values people's needs in having environmental space they need to.

Change across self-organization and self-control
The emerged themes came out of the researchers' memos from the students' demonstration of self-organization
and self-control: (1) Asking help from the more knowledgeable peers/stakeholder, (2) Working toward a common
goal and demonstrating metaknowledge.
         Asking help  from  more   knowledgeable   peers/stakeholders. Asking  help from    the knowledgeable
peers/stakeholders came mainly from the researchers' memos recording instances when students were asking for
help when discussing their final map changes with their peers and stakeholders which was coded co-regulated
learning. In co-regulated learning examples, the students were asking for help from more knowledgeable peers,
stakeholder, and sometimes instructors.
         Working toward a common goal and demonstrating metaknowledge. When the students were working
in groups toward a common goal in addressing the stakeholders' concerns, they were not only demonstrating
socially-shared regulated learning but also problem solving, critical thinking, communication and collaboration
skills which were meta-knowledge components under knowledge construct. For example, when they were asked
to justify the rezoning of their map "...[zoning for business] is important because there is not a lot of space for
business so we are thinking to make more space for it." First, they indicated that they are looking for a way to
solve the issue (problem-solving and critical thinking), second, they were indicating that they are working toward
a common goal by bringing a plural pronoun (we). This example with many other examples of this sort informed
us that the students worked toward the common goal with their stakeholder, and brainstormed ideas with the
members of the group to resolve the issues and rezone the maps.

Change across self-perception and self-definition
The change in this construct was traced by coding self-efficacy, self-concept, and possible self-explored as the
three main sub-constructs under it which led to one overarching theme: (1) No eloquent change in students' self-
perception and self-definition.
         No eloquent change in students' self-perception and self-definition. The analysis of students' qualitative
data did not  show  drastic changes  in students' self-perceptions and self-definition. Nearly  all the students
responded the same to the prompt of "what do you want to be in the future? what do you NOT want to be in the
future?" before and after the   AVLE. For  instance, Ali said "basketball player" Ciara  said "wealthy,  happy,
educated" Elijah said "business owner" and many other similar responses which were not changed in the post-
survey. This indicates that the students' perceptions of themselves, their interest and their future desires barely
change.

Case findings
The illustrative case example Andrea demonstrated intentional reflection and integrated change in all four areas:
knowledge, interests and values, patterns of self-organization and self-control, and perceptions and definitions of
self over time in three levels of starting self, possible selves explored, and new self which is summarized Table 1.
Figures 3-6 illustrate the strength of PR connections in these levels and the strength is calculated from the number
of coded segments using ENA. Overall, Andrea demonstrated many instances of foundational knowledge in
relation to self-perception and self-definition with the hope of working in the science field and "contribut[ing] to
some type of urban planning" in initial weeks of using AVLE (Figure 3). Later in the course, Andrea's identity
exploration focused more on the interest and valuing aspects as a result of engaging in the AVLE; this was
integrated her emergent and detailed knowledge of urban planning (see Figure 4). Finally, a good balance between
her knowledge, interest and valuing, and self-perceptions and self-definitions were revealed which is also shown
in Figure 4.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  220                                                 © ISLS
 Figure 3. Andrea's Starting         Figure 4. Andrea's Exploring        Figure 5. Andrea's new self, shows
 Self. The connection between        Possible self. The connection       a good balance between her
 knowledge and self-perception       between knowledge and interest      knowledge, interest and valuing,
 and self-definition is the                                              and self-perception and self-
                                                                         definition.
Andrea's starting self
The adjacency matrix of knowledge, interest and valuing, and self-perception and self-definition in Andrea's
starting self (Figure 3) during the first two weeks of the course reveal that the connection between knowledge and
self-perception and self-definition constructs are stronger than others. This strength comes from her "Agree"
responses to Likert-scale questions which were assessing both knowledge and self-perception and self-definitions
constructs such as: "I would be able to express my view in form of a group of people" or "I would be able to
create a plan that addresses the issue". Also, the connection of these constructs with interest and valuing construct
is not as week as their connection to self-organization and self-control. Andrea demonstrated interest and valuing
by describing her   interest in the environment    "I want  to help make the environment   we   live   in clean"
understanding the relevance of designing the city to her personal life "the design [of the city] affects me because
of too many buildings and it gets so crowded". She also proposed suggestions for rezoning the city by telling "we
should get rid of some buildings or separate them into different areas of Philadelphia, so we can have enough
room and make it feel less crowded" which demonstrated her problem-solving abilities in relation to relevance
during the first two weeks of the course.

Andrea's exploring possible self
Figure 4 shows the adjacency matrix for Andrea's exploring possible self which illustrates her change from week
3-7. Comparing to her starting self, Andrea demonstrated more knowledge and interest and valuing construct, and
her adjacency matrix showed weaker connection to other constructs. Totally, knowledge and interest and valuing
constructs together in all activities were coded (n=205) times which obviously have a bigger portion in Figure 4.
For knowledge, she demonstrated increasingly detailed knowledge of urban planning by suggesting her detailed
recommended land parcel changes "We changed the industrial areas to open wetlands so that the wetlands couldn't
be polluted. WE decided that the open wetlands should be just on the wet side of the map, near the water so that
the lands or the people around the area didn't pollute it and poison any of the animals or the creatures on that part
of the map/area." She capitalized "WE" which means that she is emphasizing her collaboration with other team
members and   socially shared   learning. She also demonstrated  many  instances of  relevance which   made  her
adjacency matrix thicker in this construct, too: "Me as a citizen has to show how people should respect how to
treat the environment. I think that our changes will affect the area in a good way and in a bad way because people
will need to find more industrial areas and it will be good because the environment will be safe." However, the
link between knowledge and self-perception and self-definition is weaker as well as self-perception and self-
definition and interest and valuing comparing to Figure 3 (her starting self). One explanation may be that she had
a better understanding of each of these tasks because the AVLE had simulated real-life activities and allowed her
to self-reflect during the program, thus, picked a less direct assertive response to the questions that were assessing
those constructs.

Andrea's new self
Figure 5 illustrates Andrea's adjacency matrix for her new self in final weeks of 8-9 which shows a good balance
between her knowledge, interest and valuing, and self- perception and self-definition. This figure is well supported
by qualitative themes as we discussed earlier "overlapping changes in interest and knowledge". For the majority
of students, many instances of knowledge co-occurred to the interest and valuing utterances and in some cases,
they were both presents in a single utterance. For example, when Andrea was asked "Whose needs and opinions
should a city plan reflect?" she responded, "it should reflect of the citizens of United Stated of America" compared
to some other peers who had answered "people" or "citizens of the city". This is a detailed utterance which both
demonstrates a good understanding of the city planning goals and the needs of the people who live in a country
asserting the fact that any decision in rezoning the city will impact the whole population of America indirectly.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   221                                                © ISLS
This utterance was coded both for core content foundational knowledge and global relevance which was a sub-
category of interest and valuing.
         Analyzing Andrea's adjacency matrices from starting self to new self, and the similarity of starting self
to new self, uncovered the fact that Andrea's responses to many questions of knowledge and self-perception and
self-definition were unrealistic at the beginning of the program. Using AVLE, she could explore her identity and
challenged some of her notions about her capabilities (see Figure 4). However, by using AVLE she could develop
many aspects of the Projective Reflection constructs in a way that made it similar to her starting point. This time
her responses were more realistic in the sense that she gave less affirmative but more detailed responses to the
prompts which were asked initially.

Table 1: Summary of findings from the iteration 1 group and from an illustrative student case

 PR Construct      Starting self                       Possible selves explored                  New self
                   (initial reflections; Weeks 1-2)    (during AVLE; week 3-7)                   (concluding reflections;
                                                                                                 week 8-9)
 Knowledge         Described experiences with          Demonstrated increasingly detailed        Shared clear, detailed
                   digital tools, provided general,    knowledge of urban planning (i.e.         knowledge of urban
                   factually correct responses to      understanding relationships between       planning concepts and
                   knowledge questions                 specific design variables), and           general design process
                                                       strong literacy using PLS compared
                                                       to peers
 Interests and     Shared that she valued "making      Expressed enjoyment of AVLE               Described expanded
 valuing           the environment we live in          experience, regularly identified          interests in not only
                   clean"                              relevance of urban planning to            environmental conservation
                                                       desired future career in science          but also "the man-made
                                                                                                 items that surround it."
 Self-             Shared enjoyment of group           Participated as a group leader -          Affirmed how her
 organization      work and confidence in her          volunteered design strategies in          participation "helped me see
 and self-         ability to complete learning        group meetings, offered technical         what it was like being an
 control           tasks                               assistance to peers, described            urban planner"
                                                       feedback she received and her
                                                       strategies for improvement
 Self-             Hoped to work "in the science       Shifting towards a future career in       Hoped to be "a doctor,
 perception and    field" as an engineer or            medicine, stating "urban planning         scientist, astronomer;"
 self-definition   scientist; recognized that this     would affect me in a way because of       strongly agreed when asked
                   future career means she would       jobs and how there would be               if she could see herself as an
                   "have to [have] contributed to      enough places to go and study             urban planner in future
                   some type of urban planning"        medicine."

Discussion
Case findings and group themes are summarized in Table 1. Synthesis of Andrea's changes over time revealed
integrated  identity exploration   through    engagement   with    the urban    planning    process:  the   development      of
increasingly-specific content knowledge and AVLE literacy, repeated and diverse connections to personal interest
and values and an enjoyment of the experience, active peer-to-peer leadership and the enactment of self-regulation
strategies, and connections to her current and desired future roles as they emerged. As a result, Andrea was
consistently able to find personal value and enjoyment in relation to her perceived self and active knowledge
gaining over time. These connections demonstrate the potential of the augmented AVLE for promoting deeper
learning integrated into learners' understandings of their own interest and values, patterns of self-organization and
self-control, and self-perception and self-definition. As such, the AVLE, which leveraged the affordances of both
virtual environments and real-world augmentations (i.e. roleplay and discussion) has the capacity to promote a
comprehensive identity exploration trajectory as defined by the four PR constructs.
         Group    findings suggest  that    the    AVLE  experience    encouraged      at  least some aspects     of    identity
exploration around urban planning careers for all students ­ each player concluded the experience able to justify
whether or not they wished to become an urban planner based on aspects of their AVLE participation. However,
a review of group findings revealed that not all students enacted every aspect of PR and that many students
approached identity exploration in different ways (i.e. increasing confidence versus frustration over time). These
results illustrate the need for further inquiry into patterns of identity exploration so that additional supports may
be designed in AVLEs to better support PR across learners with different starting self-characteristics (i.e. interests,
knowledge, etc.).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        222                                                          © ISLS
Theoretical and educational significance
Projective Reflection (PR) serves as a theoretical lens for supporting student learning as a process of identity
exploration that leads to change over time. The ability of adaptive collaboration to engage in (a) the intentional
reflection on the self, (b) the process of exploring possible future selves related to new careers and roles in
collaboration with stakeholders and other group members, and (c) the enactment targeted and intentional steps
toward a desired new self, will serve as a particularly valuable skill for learners preparing for an evolving 21st
century workforce. The development and enactment of Virtual City Planning offers useful insights for addressing
how learning experiences may be optimally designed using a robust theoretical framework to support targeted
identity exploration and change processes (DeVane, 2010), and how students' trajectories of identity exploration
and change in the same learning experience may differ (Foster, 2014). As practical and theoretical understandings
of identity exploration trajectories emerge through this research, the capacity of learning practitioners to design
early targeted supports for learners based on their starting self characteristics increases.

References
Bagley, E. A., & Shaffer, D. W. (2015). Stop talking and type: comparing virtual and face-to-face mentoring in
        an epistemic game. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 31(6), 606-622.
Clark, D. B., Tanner-Smith, E. E., & Killingsworth, S. S. (2016). Digital games, design, and learning: A systematic
        review and meta-analysis. Review of educational research, 86(1), 79-122.
Cobb, P., Confrey, J., DiSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational research.
        Educational researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Creswell, J. W., &amp; Miller, D. L. (2000). Determining validity in qualitative inquiry. Theory into practice,
        39(3),124-130.
DeVane, B. M. (2010). Toward sociocultural design tools for digital learning environments: Understanding
        identity in game-based learning communities. University of Wisconsin--Madison.
Ferdig, R. E.  (2006).  Assessing  technologies for   teaching and  learning: understanding      the importance of
        technological pedagogical content knowledge. British Journal of Educational Technology, 37, 749-760.
Foster, A. (2014). CAREER: Projective reflection: Learning as identity exploration within games for science.
        Drexel University: National Science Foundation.
Foster, A., & Shah, M. (2016). Knew me and new me: Facilitating student identity exploration and learning
        through  game   integration. International  Journal  of Gaming   and    Computer-Mediated       Simulations
        (IJGCMS), 8(3), 39-58.
Foster, A., Shah, M., & Barany, A. (2017). Facilitating learning as identity change through game-based learning.
        In Y. Baek (Ed.), Game-Based Learning: Theory, Strategies and Performance Outcomes. New York,
        NY. Nova Publishers.
Shah, M., Foster, A., Barany, A., Cellitti, J., Duka, M., Swiecki, Z., Evenstone, A., Kinley, H., Quigley, P., &
        Shaffer, D.W. (2018). Learning and Identity in Virtual Learning Environments: Iterative Design and
        Implementation of Philadelphia Land Science. Paper to be presented at the 1st Connected Learning
        Summit, MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA, August 1-3, 2018.
Kamarainen, A. M., Metcalf, S., Grotzer, T., &amp; Dede, C. (2015). Exploring ecosystems from the inside: how
        immersive    multi-user virtual environments  can  support development   of epistemologically    grounded
        modeling     practices  in   ecosystem  science    instruction. Journal  of  Science       Education  and
        Technology, 24(2-3), 148-167.
Kaplan, A., Flum, H. (2012). Identity formation in educational settings: A critical focus for education in the 21st
        century. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 37(3), 171-175.
Kaplan, A., Sinai, M., & Flum, H. (2014). Design-based interventions for promoting students' identity exploration
        within the   school curriculum   Motivational interventions (pp. 243-291):  Emerald       Group Publishing
        Limited.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology. Sage Publications.
Maxwell, J. A. (2013). Qualitative research design: An interactive approach (Third ed.). Thousand Oaks, Calif:
        SAGE Publications.
Milgram, P., Takemura, H., Utsumi, A., & Kishino, F. (1995). Augmented reality: A class of displays on the
        reality-virtuality continuum. Paper presented at the Telemanipulator and telepresence technologies.
Shaffer, D. W. (2017). Quantitative ethnography: Cathcart Press.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation. The views expressed are those
of the researchers.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  223                                                     © ISLS
