        A Spiral Model of Collaborative Knowledge Improvement to
        Support Collaborative Argumentation for Science Learning:
                         Technological and Pedagogical Design
                          Wenli Chen, Si Zhang, Yun Wen, Chee-Kit Looi, and Jennifer Yeo
            wenli.chen@nie.edu.sg, si.zhang@nie.edu.sg, yun.wen@nie.edu.sg, cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg,
                                                jennifer.yeo@nie.edu.sg
                                   Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

         Abstract:    Innovations  in teaching    and  learning  are not merely   about   merely  the   design of
         technologies    but the  integration   of   technologies  and pedagogical    practices   in  supporting
         meaningful learning. This paper presents the design, implementation and evaluation of a web-
         based system to support secondary school students' collaborative argumentation (CA) in science
         learning    in Singapore.   A  pedagogical      model  named    the  Spiral  Model    of Collaborative
         Knowledge Improvement (SMCKI) is proposed in this study to inform the system and learning
         activity design.   Starting  with  a  stage  of  individual  brainstorming,   the pedagogical    model
         scaffolds   students to   go  through    five   stages of   intra-group  and  inter-group    knowledge
         improvement     and  refinement,   to support   the advancement   of  their  collective  and   individual
         knowledge.     The  results showed    that  the students  significantly improved   on    their scientific
         content knowledge through the staged collaboration argumentation activities in the web based
         learning environment.

Introduction
In recent years there is a shift in science education from focusing on exploration and experiment to the construction
of argument and explanation (Duschl & Osborne, 2002). Argumentation refers to the process of discussion and
negotiation among peoples of different point of view (Osborne, Erduran, & Simon, 2004; Sampson & Clark,
2009). Argumentation is part of the practice of science for evaluating, refining and establishing new theories
(Duschl & Osborne, 2002). It has been widely recognized as an effective approach for science learning (Osborne
& Patterson, 2011) as it helps students improve their conceptual understanding (Bouyias & Demetriadis, 2012),
understand the nature of science, promotes deeper learning of content (Nussbaum, 2008), enhance knowledge
creation (Erduran, Simon, & Osborne, 2004), and develop metacognitive skill (Böttcher & Meisert, 2011).
         Many effective argumentation happens among students (Scheuer, Loll, Pinkwart, & McLaren, 2010) who
engage in proposing, critiquing, coordinating evidence with claims to construct arguments and explanations,
reflecting, and   evaluating  each   other's'  ideas.  Educational   researchers  have    developed   some   pedagogical
approaches and tools to support students' collaborative argumentation (Scheuer et al., 2010). However, students
were often found as working ineffectively and inefficiently when doing the argumentation. Students are still not
substantively engaged in the process of discussion and negotiation (Yun & Kim, 2015). One of the critical issues
is that students' discussions  do  not lead    to significant improvement     of idea improvement     due to   the lack of
interdependence among group members. More carefully designed collaborative argumentation activities which
can support idea imporvement is needed.
         This paper presents a web-based platform to support students' collaborative argumentation in science
learning. Developed by National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University Singapore, this system
is designed  for  supporting  generalized   coordination   of   collaborative argumentation    among    students   and  the
teacher in the following three aspects: 1) argumentation: developing graph-based argumentation to represent
argument elements, and relationships between them, 2) collaboration: scaffolding student's continuous knowledge
improvement through a staged Spiral Model for Collaborative Knowledge improvement, 3) peer assessment and
critique: supporting intra-group peer assessment and critique by quantitative rating and qualitative feedbacks.

Literature review
Argumentation and learning
Argumentation     is viewed   as a   vital type   of knowledge    construction   activity that can   lead to   knowledge
advancement (Weinberger & Fischer, 2006). Science teachers have designed various learning activities to support
students' argumentation     (Emig,   McDonald,    Zembal-Saul,    &  Strauss, 2014),  and  students   are encouraged    to
participate in scientific practice activities, reflective dialogue, and actively use evidence to support their own

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       240                                                     © ISLS
claims (Bulgren et al.,2014; Duschl et al., 2002). Argumentation is as an effective learning process and educational
outcome for science education (Osborne & Patterson, 2011).
          Many argumentative frameworks have been proposed to support students' argumentation in science
education. Toulmin   Argument    Pattern (TAP)   is the most  commonly    used   framework    (Toulmin,  1958). TAP
consists of six elements: claim, qualifier, data, warrant, backing, and rebuttal. A claim is an assertion, or statement,
about a belief or idea. Grounds are statements or reasons that support the claim. Warrants are an elaboration on
the reasoning behind why the person believes their claim to be true. A qualifier provides strength and clarification
to the grounds and warrant. With a qualifier, the claim is valid only during a specific circumstance. A rebuttal is
a particular condition in which the warrant becomes void and the claim is not valid. While a qualifier can provide
strength and clarification, the backing provides support to the warrant by stating why the warrant is acceptable.
          Another argumentation framework is Walton's argumentation scheme (Walton & Reed, 2005). Walton
breaks down argumentation into six different types of dialogue: persuasion dialogue, the inquiry, negotiation,
information-seeking dialogue, deliberation, and eristic dialogue. Persuasion dialogue is when one person is trying
to persuade another person that some particular suggestion is true through the use of arguments that show or prove
that it is true. Inquiry dialogue involves a group of people investigating the reasons for some event or phenomenon.
Negotiation dialogue involves bargaining, while information-seeking dialogue is when one person has, or appears
to have, information that another person wants. Deliberation dialogue is making a decision to solve a problem and
lastly, eristic dialogue is a quarrel between two people. The argumentative patterns are widely used to evaluate
students' argumentation ability and its development (Garcia-Mila, Gilabert, Erduran, & Felton, 2013).
          In addition to providing argumentative frameworks to help students develop their ability to argue, many
studies have found that graph-based computer application tools can help students develop argumentation skills
and scientific knowledge (Dwyer, Hogan, & Stewart, 2012; Hsu, Dyke, Smith, & Looi, 2018). Compared with
these previous  studies,  this study especially  emphasizes   the integration of  technology    and pedagogy. While
technical tools  support  scientific argumentation,   pedagogical  design  better supports   students'   collaborative
learning.

Collaborative argumentation
As reflected in literature, students encounter a lot of difficulties in collaborative argumentation. Except for unequal
participation and  low level   engagement   as  often observed in  collaborative  learning  activities (Choo, Eshaq,
Samsudin, & Guru, 2009), students might also not use appropriate and/or enough evidence to warrant their claims,
or justify their choice of evidence in the arguments they produce (Erduran, Simon, & Osborne, 2004; Weinberger,
Stegmann, & Fischer, 2010). The self-explanations made during argumentation were only sporadically generated
by even good students (Larusson & Alterman, 2009). Students did not evaluate the validity or acceptability of an
explanation for a given phenomenon in a satisfying way as well (Bouyias & Demetriadis, 2012). There was also
evidence that students had problem producing "a good argumentation sequence" (Larusson, &Alterman, 2009).
When required to engage in scientific argumentation, a critical type of discourse epistemic practice in doing and
communicating science (Lazarou, Sutherland, &Erduran, 2016), students were confronted with more challenges.
Existing  research has indicated   that students often  lacked ability to determine   the   acceptance,  rejection, or
modification  of ideas (Hogan    &   Maglienti, 2001).  Their acts of distorting, trivializing, and  ignoring certain
evidence  frequently resulted   in misconceptions   (Sampson   &   Clark, 2008).  In the    realm of CSCL   research,
collaborative argumentation is regarded as a key type of knowledge construction process that should be mastered
by students to enable knowledge advancement. Yet in the argumentation processes, students without necessary
training were often noted as working ineffectively and inefficiently. They did not ask each other questions, not
explain or clarify their own opinions, not articulate the reasoning behind, not elaborate and reflect on knowledge
(Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2006; Martin & Hand, 2009). They also hardly take alternative perspectives into
consideration (Sampson, Grooms, & Walker, 2011).
          In science education, engaging in collaborative argumentation is challenging for most students (Gould
& Parekh,  2018).  During  the   process of collaborative argumentation,   it is  difficult for students to construct
scientific explanations, and students adopt the wrong ways of arguing and only a few students can complete the
argumentation task (Ryu & Sandoval, 2012). The main reason for this phenomenon is that students lack the basic
skills of collaborative argumentation. Students don't know how to create a logical point of view and present
evidences for support it. To improve students' performance of collaborative argumentation, one kind of method
is to provide students with a structured argumentation scaffold (Suthers, 2003).

Web-based system design
The web-based system development is based on the J2EE platform, and adopts the SSH (Spring, Struts, and
Hibernate) technology. The system includes three modules: graph-based argumentation, collaborative knowledge

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    241                                                   © ISLS
improvement, and peer assessment and critique. Figure 1 shows the screenshots of the system. The central area of
the screen is students' graph-based argument workspace, where students use evidence to support or oppose the
claim. The activity description (such as activity topic, activity introduction, role assignment, experimental data
and evaluation rules, etc) and chat window are shown on the top right of the page.

Graph-based argumentation design
The system  is  a  graph-based   argumentation application   that uses different shapes   to represent   the    argument
elements.  The  oval node represents  the  claim, the  cloud node   represents the   idea (not  sure if  it  is claim   or
evidence), and the rectangle node represents the evidence.    The explanation of shapes of the argument elements
in the system are shown in figure 1. The arrows represent the relationships among the nodes. Green arrows
represent "evidence for" whereas red arrows represent "evidence against".

                                                                                     Claim: an assertion, conclusion,
                                                                                     statement,    explanation,     or
                                                                                     response to a question.

                                                                                     Idea: an immature point of view,
                                                                                     which may become a claim, or
                                                                                     turn into an evidence later.

                                                                                     Evidence   for: to  support    the
                                                                                     claim. These may originate from
                                                                                     student's  experience,  hands-on
                                                                                     experiments,             previous
                                                                                     experimental      results,     or
                                                                                     theoretical principles.

                                                                                     Evidence   against: These    may
                                                                                     originate     from      student's
                                                                                     experience,             hands-on
                                                                                     experiments,             previous
                                                                                     experimental      results,     or
                                                                                     theoretical principles.
                  Figure 1. The Screenshot and explanation of augment elements of the System.

        The system supports uploading and downloading attachments (including pictures and documents) with
the nodes. In addition, the system supports the transitions between different shapes, for example, the idea can be
changed to the claim, or changed to the evidence if it was connected with the claim. Because the team members
are engaged    in  collaborative argumentation,   members    from   the same     group  can    modify    or  delete   the
nodes/relationships created by other members of the group.

Collaboration design: Spiral Model of Collaborative Knowledge Improvement (SMCKI)
Instead of collaboration scripts that generally provide a detailed set of guidelines, rules and structured tools for
describing how the group members should interact, we propose a pedagogical model to guide the interaction
processes so that Collaborative Knowledge Improvement can happen more effectively in classrooms. The 5-stage
Spiral Model    of Collaborative   Knowledge   Improvement     (SMCKI)    provides    a   tangible   structure  for one
operational collaborative activity  design beginning   with  brainstorming and    a  structured  process     of constant
knowledge improvement. The model focuses on democratic knowledge sharing as well as cycles of individual,
group and class knowledge enhancement (see Figure 2).
        This model is based on the authors' previous work on Funnel Model for rapid collaborative knowledge
improvement (Wen, Looi, & Chen, 2011), which consists of three stages of collaborative learning process. By
respecting  and encouraging cognitive  diversity,  the first stage encourages    the creation   of diverse   ideas. The
subsequent stages tap on this diversity to seek synergy of ideas, and a stage of convergence and consensus seeking
leading to knowledge convergence and advancement of the individuals, groups and class. The CMCKI model
entails 5 stages (Figure 2). The teacher used verbal instructions and system buttons to regulate the 5 stages of
scientific argumentation activity.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   242                                                       © ISLS
       I:    Individual    brainstorming:      Students
 individually  construct  argument   with   claims  and
 evidences of the scientific phenomena. The argument
 represents the best knowledge of the individuals.
    II:   Intra-group   synergizing: Students    discuss,
 synergize and consolidate group members' work by
 deleting,  adding, modifying   nodes/relationships. A
 group graph-based argumentation diagram is created
 which represents the best knowledge of the group.
    III:   Inter-group  peer assessment    and critique:
 Students go to other groups to provide quantitative
 ratings and qualitative comments by identifying the
 strengths and areas for improvements.
    IV: Intra-group refinement: Students go back to
 their own groups and refine the group work based on
 other  groups'  ratings and  feedbacks.   After further
 verbal   negotiation,  they  were   required  to  seek
 consensus and finalize their group idea.
       V:  Individual   idea  perfection:  Individually,    Figure 2. Spiral Model of Collaborative Knowledge
 students  write an argumentative    essay or  reflection                  Improvement.
 report to explain the scientific phenomena.

Peer assessment and critique
In stage III of SMCKI, students go to other groups to provide quantitative rating and qualitative feedbacks on the
content and structure of the argument. Students can rate both the nodes and the relationships in the argument
diagram. When students double-click the node or relationship, an assessment window will pop up (see Figure 3).
All the students' qualitative feedbacks will be displayed in a table format. In order to encourage thoughtful critique
and rating, each element of the argument diagram can only be rated once. Students name will not be shown in this
stage.
          To make the ratings more intuitive for students, the color of the lines of those nodes and relations which
received positive ratings will be highlighted whereas the color of the lines of those nodes and relations which
received negative ratings will be lighter. This feature will help channel teacher and students' attention when they
do stage 3 and 4 argumentation activities. On top of assessing the individual elements of the argument diagram,
students can assess the whole diagram based on the rubrics given by the teacher.

              Figure 3. The screen shot of the peer assessment and critique (Stage III of SMCKI).

Research questions
In this study, we focus on investigating whether and how was the use of web-based system informed by the
SMCKI helpful for improving students' conceptual knowledge learning?

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   243                                                  © ISLS
The enactment of SMCKI in science classroom
Participants
A secondary grade 4 (16 years old on average) class with a total of 33 students in Singapore participated in the
project. They studied physics phenomenon though SMCKI approach using the system. All the students in this
school are equipped with a personal iPad 24/7, and they are proficient in using iPad as a learning tool. The teacher
has rich experiences in science teaching and he is tech-savvy. Before the project started, researchers conducted
training for the teacher with the aim to improve teacher's understandings of the technological and pedagogical
design of the system. All the students were heterogeneously grouped by the teacher according to their ability.
There were nine groups of 3-4 students in the class.
         The collaborative  argumentation   activities  were co-designed  by  the  teachers and researchers. Three
lessons were implemented (50 minutes per lesson) from July to August in 2018. The data analyzed in this paper
were from  the third lesson  on  the electromagnetic    induction phenomenon.   Following   the SMCKI    approach,
students went through 5 staged of collaborative argumentation. The time allocation for each stage is: Individual
brainstorming  (7  minutes),  within-group  synergizing    (10 minutes), inter-group   assessment and    critique (8
minutes), intra-group refinement (10 minutes), and individual perfection (after class). The paper examines the
students' conceptual development in the process for 5-staged collaborative argumentation activities.

Methods and instruments
During the   collaborative argumentation    activities, students  were  asked   to provide  explanation  about    the
phenomena that they observed from an iPad which showed the induced current flowed in a solenoid over time
when a magnet fell through it. Students presented their explanations based on an explanation framework which
consisted of three elements: claim, evidence, and reasoning (McNeill, Lizotte, Krajcik, & Marx, 2006). A total of
48 explanations generated in students' collaborative argumentation activities. Content analysis was employed to
analyze the nature of peer comments in Stage 3. The unit of content analysis is one comment.
         Pre-test and post-test design. Pretest and posttest were used to measure students' conceptual knowledge
before and after the collaborative learning activity and used the same text paper, which contained 4 questions, one
point for each question. The test questions were closely related to the knowledge points in this lesson.
         Coding scheme of peer feedbacks. A coding scheme adapted from Clark & Sampson (2007) was used to
code students' qualitative feedbacks in stage 3. The coding scheme consists of five codes: rebuttal, support, query,
emotive appeal, and off-task comments. The second and third authors independently coded all the 79 comments,
with an inter-rater reliability of 0.864 (Cohen's Kappa).
         Students'  interview design. Students  were    required  to reflect on their experiences of collaborative
learning based on one guiding questions in the post-intervention interview: What did you do at each stage of
collaborative learning activity?

Data analyses and results
Comparison of students' conceptual understanding between Stage I and Stage V.
In Stage I and  V,  individual   students are required  to construct  argument  and   explanation of the scientific
phenomenon individually. A comparison was made to measure students' conceptual knowledge between stage I
and V. Descriptive statistics were used to analyze the mean and standard deviation of conceptual understanding,
see Table 1. As the data do not conform to normal distribution, the Wilcoxon signed Ranks test was used to detect
differences on conceptual knowledge between 2 stages. The results in table 1 showed that students' conceptual
understanding in Stage V was significantly higher than the stage I (z=-4.647**, p<0.001).

Table 1: Wilcoxon signed Ranks test results

                      N           Minimum          Maximum             Mean           Std.Dev            Z

     Stage I          33              0                  4              2.58           0.830         -4.647***

     Stage V          33              2                  4              3.70           0.529
Note. *** p<0.001.

Students' conceptual development throughout staged activities: Group 3 as the case study

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    244                                                 © ISLS
     We provide a qualitative account of group 3's process of doing the staged collaborative argumentation. In
order to clearly show the process of students' revision of their explanations, we used bold font and underlining in
the text to show the position of students' revision.
     Stage I individual posting. All 4 students (Jenny, Hellen, Nichole, and Sabrina, all pseudo names) managed
to post their explanation of the scientific phenomena based on their pre-existing knowledge.
     Stage   II intra-group  synergizing.  After seeing   each other's  posting, students compared            each other's
explanations and tried to synergize their work through negotiation and discussion. In this stage, Helen added a
scientific knowledge element to her previous explanation in stage 1.

     "When the magnet first enters the solenoid, there is a momentary increase in rate of cutting of magnetic
     field lines by the coil, hence by Faraday's Law, an e.m.f. is induced in the coil and there is a current.
     In the moment that the magnet is completely in the solenoid, there is no rate of cutting of magnetic field
     lines by the coil, so there is no e.m.f. induced in that moment and the current is 0. When the magnet falls
     out of the solenoid, there is a momentary decrease in rate of cutting of magnetic field lines by the coil,
     hence by Faraday's Law, an e.m.f. is induced in the coil. Since the motion of the magnet is in the opposite
     direction as compared to when it enters the solenoid, the induced e.m.f. is in the opposite direction and
     the current is also in the opposite direction, by Lenz's Law." (14:02, posted by Helen)

    In this stage, Sabrina repeatedly revised the statements that represent her explanation. In the process of
revision, the representation of Sabrina's explanation moved closer to the expert scientific concept knowledge.

     "When the magnet is dropped into the solenoid, there is a momentary rate of cutting of magnetic field
     lines and thus an e.m.f is induced and a current in the solenoid is recorded. According to Lenz's law of
     motion, as the magnet changes direction to move out of the magnet, the current recorded would be of
     similar magnitude and amplitude but in a different direction." (14:06, posted by Sabrina)

     In stage II, students not only revised their own explanations, but also added new explanations. Sabrina added
a new claim and evidence to improve own explanation. Jenny put forward a backing to Helen's explanation.
During   the post-activity interviews, the 4 students    explained to researcher how they  synergized          their group
argumentation diagram in Stage 2. Students discussed with her group mates first and then modified her explanation
(from the interview transcript with Sabrina). If student's concept is wrong, she would modify her explanation
(from the interview transcript with Sabrina). If students thought their partners' explanations make more sense,
they will add others' idea to her explanation (from the interview transcript with Helen).
      Stage III Intra-group assessment and critique. Group 4 students went to group 3 to provide ratings and
feedbacks. To examine the role of stage 3 peer critique for students knowledge improvement in argumentation,
content analyses was done to understand the nature of peer comment given. Group 4 gave a total of 7 comments
in this stage, including 1 support, 3 rebuttals, and 3 emotive appeals. Table 2 shows an example of comments
given by group 4.

Table 2: An example of comments given by group 4 to group 3

1.Explanation          Group 3 (Student Jenny)
                       "When the magnet is drops into the coil, there is a momentary rate of cutting of the magnetic field
                       lines from the magnet by the coil. By faraday's law, an emf is induced in the coil, which drives an
                       induced current, hence a sudden increase in magnitude of current was recorded. This repeated in the
                       opposite direction when the magnet fell into the solenoid, hence by lenz's Law, the direction of the
                       current is opposite to that at first, so a current of similar magnitude but in opposite direction was
                       recorded."

1.1                    Group 4 (comments to group 3)
Rebuttal               "why does the direction change? "

1.2                    Group 4 (comments to group 3)
Rebuttal               "What does "direction of current is opposite to that at first" a bit confusing."

1.3                    Group 4 (comments to group 3)
Emotive appeal         "True"

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    245                                                          © ISLS
         During the post-activity  interviews, students  explained their experiences  in this  stage. In this stage,
students of group 4 gave comments to group 3 based on the following criteria: (1) key words, (2) explanation was
clear or not, (3) the number of evidence supported one claim, (4) students' understanding of the conceptual
knowledge, and (5) the concept was correct or accurate. If students thought that the other group's explanations
were better, they would bring other groups' ideas to their own group.
      Stage IV Intragroup refinement. Based on the explanations and comments from other group, students in
group 3 further revised their explanations. Students added scientific conceptual knowledge in their explanations
or had their doubts about some conceptual knowledge cleared.

Discussion and conclusion
This study proposes web-based platform to support students' collaborative argumentation in science education by
scaffolding students'  graph   based argumentation   informed   by a  spiral model   of  collaborative   knowledge
improvement. An empirical study was conducted to investigate how student construct argumentation for science
learning throughout the stage-collaborative argumentation activity. The paper provides a descriptive account of
the interactions of a group as the students engaged in spiral cycles of knowledge improvement. The case study
demonstrates that students' conceptual understanding improved continuously through the 5 stages of SMCKI.
This study also showed that revision, deletion and synthesis of explanation were sophisticated skills, and the web-
based system needed to provide scaffoldings for the development of students' these skills. In addition, teachers'
feedback was also very important. In the second and fourth stages, students would perform better if teachers could
provide some feedback on scientific knowledge and collaboration process.
         Informed by SMCKI, our web-based system has 3 characteristics: "low floor", "wide walls", and "high
ceiling". "Low floor" means all students can easily participate and contribute to the group and class's knowledge
improvement;  "Wide    walls"  means  the  networked    online system enables    everyone   to connected   through
individual-group-class-group-individual interaction pattern. There are many opportunities for students be exposed
to diversified ideas and perspectives. "High ceiling" means that students can tap on each other's ideas to improve
the knowledge throughout the staged spiral model. Our empirical study shows that the quality of ideas of the one
stage is always  higher   than  the  preceding  stage.  Students work    on  increasingly   complicated   ideas by
communication, negotiating and critique, all of which require higher order thinking.
         The SMCKI     is also meant  to  scaffold teachers to enact  and orchestrate   the collaborative  learning
activities in the classroom as well as to build capacity to be able to design such learning activities themselves. It
has the potential for teachers to embark on collaborative learning activities in the classroom and to manage the
risks of the activities breaking down or not reaching any kind of fruitful collaboration. SMCKI is not specific to
collaborative argumentation or science learning. It can be applied in any collaborative learning activity. Further
study is needed to investigate the application of SMCKI in other contexts of collaborative learning.

References
Bouyias, Y., &  Demetriadis,    S. (2012). Peer-monitoring   vs. micro-script  fading   for enhancing    knowledge
         acquisition when learning in computer-supported argumentation environments. Computers & Education,
         59(2), 236-249.
Böttcher, F., & Meisert, A. (2011). Argumentation in science education: A model-based framework. Science &
         Education, 20, 103-140.
Bulgren, J. A., Ellis, J. D., & Marquis, J. G. (2014). The use and effectiveness of an argumentation and evaluation
         intervention in science classes. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 23(1), 82-97.
Choo, K. A., Eshaq, A. R. M., Samsudin, K. A., & Guru, B. K. (2009). An evaluation of a constructivist online
         collaborative learning activity: A case   study on Geometry.    Turkish Online   Journal of   Educational
         Technology, 8(1), 15-25.
Clark, D. B., Sampson, V., Weinberger, A., & Erkens, G. (2007). Analytic frameworks for assessing dialogic
         argumentation in online learning environments. Educational Psychology Review, 19(3), 343-374.
Duschl, R. A., & Osborne, J. (2002). Supporting and promoting argumentation discourse in science education.
         Studies in Science Education, 38, 39­72.
Dwyer, C. P., Hogan, M. J., & Stewart, I. (2012). An evaluation of argument mapping as a method of enhancing
         critical thinking performance in e-learning environments. Metacognition and Learning, 7(3), 219-244.
Emig, B. R., McDONALD, S. C. O. T. T., ZEMBAL-SAUL, C. A. R. L. A., & Strauss, S. G. (2014). Inviting
         argument by analogy: Analogical-mapping-based comparison activities as a scaffold for small-
         group argumentation. Science Education, 98(2), 243-268.
Erduran, S., Simon, S., & Osborne, J. (2004). TAPping into argumentation: Developments in the application of
         Toulmin's argument pattern for studying science discourse. Science education, 88(6), 915-933.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  246                                                    © ISLS
Garcia-Mila, M., Gilabert, S., Erduran, S., & Felton, M. (2013). The effect of argumentative task goal on the
         quality of argumentative discourse. Science Education, 97(4), 497-523.
Gould, D. L., & Parekh, P. (2018). Mentoring and Argumentation in a Game-Infused Science Curriculum. Journal
         of Science Education and Technology, 27(2), 188-203.
Hogan, K., & Maglienti, M. (2001). Comparing the epistemological underpinnings of students' and scientists'
         reasoning    about  conclusions. Journal of Research    in Science Teaching:    The   Official Journal of   the
         National Association for Research in Science Teaching, 38(6), 663-687.
Hsu, P.-S., Dyke, M. V., Smith, T. J., & Looi, C.-K. (2018). Argue like a scientist with technology: the effect of
         within-gender versus cross-gender team argumentation on science knowledge and argumentation skills
         among middle-level students. Educational technology research and development, 1-34.
Kollar,  I., Fischer,  F.,  & Hesse, F.   W.  (2006).   Collaboration  scripts­a   conceptual   analysis. Educational
         Psychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.
Larusson,    J. A., & Alterman,  R. (2009).  Wikis   to support  the "collaborative"   part of collaborative learning.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(4), 371-402.
Lazarou, D., Erduran, S., & Sutherland, R. (2017). Argumentation in science education as an evolving concept:
         Following the object of activity. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction, 14, 51-66.
Martin, A. M., & Hand, B. (2009). Factors affecting the implementation of argument in the elementary science
         classroom. A longitudinal case study. Research in Science Education, 39(1), 17-38.
McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting students' construction of scientific
         explanations by fading scaffolds in instructional materials. Jrl of the Learning Sciences, 15(2), 153-191.
Nussbaum, E. M. (2008). Collaborative discourse, argumentation, and learning: Preface and literature review.
         Contemporary Educational Psychology, 33(3), 345-359.
Osborne, J., Erduran, S., & Simon, S. (2004). Enhancing the quality of argumentation in school science. Journal
         of research in science teaching, 41(10), 994-1020.
Osborne, J. F., & Patterson, A. (2011). Scientific argument and explanation: A necessary distinction? Science
         Education, 95(4), 627-638.
Ryu, S., &      Sandoval,  W. A. (2012).  Improvements      to elementary  children's  epistemic  understanding  from
         sustained argumentation. Science Education, 96(3), 488-526.
Sampson, V., & Clark, D. (2009). The impact of collaboration on the outcomes of scientific argumentation.
         Science education, 93(3), 448-484.
Sampson, V., & Clark, D. B. (2008). Assessment of the ways students generate arguments in science education:
         Current perspectives and recommendations for future directions. Science Education, 92(3), 447-472.
Sampson, V., Grooms, J., & Walker, J. P. (2011). Argument-Driven Inquiry as a way to help students learn how
         to participate in scientific argumentation and craft written arguments: An exploratory study. Science
         Education, 95(2), 217-257.
Scheuer, O., Loll, F., Pinkwart, N., & McLaren, B. M. (2010). Computer-supported argumentation: A review of
         the state of the art. International Journal of Computer-supported collaborative learning, 5(1), 43-102.
Suthers, D.     D. (2003). Representational guidance    for collaborative inquiry.  In  Arguing to learn  (pp. 27-46).
         Springer, Dordrecht.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Walton, D., & Reed, C. A. (2005). Argumentation schemes and enthymemes. Synthese, 145, 339­370.
Weinberger,     A., &  Fischer, F. (2006).  A framework      to analyze   argumentative  knowledge      construction in
         computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & education, 46(1), 71-95.
Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2010). Learning to argue online: Scripted groups surpass individuals
         (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human behavior, 26(4), 506-515.
Wen, Y., Looi, C. ­K., & Chen, W. L. (2011). Towards a model for rapid collaborative knowledge improvement
         in classroom language learning. In H. Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake & N. Law (Eds.), Proceedings of
         Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2011 (Part 2, pp. 836-840). Hong Kong, China:
         International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Yun, S.  M.,    &   Kim,  H. B. (2015). Changes   in students'   participation and  small   group norms   in scientific
         argumentation. Research in Science Education, 45(3), 465-484.

Acknowledgments
This study   was    funded by Singapore   Ministry of   Education   (MOE)  under    the Education  Research   Funding
Programme       (OER   07/17  CWL)   and    administered    by  National  Institute of   Education  (NIE),   Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Singapore MOE and NIE.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     247                                                    © ISLS
