   Developing a Model of Collaborative Learning With Minecraft for
   Social Studies Classrooms Using Role-play Theory and Practice
                         Anders I. Mørch, University of Oslo, Anders.Morch@iped.uio.no
                    Louise Mifsud, Oslo Metropolitan University, Louise.Mifsud@oslomet.no
                             Siv Eie, Oslo Metropolitan University, Siv.Eie@oslomet.no

          Abstract: Minecraft is a multi-user block-building game and 3D virtual world for creating
          visual structures. We report on two three-week collaborative teaching experiences in a teacher
          education   program     in social  studies    where   we   experimented     with   different ways   of
          intertwining block building and role-playing in Minecraft. We created a model for integrating
          collaborative  learning    and  virtual   worlds   in  social studies  classrooms,     referred to  as
          collaborative  knowledge      adaptation.   The  model    consists of three  levels:   1) introduction
          (teacher introducing topic for learning), 2) reconstruction (building in Minecraft and creating
          a script  for role-play),  and 3) transformation   (acting  out   role-play  and  producing  a  video).
          Data   were   collected through  interviews,   an  open-ended   questionnaire,    and product   (video)
          analysis. We focus our analysis on generic skills interwoven with domain-specific skills and
          three levels of intersubjectivity toward a shared knowledge object.

Introduction
Minecraft has been rated the most popular digital game among 9­14-year-old children in Norway (girls/boys 9­
11 and in the top five for girls/boys 12­14), but teachers' perception of Minecraft as a game and not a learning
tool poses a challenge. This challenge is addressed by a new model for using Minecraft in teacher education,
which manages to meet the students in their own arena while fulfilling the requirements of the curriculum. We
took advantage of the popularity of the game, opportunities for collaboration and creativity enabled by block
building  and  role-playing,   and   imposed constraints    through   knowledge-based    activities  before, after and  in
parallel with using Minecraft. Our case is a teacher education program in social studies. Research indicates that
three-dimensional (3D) virtual worlds can be integrated into a teacher education program to provide preservice
teachers with the experiences needed to apply teaching skills in real school settings (Muir, Allen, Rayner, &
Cleland, 2013; Mørch, Hartley & Caruso, 2015).
          Minecraft is a sandbox game, which means that users in the game interact by creating visual structures
using basic  blocks   (modeled    after 1m3  physical    construction blocks  and   in analogy   to a  child playing in a
sandbox) and communicate in parallel, mainly by chat but also by voice via other applications. Children are
attracted to Minecraft   for several    reasons;  they  mine building   blocks  and   craft tools, combat  monsters,  and
collaborate with peers and allies in one of four different gameplay modes. We used the version of the game
called Minecraft Education Edition in creative mode, with many of the gaming elements turned off to emphasize
the elementary design acts of placing and breaking blocks in order to accomplish more advanced design tasks,
such  as  reconstructing  symbolic      buildings  of  a society (e.g., governmental,    industrial,   cultural, religious,
historical). Role-playing was the final stage of our learning activity and occurred inside or outside the buildings.
          Engagement and motivation in learning are often listed as the strengths of using games in education
(Gros, 2007; Pivec, 2007). Taking advantage of this potential could be the first step toward helping teachers to
bridge the gap between students' life worlds and schools' curricular goals. Next, collaboration and problem
solving are important behaviors associated with children's digital game playing (Danby et al., 2018), which
have been highlighted as important skills for the 21st century that we refer to as generic skills (Mørch, Eie, &
Mifsud, 2018). Students combine generic and domain-specific skills when they learn in Minecraft. The aim of
our research is to understand how student teachers organize and perceive the value of generic skills in specific
subject areas, and how both types of skills can be practiced in the same lesson and in the same digital learning
environment. The most prominent generic skills practiced in our study are information seeking, collaboration,
and  creativity. Other   types  of generic  skills  are  communication,   critical  thinking, decision-making,    reading,
writing, computational skills, adaptability, personal development, and group effectiveness (Binkley et al., 2012).
          Minecraft's technological and pedagogical affordances support a broad range of domain-specific skills,
including   mathematics,  chemistry,    computer    science, history,   and  social studies  (Nebel,   Schneider,  & Rey,
2016). The students can both visualize and concretize concepts. For example, the constructive play features in
Minecraft   inherited   from wooden     blocks,   jigsaw   puzzles, and  Lego   bricks  can   improve  children's  spatial
abilities (Caldera et al., 1999). Furthermore, Minecraft includes tools that enable children to learn programming
by introducing   it as  one  of several  techniques    for solving  practical problems   in  the game   environment   and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       272                                                     © ISLS
enhancing the game experience. Finally, research has shown that virtual worlds can motivate children to learn
specific concepts   through   immersion    and   play, which    means    that they  become       involved  in a  subjective
experience   of  concept  understanding   that leads   to  a feeling  of   participating    in a comprehensive,     realistic
experience (Dede, 2009). The domain (subject area) we focus on in this study is social studies.
         Minecraft and related virtual worlds and block-building games are suitable for a variety of teaching
methods, including scenario-based learning, incremental and iterative activities, and role-playing (Prasolova-
Førland et al., 2013; Westera, Nadolski, Hummel, & Wopereis, 2008). In role-play activities, participants are
involved  in "as-if"  or  simulated  actions  to approximate    aspects   of  a   real-life situation that is problematic,
impractical, impossible,   expensive,   or risky  to   carry out   in the  real   world   (Yardley-Matwiejczuk,     1997).
Students often   blur the  distinction between   themselves    and avatars    when  they    immerse   themselves    in a 3D
learning environment,    which  makes     3D virtual worlds    potential sites  for embodied     and   extended  cognition
(Pasfield-Neofitou,   Huang   &    Grant, 2015).  Educators     have  used    role-play   in   many   different  application
domains,   including  healthcare,   therapy,  organizational    change,    crisis management,       military  training,  and
education (Mørch et al., 2015; Prasolova-Førland et al., 2013; Westera et al., 2008). For example, Mørch et al.
(2015)   studied collaborative  learning   and   role-play   in special  education     in   Second   Life  and   found   that
combining abstract (conceptual) and concrete (hands-on) learning activities in multiple rounds and debriefing
sessions were useful for grounding theoretical concepts in concrete experience. We address the combination of
abstract and concrete learning activities in our study. We chose Minecraft instead of Second Life, as Minecraft
is better adapted to schools.
         Role-play    and  virtual worlds  offer  interesting   opportunities   for computer      supported   collaborative
learning (CSCL)   research  (Jamaludin,    Chee,  &  Ho,   2009).  For  example,    embodied,    enactive,   extended,   and
embedded   (4E)  learning  has  been   proposed   as   the theme   of  the CSCL     2019    conference,    combining   these
elements in collaborative settings. Historical re-enactment is an educational or entertainment activity in which
people follow a plan to recreate aspects of a historical event or period. In the study presented here this historical
enactment is transferred to Minecraft. Our approach builds on ideas of collaborative knowledge construction
(Roschelle & Teasley, 1995; Stahl, 2006), particularly knowledge construction achieved by intersubjectivity and
meaning-making (Arnseth & Solheim, 2002; Baker et al., 1999; Suthers, 2006), which can be regarded as a
dynamically changing context (Suthers, 2006) toward a shared object (Fugelli, Lahn, & Mørch, 2013), in our
case a domain-specific knowledge object. Achieving and maintaining intersubjectivity requires a repertoire of
conversational acts like "uptake" to reuse and modify prior contributions in conversation (Medina & Suthers,
2013), as well as models for researchers to analyze and design CSCL tasks at different levels of intersubjectivity
(Baker et al., 1999) and guidelines for educators to organize their teaching designs (Matusov, 2000).
         This study will therefore address the following research questions:
     ·   How are generic and domain-specific skills practiced in the different learning activities?
     ·   How are intersubjectivity and role-play relevant in learning social studies?
         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, we describe our theoretical framework and the
model we partially derived from the framework. Next, we present the methods we have used for data collection
and analysis. Then, we present, analyze, and discuss our data and findings and show how the empirical findings
informed the model in important ways.

Theoretical framework: Role-play and prolepsis-driven intersubjectivity
The idea of role-play in learning is to foreground envisionment and exploration of alternative courses of action
(Yardley-Matwiejczuk, 1997). For example, a child will envision different scenarios for how she will act in an
upcoming school presentation by imagining her audience in front of her in the mirror or in her dreams. When
this inner and   private  (non-observable)   hypothetical    situation is  turned   into    an observable    and organized
activity, we have a role-play situation, and new opportunities for teaching and learning occur. Vygotsky (1978)
suggested  that  play is a leading  factor in  human   development,    stating    that "In  play  a  child always   behaves
beyond his average age, above his daily behavior; in play it is though he were a head taller than himself" (p.
102). The imaginary situations that children engage in when they play are concrete while involving rules and
roles, thus providing a means to iterate between concrete and abstract behavior, which we argue is essential for
the effective use of role-play in education. Furthermore, Mead (1932) developed a philosophy of experience,
with  concepts   such as  emergence,   temporality,  and   consciousness,    in which   the    past and future  are viewed
through the lens of the present in interactions with others. Mead (1932) emphasized the novel character latent in
both the present and the past (e.g., that historical understandings may involve anticipatory cues that may lead to
transformations that in turn may lead to new insights).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      273                                                       © ISLS
         Role-play   conversation    is different from   naturally occurring    dialog  in   that  it is  scripted  and  staged
(Yardley-Matwiejczuk,     1997).    CSCL    researchers   have adopted    the  term   script for   organizing    collaborative
learning activities (Cesareni, Cacciamani, & Fujita, 2016). We use script in a slightly different way to mean the
written text of  a   roleplay in  film  production   and  connected   with   terms  such   as   scenes,   scripts,  props, and
prolepsis. We    draw    on the   work   of Rommetveit     (1976)    who   developed    a    prolepsis-driven      approach  to
intersubjectivity.  According   to  Rommetveit,     intersubjectivity is a temporarily    sustained      and  partially shared
social world   that  depends  on    access  to historical information    (common      pre-understanding).     Participants   in
conversation   collaboratively    construct  knowledge    by   expanding     a  joint  space    of  intersubjectivity,   and a
technique  for  this  is to issue   anticipatory  cues    (shared  prolepsis),  such   as  subtle     utterances,   incomplete
sentences, or deliberately inserted cues. An incomplete utterance invites the listener to actively participate in the
co-construction of an expanded intersubjective space to fill in the missing parts (Rommetveit, 1976; Fugelli,
Lahn   &   Mørch,   2013).  An    example   from    our case is   providing    the role-players     with   an opportunity    to
understand a historical event in a contemporary context through an utterance, which points toward a future event
outside the context that is shared by the participants, thus making the learning episode more meaningful to them.
         The theoretical framework helped us construct a model of collaborative knowledge adaptation for the
implementation of virtual worlds in social studies classrooms (Table 1). The columns in the table are connected
through  three crosscutting   themes    (introduction,   reconstruction,  transformation)     and     are either   theoretically
motivated (columns 2&3), based on empirical findings (columns 1&5), or informed by both theory and data
(column 4).

Table 1: Collaborative knowledge adaptation model for integrating virtual worlds in classroom practice

                         Activity          Rationale        Temporal            Shared know-ledge         Type of skill
                                           (metaphor of     orientation         object                    (primary /
                                           learning)        (Mead, 1932)        (intersubjectivity)       secondary)
    Introduction         Teacher           Acquisition      Past:               Vague:                    Domain-specific
                         lecturing;        (Sfard, 1998)    Retrospective       Teacher centered;         (primary)
                         students                           views of topic      students with
                         gathering                          to be learned       different prior
                         information                                            experiences
    Reconstruction       Collaborative     Particpation     Present:            Fragmented:               Generic
                         design in         (Sfard, 1998)    Create new          Minecraft building        (primary) and
                         Minecraft and                      experiences         vs. role-play script      Domain-specific
                         roleplay                           together                                      (secondary)
                         scriptwriting
    Transformation       Role-playing      Knowledge        Emergent:           Focused:                  Domain-
                         and video         creation         Potential to        Enacting an               specific
                         recording         (Paavola &       connect an          historical event          (primary) and
                                           Hakkarainen,     historical event    while immersed in         Generic
                                           2005)            with an             a virtual world           (secondary)
                                                            upcoming            learning activity
                                                            event               (video recorded)

         The model is the result of the first iteration of a design experiment. We used part of the model to
organize the second iteration; and data we analyze in the next section provide contents for the last two columns
(RQ 1&2). The rationale for the model is three metaphors of learning (Sfard, 1998; Paavola & Hakkarainen,
2005), which suggest a sequence of increased complexity of collaborative knowledge construction. We call it
collaborative knowledge adaptation, as the first level is domain-specific knowledge introduced by teachers.

Methods
The study was organized as an experimental teaching activity between two educational institutions in Norway
(A and  B)  over   a three-week     period over  two   semesters  (2017  &   2018).   Institution   A  provided    educational
resources  (15  MA    students   majoring   in education   acted  as  tutors)   and   institution  B  organized     the design
experiment as part of a teacher education course (60 BA student teachers majoring in social studies).
         Our   interventionist   approach   follows  design-based     research  principles   (DBR)       (Hoadley,   2002),  in
which a teacher and two researchers (the authors) collaborate to `engineer innovative educational environments
and simultaneously conduct experimental studies of those innovations' (Brown, 1992). DBR as a methodology
allows  us to  focus  on    contextual  aspects   that  become   `relevant   in the   students'    interactions'   (Krange   &
Ludvigsen, 2009). This means we do not limit ourselves to the local situation of interaction but take the whole

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       274                                                          © ISLS
into account  in considering   how   the technical solution  provides a  new context  for   interaction.  In the first
experiment, the activities were building in Minecraft and role-playing with minimal teacher instructions, and in
the second experiment the three-level model presented in Table 1 was used to inform our learning design.
         The assignment in the first iteration (case 1) was to create a model of the Norwegian parliament and to
engage in collaborative learning by role-playing a political decision-making process inside the building based
on a script collaboratively created in small groups (Figure 1). The assignment of the second experiment (case 2)
was to create a model of one of the historical buildings along the main river of Oslo and create a role-play of a
historical event that is said to have happened in and around the building by its owners, tenants, and workers
during industrialization, focusing on the working and living conditions of the 19th century (Figure 2).

Figure 1. Two video snapshots of Minecraft parliament building (outside and inside, respectively) from case 1.

         In both cases, the students were bachelor students, co-located, and worked in groups of three to five
individuals. We   collected   data  through an  open-ended   questionnaire informed   by    our  research   questions
(N1=37/60; N2=25/40), interviews (in the first case), observation notes, and 25 role-play films (3­5 minutes,
both cases). We   asked  questions   about  experiences with  Minecraft, what   activities they  found   more or less
interesting, how they organized collaborative work, the availability of support, would they use Minecraft for
own school learning, etc. We thematically coded the answers, following an abductive approach that was partly
data-driven and partly theory-driven by our model and research questions (Guest, 2012). We summarize our
findings in the next section.

      Figure 2. Two video snapshots of Minecraft reconstruction of a textile factory building from case 2.

         We   identified the  following  themes in  our  data: 1) time  issues, 2) play    vs. learning, 3)  technical
challenges,  4)   generic    skills  interwoven    with  domain-specific   skills,  and    5)   knowledge     sharing
(intersubjectivity). We focus on themes 4 and 5 in this paper.

Results and analysis
A higher percentage of students reported a positive experience using Minecraft in case 2 compared to case 1.
Thirteen students  (52%)    who     had not played  Minecraft   previously indicated  that     they had   satisfactory

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    275                                                   © ISLS
knowledge   of   Minecraft    after  the three  weeks    (44%   reported    previous   knowledge    of Minecraft).   Only   one
student (4%) claimed that s/he did not master the game after the three-week period (19% in case 1). Findings
from interviews in case 1 (Mørch et al., 2018) showed that the student teachers perceive the use of Minecraft in
their teaching as a possible threat to domain-specific (social studies) skills practice. However, they consider
generic  skills  important   and    see  the  potential in  Minecraft     as a new    way    of reaching  their students.   Our
experiences from case 1 made clear to us that the two types of skill (domain specific and generic) were not well
integrated in the learning design.
         We took the lessons learned from case 1 and started with a domain-specific context on which to base
building in Minecraft. The teacher gave a lecture to introduce the social studies topic to the student teachers: the
industrial breakthrough in Oslo in the mid-19th century. They were asked to search for information in two ways:
through  a given   list of   sources  and   encouraged     to  search  for  additional  sources  independently.   The   student
teachers were    also given     an  introduction  to Minecraft      and the  generic   skills emphasized    in  the curriculum
(information seeking, communication, collaboration). This was followed by an excursion to the river and the
industrial area.

Thematic analysis
To  address   the  two  research     questions,   we give   examples      from  our  data   showing    how  generic  skills  are
interwoven with domain-specific skills and how intersubjectivity (knowledge sharing) is achieved during the
course of the activity at three levels we have labeled introduction, reconstruction, and transformation.

Introduction
The students worked in groups after the initial orientation by the teacher. They searched for information through
books and   the  Internet    to understand    the task. One    student    elaborated on  the  process:   "We   collaborated  on
finding images of the building from all angles and had a discussion at the physical site" (Student 9). During the
excursion  to the  river and    the  industrial   area, the students    measured   the   perimeter  of the building  and    took
photos as preparatory work for the reconstruction to follow. This part of the activity was mainly about acquiring
domain-specific (social studies, historical) knowledge and using information seeking as the main generic skill
(excluding the basic skills of reading and writing). One student said, "[It took us] around three to four hours to
find information about the building, its history, and activity" (Student 18).
         Intersubjectivity      was  not achieved    at this   level, which    we  call  the  "vague   object." Based   on  our
observations,   the   students,    despite   knowing    of  or  about     each other    from    previous  classes   and  course
assignments,    were    just beginning     to work   together    on    this  task. The   group    efforts  included  gathering
information from various sources (books, Internet texts, pictures of buildings) and preparing the group members
for the next level of the activity.

Reconstruction
The most   prominent    observed     skills  practiced  at this level   were   collaboration,   cooperation, and    design. The
students divided the work based on their interests and found that building and creating a role-play scenario were
equally important. In their responses to the questionnaire, the students reported that two to three individuals
from each group built in Minecraft while two to three wrote the script. As one student noted, "We collaborated
well, and split the [task] into different parts. We all contributed toward both building and the role-play [script]
but focused     on   different   subtasks"    (Student     9). The    two    subtasks    (building  and   scriptwriting)    were
interdependent because Minecraft structures provided the scenery for the role-play script and the script defined
actions and   interactions   in  the  buildings.  The   students    liked this way   of  working,   as it allowed   them to  be
creative and focus on an area they had experience with or interest in while simultaneously contributing to the
common goal. As one student put it, they had "the possibility to create something, be creative, and learn to
collaborate in groups. The pupils who have problems at school can shine in such an arena" (Student 7). Both
tasks made use of knowledge acquired from phase 1, but during role-play planning, the students had to find
more detailed information about the historical event so that their re-enactment would be recognizable to viewers
outside the group.
         Our    observation     notes and    questionnaire     data show     that two   strands  of shared   knowledge      were
established at   this level:    one  associated   with   building   in  Minecraft    and  the   other  scenario  development.
However, they were not yet integrated and we characterize intersubjectivity as a fragmented knowledge object.

Transformation
In this phase, the students used what they had created in the previous phase through a roleplay (historical re-
enactment)  set   in the given     time  epoch  (mid-19th      century  work   and  life in  Norway).   The  generic  skills of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                          276                                                       © ISLS
creativity, communication, and collaboration were the most prominent ones observed at this level. For example,
creativity had the effect of generating enthusiasm not only within the group but also among the audience, who
later watched the video in a plenum session, or as one student put it, "A more enjoyable variation in role-play
where pupils  can practice    other skills such as filmmaking,    etc. ... In addition [the pupils] can practice
collaboration in film creation" (Student 7). The use of shared prolepsis as a film technique for expanding the
space of intersubjectivity among a group of interlocutors and viewers was observed in a few of the videos and is
illustrated by the following example:

Turn    Actor      Utterance
1      Owner      Yes, indeed, that is a very nice bridge.
                  I will of course maintain it in a good
                  way. Hmm, I think it would be a good
                  idea to introduce a toll collection
                  system, so I can finance maintenance
                  work.

2      Attorney   Toll?
3      Owner      Yes, it will be the first toll road in
                  Norway, and with regards to this
                  bridge, which you say is the main
                  crossing between here and Akershus              Figure 3. Role-play scene/Minecraft video image.
                  Fortress, I think it's a good idea.

       The    extract is part of a  dialog  between two    interlocutors (Owner  & Attorney), the   owner of the
property on which a bridge is located and a legal representative of the government, regarding who should pay
for maintenance of the bridge, as the Owner has newly purchased the property. During the exchange, the Owner
suggests imposing a toll for crossing the bridge to finance maintenance costs, which comes as a surprise to the
Attorney since it is one of a few passage points between west and east in Oslo. The discussion is interesting in
that it shows an important event in history, but, by using the word "toll," the exchange not only takes up and
elaborates previous information, but spawns a new line of discourse, connecting the conversation to another
event, a current debate in Norway regarding who should finance a new road system around Oslo and other cities
(end users vs. central authorities). The students are doing more than recreating history; they are pointing toward
a future event they can relate to, which is why we have labeled this level of intersubjectivity transformation. It
provides a way for students to personalize their collaborative learning efforts in creative ways. Five out of 25
videos included proleptic instances in their role-plays, although there were no instructions to do so. We discuss
the implications below.
       The two strands of knowledge (Minecraft building and scenario development) are integrated at this
level in the three- to five-minute role-play, which are recorded on video and called a focused knowledge object.

General discussion
We discuss our findings in terms of the research questions we raised in the introduction.

How are generic and domain-specific skills practiced in the different learning
activities?
One of our aims has been to understand how student teachers organize and perceive the value of generic skills in
specific subject areas. We addressed this through a model of collaborative knowledge adaptation (Table 1). This
model engages the students at different levels of collaborative learning. For example, developing the role-play
required in-depth studies of historical sources, which put domain-specific skills practice in the foreground (level
1). Throughout the planning of the role-play, the students had to take a detour and pose "as-if" questions to
envision working conditions, class struggles, labor strikes, or rivalries between factory owners. Generic skills
(Binkley et al., 2012; Danby et al., 2018) thus became important for the elaboration of domain-specific skills
practice: reconstructing historical events through collaborative design in Minecraft and roleplay script writing
together (level 2: generic skills practice in foreground and domain-specific in background) and enacting the
historical knowledge in creative ways in the role-plays with generic skills in the background (level 3). The data
from the open-ended questionnaire indicate that all students found it useful to start with domain-specific skills

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    277                                                © ISLS
and  that both   the creation of   buildings  in Minecraft  and   role-plays (developing    and   enacting) were    equally
important.

How are intersubjectivity and role-play relevant in learning social studies?
Historical   knowledge  and   intersubjectivity  have   several  common    features.  For example,    they are  temporary
processes that must be periodically updated to sustain, and they are never complete, nor fully shared. Moreover,
there are multiple didactical strengths in creating and playing out a historical role-play at different temporal
levels. First, the students get a "current" perspective rather than a retrospective. While role-playing, the students
get involved   as actors and   are  thus enabled   to  see  history through  multiple  perspectives   and   to develop    an
understanding of historical presentations as constructs (Seixas & Morton, 2013). Second, through role-play the
students are creating micro-stories about humans and their environments in the past. These micro-stories can
help to   develop the   students'  historical empathy.     The  interplay  between   the micro-   and macro-stories      will
enhance the historical overview and provide a deeper understanding of the past (Kvande & Naastad, 2013).
          Matusov    (2001)  suggested   three   aspects of intersubjectivity  when   developing   a  guide for  teaching
design: 1) intersubjectivity as having something in common, 2) intersubjectivity as coordination of participants'
contributions, and 3) intersubjectivity as human agency. Our model is inspired in part by these aspects, but it
differs in that we make use of role-play and building in a virtual world. Our model can also be compared with
the five  cycles  of enactive  role-play   sessions proposed    by  Jamaludin,  Chee,  and  Ho    (2009).  However,   their
domain    is different  from  ours,   debating   moral   issues as  argumentative    dialog rather   than  techniques    for
expansion of intersubjectivity. Medina and Suthers (2013) suggested "uptake" as an analytic approach for doing
CCSL research. We have expanded the repertoire with "prolepsis," as a way to project a conversation forward.
Our approach builds on the framework of Fugelli, Lahn, and Mørch (2013), who conceptualize intersubjectivity
as a knowledge object trajectory from incomplete to more complete. We propose three key events along this
trajectory (vague, fragmented, focused), aligned with temporal orientations: past, present, and future (emergent).

Conclusions, shortcomings, and directions for further work
Our  prior   experience  shows    that student   teachers  tend  to value  domain-specific    skills over  generic   skills.
Therefore, models are needed that emphasize and integrate both types of skills. Towards that end, we have
developed    the  collaborative   knowledge    adaptation   model   for   integrating virtual worlds    in  social  studies
classrooms using a design-based research approach with two iterations, where the results of the first iteration
informed the second. The model is based on a combination of empirical findings and theories of role-play and
intersubjectivity. The model puts focus on enactment, as in historical re-enactment to address the CSCL 2019
conference theme of 4E learning. We proposed a new conversational act to expand the space of intersubjectivity
for small group conversation (shared prolepsis) and gave an example of a new way to use role-play in CSCL.
          We   plan  to continue   to  develop   and  test our  model   in several   iterations. We   have  identified   the
following shortcomings and directions for further work: (1) The whole activity is time consuming compared to
conventional teaching practice; (2) The model is presented as linear, but levels 2 and 3 depend on the previous
level, and information may have to be updated (e.g., improving the building based on the role-play); (3) Video
recording of collaborative design in Minecraft and script development; (4) Different criteria for evaluating the
video products; and (5) The model will undergo four new iterations in higher education and be tested in two
experiments   in  7th  grade classrooms    during  the  2019-2020    school year,  when   our  student  teachers    will use
Minecraft with 12-year-old pupils in preservice training.

References
Arnseth,  H.C.,  &   Solheim,  I.  (2002). Making    sense  of  shared  knowledge.    Proc. CSCL     2002  (pp.  102-110).
          Boulder, CO: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Baker, M., Hansen, T., Joiner, R., & Traum, D. (1999). The role of grounding in collaborative learning tasks. In
          P. Dillenbourg    (Ed.), Collaborative   learning:   Cognitive   and computational     approaches    (pp. 31-63).
          New York: Pergamon.
Binkley,  M.,  Erstad,  O.,  Herman,   J., Raizen,  S.,  Ripley, M,  Miller-Ricci,   M.,  Rumble,    M. (2012).  Defining
          twenty-first century skills. In P. Griffin, B. McGaw & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st
          century skills (pp. 17-66). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer.
Brown,    A.  (1992).   Design  experiments:     Theoretical    and methodological    challenges   in   creating complex
          interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Caldera,  Y.M.,   Culp,  A.,  O'Brien,   M.,   Truglio,  R.T.,  Alvarez,   M., Huston,    A.C.   (1999).  Children's     play
          preferences, construction-play with blocks, and visual-spatial skills: Are they related? Int. J Behavioral
          Development 23(4), 855-872.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       278                                                      © ISLS
Cesareni, D., Cacciamani, S. & Fujita, N. (2016). Effects of role taking in online writing and reading activities
         for knowledge building in a blended university course. Int. J. of Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning, 11(1), 9-39.
Danby, S., Evaldsson, A. C., Melander, H., & Aarsand, P. (2018). Situated collaboration and problem solving in
         young children's digital gameplay. British Journal of Educational Technology, 49(5), 959-972.
Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning. Science, 323(5910), 66-69.
Fugelli, P., Lahn, L., & Mørch, A.I. (2013). Shared prolepsis and intersubjectivity in open source development:
         Expansive grounding in distributed work. Proc. CSCW 2013 (pp. 129-144). New York, NY: ACM.
Gros, B. (2007). Digital games in education. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 40(1), 23-38.
Guest, G. (2012). Applied thematic analysis. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage.
Hoadley, C. (2002). Creating context: Design-based research in creating and understanding CSCL. Proc. CSCL
         2002 (pp. 453-462). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Jamaludin, A.,  Chee,   Y.S., & Ho,   C.M.L.  (2009).  Fostering argumentative      knowledge construction  through
         enactive role-play in Second Life. Computers & Education, 53, 2, 317-329.
Krange, I., & Ludvigsen, S.R. (2009). The historical and situated nature of design experiments: Implications for
         data analysis. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25(3), pp. 268-279.
Kvande, L., & Naastad, N. (2013). Hva skal vi med historie? Historiedidaktikk i teori og praksis. (Why do we
         need history? Teaching history in theory and practice). Oslo: Universitetsforlaget. (In Norwegian)
Matusov,  E.  (2001). Intersubjectivity as  a way   of informing teaching      design for a community   of learners'
         classroom. Teaching and Teacher Education 17, 4, 383-402.
Mead, G.H. (1932). The philosophy of the present. Edited by A.E. Murphy. Chicago and London: The Open
         Court Publishing Company.
Medina, R., & Suthers, D. D. (2013). Juxtaposing practice: Uptake as modal transposition. Proc. CSCL 2013
         (pp. 328-335). LuLu and Amazon: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Mørch, A.I., Eie, S., & Mifsud, L. (2018). Tradeoffs in combining domain-specific and generic skills' practice
         in Minecraft in social studies in teacher education. Proc. CoPDA 2018 (pp. 44-52), Castiglione della
         Pescaia, Italy, May 29, 2018 (published at http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2101/).
Mørch, A.I., Hartley, M.D. & Caruso, V. (2015). Teaching interpersonal problem solving skills using roleplay
         in a 3D virtual world for special education: A Case study in Second Life. Proc. ICALT 2015 (pp. 464-
         468). Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society.
Pasfield-Neofitou, S., Huang, H., & Grant, S. (2015). Lost in Second Life: Virtual embodiment and language
         learning via multimodal communication. Educational Technology Research and Development, 63(5),
         709-726.
Paavola, S.,  &  Hakkarainen,   K.  (2005). The    knowledge  creation    metaphor:   An  emergent epistemological
         approach to learning. Science & Education, 14(6), 535-557.
Pivec, M. (2007). Play and learn: Potentials of game-based learning. British Journal of Educational Technology,
         38(3), 387-393.
Prasolova-Førland,  E., Fominykh,     M., Darisiro, R., &   Mørch,     A.I. (2013). Training  cultural awareness  in
         military operations in a virtual Afghan village: A methodology for scenario development. Proceedings
         46th Hawaii    International Conference   on  System Sciences      (pp. 903-912).  Washington,  DC:   IEEE
         Press.
Rommetveit,   R. (1976).  On   the architecture of  intersubjectivity. In   R. Rommetveit   & R. M.    Blakar (Eds.),
         Studies of language, thought and verbal communication (pp. 147-161). New York: Academic Press.
Roschelle J., & Teasley S.D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In
         C. O'Malley (Ed.), CSCL NATO ASI Series, vol. 128. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Seixas, P. & Morton, T. (2012). The big six historical thinking concepts. Toronto, CA: Nelson Publishing.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher,
         27(2), 4-13.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.
Suthers, D.D.   (2006). Technology    affordances  for intersubjective  meaning     making: A  research  agenda  for
         CSCL. Int. J. of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Edited by M.
         Cole. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Westera, W., Nadolski, R., Hummel, H.G., & Wopereis, I.G. (2008). Serious games for higher education: A
         framework for reducing design complexity. J. Comp. Assisted Learning, 24, 420-432.
Yardley-Matwiejczuk, K.M. (1997). Role play: Theory and practice. London, UK: Sage Publications.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   279                                                    © ISLS
