  "Can't Nobody Floss Like This!": Exploring Embodied Science
                                  Learning in the Third Space

                            Chris Georgen, Indiana University, cgeorgen@indiana.edu

          Abstract: I present an out-of-school science study situated in a performing arts center. The
          design brings together a mixed-reality science learning environment with ensemble dance in a
          series of embodied learning activities exploring the states of matter. Building on the theoretical
          framework of the third space, I analyze hybrid embodied movements that highlight the diverse
          role the body can play in learning science. Additionally, I report on pre- and post-measures
          indicating participants learned targeted science concepts and hybrid embodiments supported
          learning one particularly unintuitive concept. Finally, I make a case for the design of embodied
          learning activities that extend beyond considerations of analogous movements to include local
          and diverse movements that, if recognized as legitimate, expand possibilities for learning and
          doing science.

          Keywords: science, performing arts, technology, elementary education

Introduction
Educational research has increasingly recognized ways in which the body can play an important role in learning
and engaging with disciplined practices (Alibali & Nathan, 2012; Azevedo & Mann, 2018; Goodwin, 2000). More
recently, our natural tendency    to use the body  as a   learning  resource  has been   paired with  motion-tracking
technologies (e.g., mixed-reality environments) in the design of individual and collective instructional contexts
that leverage embodiment (Danish et al., 2015; Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013). Often these designs focus
on some degree of congruency between body movements and the content to be learned, for example pushing arms
forward to represent applying force to an object in a Newtonian simulation (Enyedy, Danish, & DeLiema, 2015).
However, a focus on cleanly mapping bodily movement to content potentially ignores a diversity and potential
hybridity of embodiment and how more informal ways of moving can support learning.
          Notions of  diversity and  hybridity  in learning   build on the  theoretical  construct of the  third space
(Gutiérrez, 2008). The third space highlights the transformative power of hybridity--how informal and formal
discourses (e.g., home   and  school)    can become   interconnected     to productively  challenge   what   counts as
knowledge and how knowledge is produced. Hybridity in language practices has been well explored through the
lens of the third space (Gutiérrez, Baquedano-López, & Tejeda, 1999; Gutiérrez, Rymes, & Larson, 1995). I aim
to extend the exploration of hybridity to consider how embodiment can bring together informal and formal ways
of moving and knowing (Ma, 2016). In this case, I view hybrid embodiments as those that merge dance-based
ways of   moving  with   science. Specifically, I explore  how  one  fun    and familiar embodied   action   (known as
"flossing") can represent a scientific phenomenon to act as a shared resource for participation and sense-making
in collective science learning activities. To unpack the role of hybridity and embodiment in learning, I describe
the design of a 10-lesson science activity sequence that integrated mixed-reality science learning with ensemble
dance. I report on the results of the activity sequence and discuss how hybrid forms of embodiment supported
learning by connecting dance movements throughout the intervention to performances on pre- and post-measures.
I highlight how the unintuitive scientific concept that solid particles vibrate (i.e., they have high energy but are
stationary) is explored that through a variety of ways of moving. I aim to answer the following research questions:
   1.     How do participants use familiar dance movements to represent and build upon scientific
          understandings of states of matter?
   2.     How do these movements support performance on pre- and post-measures?

Background, design, and community
To illustrate the role of hybridity in embodied learning, I describe the design of a science learning research study
that took place in a performing arts center. In contrast to science classrooms, all activity surrounding science
learning  focuses on  local music  and   dance  practices in  which  the adults  and children   participate. Hybridity,
therefore, is made possible in the ways in which participants make sense of the conceptual practices of science in
relation to the local, everyday ways of knowing and doing in dance. The intervention design explicitly connects
two thematically and conceptually related ensemble learning activities: mixed-reality science models and dance
(Figure 1). Within ensemble settings, individuals learn to take on a role within a system (e.g., a collective dance),

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     280                                                    © ISLS
but much of their understanding and performing requires moving and thinking relatively to one another (Ma &
Hall, 2018). In science, I explore ensemble learning through what I call collective embodied models. I build on
the successful Science Through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP) mixed-reality learning environment that
combines motion-tracking technology with a computational simulation (Danish et al., 2015; Danish et al., 2017;
Enyedy et al., 2017). STEP allows participants to move across the room pretending to be water particles. The
technology tracks their respective movements in real-time to generate a virtual representation of what state of
matter those particles would collectively create. Through engaging with and analyzing the simulation, participants
learn to coordinate their movement in certain ways to build, test, and refine models that predict and explain the
rules behind the particulate nature of matter (Schwarz et al., 2009).
         In  dance, ensemble  learning takes   the form   of  learning and   performing  choreography.   As  part of a
performing arts program, participants learned, rehearsed, and refined an ensemble dance based on the music and
themes of the Disney production Frozen. The choreography and materials (e.g., props and costumes) integrate
science concepts related to why and how particles move in solid, liquid, and gas. The dance was iteratively
rehearsed and refined as participants learned more about the particulate nature of matter and as they practiced an
increasingly more   complex   dance  routine.  Like the   STEP    environment,   ensemble    dance  requires working
collectively toward  representing an idea, feeling,  or   experience.  Since the dance   was  tied  to communicating
scientific understanding, it made visible important concepts and supported additional discussion and reflection
about what was learned. Yet, the dance was not "scientific." Though it conveyed aspects of science, the Frozen
dance was held accountable to dance criteria (e.g., timing, rhythm, presentation, etc.).

                           Figure 1. Representing ice in STEP (left) and dance (right).

Methods

Participants and data sources
Over the course of a summer performing arts program, two groups of participants (n=35, ages 6-8, 34 black or
African-American and 1 white) participated in the activity sequence summarized in Table 1. Of these, 18 assented
and received parent consent to participate in the study. Participants were divided into two groups. Each group
participated in a 45-minute   STEP   activity, which  was    immediately   followed   by Frozen  dance   practice and
rehearsal. Each  activity had a science learning    goal  related to   rules governing   the states of  matter, which
progressed from macroscopic to microscopic. The STEP activities were facilitated by the research team with
support from local staff. The "Frozen Dance" was choreographed a camp instructor. The dance was design to
support the ideas from STEP, but maintained the ultimate goal of performing in front of loved ones at the end of
camp during a large community event.
         Throughout the planning process, the research team met regularly with the dance instructor to discuss
the science content, locate overlaps and synergies, and build bridges between the two activity strands. During
collaborative planning sessions, the research team and local instructor aimed to connect the science and dance in
content, but also thematically  through the    narrative, characters,  and   settings from Frozen.  Connections   and
similarities between the activities were explicitly communicated to students during activity introductions and
debriefs, as well as emergently during key instructional moments. All activities from STEP and dance were video
recorded provided consent.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     281                                                   © ISLS
Table 1: Integrated Activity Sequence

 Activity Sequence     STEP Activity                    Dance Activity                    Learning Goal

 Activity 1-2          Participants embodied energy     Participants learned the first    Macro-level: Water exists in
                       sources and explored how         phase of their dance focused      different states of matter:
                       energy and temperature drive     on representing particle speed    solid, liquid, and gas. Water
                       observable changes in state      and distance during ice to        can change states.
                       and particle movement.           liquid state changes.

 Activity 3-4          Participants took on roles as    The dance introduced "magic       Marco-level: Energy and
                       "energy wands" to explore        wands" for participants to        temperature produce state
                       how energy causes state          hold, accenting the dance and     changes, i.e., giving energy
                       changes in a snowman, Olaf       representing energy sources in    causes melting and taking
                       from Frozen.                     the Frozen dance.                 away energy causes freezing.

 Activity 5-6          Participants build and test      The dance introduced "Elsa        Micro-level: Develop rules
                       models to explore the            gloves" for participants to       for particle speed and distance
                       relationship between particle    wear, including discussion of     in different states (e.g.,
                       distance and speed during        how Elsa [the main character      identify different distances
                       state changes.                   in Frozen] took away energy       and speeds and associate them
                                                        to make ice in things she         with states of matter).
                                                        touched. Participants learned
                                                        the second phase of their
                                                        dance representing liquid to
                                                        gas state changes.

 Activity 7-8          Participants build and test      The dance introduced sticks       Micro-level: Particles in
                       models to explore the            with streamers on the end for     different states of matter are
                       relationship between particle    students to hold and represent    arranged differently. Particles
                       attraction during state          the chaotic movement of           in a solid are patterned,
                       changes.                         particles in gas.                 "stuck," and vibrating.
                                                                                          Particles in liquid have no
                                                                                          regular arrangement and
                                                                                          move closely together.
                                                                                          Particles in gas move freely at
                                                                                          high speeds.

 Activity 9-10         Participants took on roles as    Rehearsal for end of camp         Micro-level to macro-level:
                       water particles inside of        showcase performance.             Particles in solids always keep
                       containers in the mixed-                                           their patterned shape,
                       reality simulation to explore                                      Particles in liquids keep their
                       particle behavior.                                                 shape but can move around,
                                                                                          and particles in gas move
                                                                                          freely and can escape if a
                                                                                          container is opened.

 Wrap-up               Post-measures conducted.         Rehearsal for end of camp         N/A
                                                        showcase performance.

 Wrap-up               Post-measures conducted.         Rehearsal for end of camp         N/A
                                                        showcase performance.

Methods: Interaction analysis to investigate hybridity
To understand the role hybrid embodied practices played in learning science content, I used interaction analysis
to better understand ways in which participants used dance movements to navigate science concepts and vice
versa (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). Due to the focus on the role of hybridity in embodied learning science, I
focused video analysis on interactions during STEP activities. Nonetheless, I viewed and content logged the entire
dance video corpus to better understand how embodied actions were taken up and used across these activity
spaces. Within STEP, I identified constructions of the third space by observing embodiment as it related to the
science (e.g., moving like water particles in the simulation) or dance (e.g., moving gracefully like water particles

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     282                                                         © ISLS
in dance), focusing on tensions and synergies between these two types of movements. Within these sequences of
embodied   activity, I transcribed   the   video verbatim   with key  attention   to formal, informal,  and  hybrid
embodiments. I then categorized and compared these sequences to others to see if any patterns emerged. From
there, I flagged moments where the science content was made visible in talk or embodied action to reference with
the ways participants performed on pre- and post-measures.

Methods: Science content knowledge measures
To measure content knowledge, all participants completed a multiple choice pre- and post-test. Additionally,
individual pre- and    post-interviews    were conducted  with   18 participants. Interview  questions  focused on
supporting participants in articulating how particles (on the microscopic level) resulted in how matter behaved
(on the macroscopic level). I conducted paired t-tests to determine whether students learned about the particulate
nature of matter over the course of the activity sequence.
        Based on the work of Paik, Kim, Cho, and Park (2004), I coded interviews for reasoning levels about
state change mechanisms from circular reasoning (Level 0) or observable macroscopic features (e.g., melting)
(Level 1) to unobservable microscopic relationships between kinetic energy and structures of particle movement
(Level 4) (Table 2). Coding was not exclusive; any utterance may have more than one code or no codes at all,
with the highest level of marking the final code. I transcribed each interview and segments of talk were labeled
when participants articulated their reasoning about state changes. For each interview question, codes were applied
to each participant utterance, including gestures and embodied actions. I conducted a paired t-test to examine if
students' average reasoning level    increased   from their pre- to post-interview   responses. Given  my focus on
hybridity in movement based on one specific concept, I report on the analysis of one interview question ("How
do you think the particles in the ice are behaving?") that specifically addressed participants' experience of hybrid
embodiment as it relates to science.

Table 2: State Change Coding Scheme

 Interview Prompt
 You might know this already, but things around us, like ice cubes and water, are made up of super tiny pieces
 called particles. I'm going to ask you some questions about the particles in ice (show student a large ice
 cube).
    1.     How do you think the particles in the ice are behaving?
    2.     What makes you think so? (If they mention the ice cube slide or moved around, tell them to imagine
           the ice is completely still.)

 Code                                                                Example Response

 Level 0 - Circular Reasoning: any explanation for why               "Ice doesn't change shape because it is ice."
 behaviors happen without providing additional information,
 i.e., things happen because they are just "the way they are."

 Level 1 - Macroscopic explanation (superficial properties):         "Ice doesn't change shape because it is
 Any explanation that uses observable properties of matter.          hard."

 Level 2 - Macroscopic explanation (energy/temperature): Any         "Ice doesn't change shape because it is
 explanation that uses energy or temperature.                        frozen."

 Level 3 - Microscopic explanation (single factor): Any              "Ice doesn't change shape because the
 explanation that uses the behavior of particles in articulated      particles have high attraction."
 reasoning, but only gives a single factor in their explanation
 (e.g., distance, speed, or energy).

 Level 4 - Microscopic explanation (complex interactions):           "Ice doesn't change shape because the
 Any explanation that uses the behavior of particles in              particles have low energy so the bonds can
 articulated reasoning with multiple connected factors in the        be strong."
 explanation (e.g., distance and energy).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     283                                                 © ISLS
Findings
Overall, the integration of STEP and dance afforded participants the opportunity to explore hybrid movements
that bridged fun and familiar dance embodiments with scientific ones. This hybridity also appeared to support
reasoning across contexts, from dance and science activities to content knowledge post-measures. Throughout the
activity sequence, participants moved their bodies in a variety of ways to support reasoning about the science. A
key pattern that emerged  was     the role of the body in reasoning   about vibration. To represent   ice particles,
participants used a ranged of embodied intuitions from more normative scientific embodiments (e.g., standing
still and shaking or jumping) to dance-based representations (e.g., doing the "wiggle worm" or "slow-mo" dance).
In this paper, I focus on "flossing" as an illustrative example of how participants used dance to reason around
movement and to accent their scientific understanding in new ways.

Hybridity in embodied science learning
Because children's everyday observations of matter tend to lead their assumptions about particle behavior, it can
be challenging to support learning about the observable properties of matter as they relate to particulate behavior
(Talanquer, 2009). For example, children assume that particles in ice are frozen and therefore do not have energy
and cannot move. In fact, solid particles do have energy and vibrate in a rigid lattice structure. While the STEP
simulation is useful for supporting    understandings about  particle distance and movement    over   space, it is a
challenge for young learners to understand that solid particles move but remain stationary. A number of dance-
based movements provided a useful resource in exploring ideas related to vibration. The findings of this paper are
focused on a specific hybrid embodiment that is taken up by participants that supported robust performances on
post-measures related the particles in ice. The following excerpts illustrate one form of hybrid movement that
appears to  have supported  learning   about  how  particles in a solid behave.  To illustrate the   role of hybrid
embodiment in learning about the behavior of particles in ice, Excerpt 1 details a moment when a fun and familiar
dance move "the floss" is taken up to represent vibration (Table 3).

Table 3: Excerpt 1

 1  Facilitator:   Let's look on the screen. How are these particles moving?

 2  Peyton:        Glitchin' out.

 3  Facilitator:   Glitchin' out. Right. Another way we can say that is vibrating. So, solid particles stay in
                   place and they vibrate ((shaking arms and shoulders)). Everybody stand up and vibrate like
                   a solid particle would. ((Students all stand up and start to shake their bodies))

 4  PJ:            Can't nobody floss like this ((moving arms in front and behind of their body)).

 5  All:           ((Other students around PJ begin to laugh and floss))

 6  Facilitator:   Yeah, PJ! That is a good way to vibrate.

        During the second week of the activity sequence, students took on roles as energy sources and observe
how energy effects particles in different states. Excerpt 1 took place while participants were making observations
about how solid particles are moving in the STEP simulation. One participant, Peyton described the particles as
"glitchin' out" (Line 2). This bid was taken up by the facilitator as an opportunity to introduce the concept of
vibration and a more normative embodied representation of standing still and shaking arms and shoulders. This
embodied movement is transformed by another participant, PJ, who responded by performing the well know dance
"the floss" (Line 4). Flossing is a dance move performed by standing in place still while swinging arms, with
hands in fists, from the back of the body to the front and moving hips in the opposite direction (Figure 2).
        Flossing was made popular on social media and exploded due to its performance in music videos and
video games. While flossing was not an explicit aspect of the final choreography in the Frozen dance, it was an
"insider" movement in the context of this performing arts center, and children could be seen flossing throughout
the day (e.g., during free time and lunch). Flossing also often occurred informally during STEP activities that
promoted the exploratory use of the body. However, in this instance PJ spontaneously introduced flossing to move
like a solid particle in science (i.e., standing in place and vibrating). While not scientifically normative, the move
to represent particles with locally recognized dance blended the scientific notion of vibration with a well-known

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    284                                                  © ISLS
dance. Moreover, it anchored students' embodiment in a way that legitimately maps to the verbal descriptions of
vibrating particles as staying stationary but moving.

                              Figure 2. Choreographic movements of "the floss."

         After this moment, flossing was taken up as a legitimate way to represent the trajectory of particles in
ice during later activities. Beyond the overlaps in embodiment, the "unofficial" movement of "the floss" became
central to how students understand   particulate  behavior.   Hybridity both leveraged   the prior knowledge and
experiences of the participants as well as expanded the possible ways of knowing and moving related to science.
For example, Excerpt 2 occurs toward the end the activity sequence. This activity focused on how particles in
different states behave given the macroscopic conditions of an environment (e.g., a container with a lid) (Table
4). After engaging with the mixed-reality simulation as particles, the students re-represented their understanding
from STEP with an embodied model. During the activity, the participants pretended the classroom was a container
and the door was the lid. Beginning as ice particles, the facilitator gave the particles energy until they ran around
the room as gas. Once the door was opened, all the participants ran out of the room like gas particles escaping a
container.

Table 4: Excerpt 2

             1  Facilitator:  If we were particles, what state of matter would we be in right now?

             2  All:          Solid!

             3  Facilitator:  Solid, right. Do solid particles stay totally still?

             4  All:          No.

             5  Lauren:       No, they vibrate! ((Participants start to shake arms and floss))

Excerpt 2 begins with a typical instructional move of opening instruction with a content question (Line 1). At
once, the participants respond with the correct answer that particles in this formation would create a solid (Line
2; Figure 3). Further probing the participants, the instructor calls for more detailed information about particles,
which is returned with another collective response. Immediately after, another participant, Lauren, calls out the
answer, which is next embodied by Lauren and her peers with flossing. This moment demonstrates that the original
embodied connection persisted over the course of multiple activities, as many of the participants took up flossing
to represent vibration in solid particles.

                             Figure 3. Embodied re-representation of solid particles.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     285                                                 © ISLS
Learning gains
Paired t-test results of the 10-question multiple choice measure indicate that individual participants significantly
improved their general understanding about particle behavior (t (17)=-7.071, p < 0.001) from pre-test (mean=3.11,
SD=1.9) to post-test (mean=6.44, SD=0.85).
         Given the specific focus on how hybrid embodied movements supported learning, the analysis of pre-
and post-interviews focused on the first question of the interview protocol: How do you think the particles in ice
are moving? Paired t-test results of the highest level code applied to student responses to this question indicate
that individual participants   significantly advanced their   reasoning   (t(17)=-8.416,  p <  0.001)  from  pre-test
responses (predominately circular reasoning or superficial observations) (mean=0.944, SD=0.53) to post-test
responses (single  and  multifactor micro-level  particle    behaviors) (mean=2.61,   SD=0.77).  Generally,    in pre-
interviews participants focused on macro-level properties of ice to reason around how particles in ice behaved.
For example, most students gave the expected response that particles in a solid were frozen together and could
not move. In post-interviews, most participants (14/18) said that solid particles vibrate (see Table 5). This result
is in marked contrast to previous classroom implementations of the STEP activity sequence focused on modeling
and embodied play where only half the students in post-interviews could accurately describe or demonstrate how
particles in ice behave (Danish et al., 2015). While these previous implementations supported robust learning
gains, participants' beliefs  about  ice particles persisted   despite   experiences  in  the  mixed-reality science
simulation. Given that pre-interviews in this and similar STEP studies showed that the groups were comparable
on their prior knowledge of science, it seems that the dance context contributed to participants' ability to engage
with the conceptual knowledge and practices of science. That is, the dance context that supported hybrid embodied
movements appears to have supported students in moving beyond descriptions of solid particles based on a
surface-level characteristic.

Table 5. Interview Responses

How do you think the particles in the ice       Particles are frozen or         Particles are          Circular
are behaving?                                   don't move                      vibrating              reasoning

Pre-interview                                   13                              0                      5

Post-interview                                  4                               14                     0

Summary and significance
The  integrated sequence   of STEP   and dance   activities  resulted in both learning   gains and   opportunities for
participants to explore diverse  forms of    embodiment.  By   focusing  on moments    of hybridity,  analysis traced
specific movements from their spontaneous enactment to their use as a shared resource for sense-making in
collective activities and individual assessments. In particular, flossing appears to have supported understanding
an unintuitive concept that historically challenged young learners (i.e., that solid particles do in fact move). These
outcomes suggest that scientific embodiments can incorporates local ways of knowing and moving and become a
powerful resource in meaning-making. These results have implications for researchers and practitioners. First,
work should further recognize embodiment as a diverse and hybrid practice. Second, scholars should continue to
encourage the co-construction of hybrid learning spaces in a variety of modalities. Third, this study helps to
articulate how future designs for embodied activity can benefit from moving beyond considerations of analogous
movement (although that is still important) to include a focus on a diversity of movements that, if properly
supported, can blend personally-meaningful movements with scientifically normative ones.
         Overall, the goal of this paper is to highlight the need to understand the diversity of potential body
movements in designing and implementing classroom-based and out-of-school science learning contexts. I argue
that these results further support the central role the body plays in learning and exploring concepts. At the same
time, it expands notions of embodied cognition from the ways a deliberately cued and technologically-enhanced
body might directly interface with science content to include spontaneous new forms of movement that support
learning (Lindgren, 2014). Moreover, this work offers new perspectives on hybridity and the third space--that is,
how an embodied third space can produce and invite new forms of body-based participation for both individual
participants and collectives. In sum, these outcomes can continue to advance computer-supported collaborative
learning contexts, and  in doing  so expand    possibilities for young   learners' future scientific experiences   and
identification (Bell, Tzou, Bricker, & Baines, 2012).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    286                                                   © ISLS
References
Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: Evidence from
       learners' and teachers' gestures. Journal of the learning sciences, 21(2), 247-286.
Azevedo, F. S., & Mann, M. J. (2018). Seeing in the dark: Embodied cognition in amateur astronomy practice.
       Journal of the Learning Sciences, 27(1), 89-136.
Bell, P., Tzou, C., Bricker, L., & Baines, A. D. (2012). Learning in diversities of structures of social practice:
       Accounting for how, why and where people learn science. Human Development, 55(5-6), 269-284.
Danish, J. A., Enyedy, N., Saleh, A., Lee, C., & Andrade, A. (2015). Science Through Technology Enhanced
       Play: Designing to Support Reflection Through Play and Embodiment In Lindwall, O., Häkkinen, P.,
       Koschman,   T.  Tchounikine, P. Ludvigsen,  S.   (Eds.) (2015). Exploring    the Material Conditions     of
       Learning:  The  Computer   Supported Collaborative    Learning  (CSCL)     Conference  2015,  Volume     1.
       Gothenburg, Sweden: The International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Danish, J., Humburg, M., Saleh, A., Lee, C., Dahn, M., Kiefert, D., & Enyedy, N. (2017). A Socio-Cultural
       Framework for Embodied Cognition. Paper presented at the Jean Piaget Society, San Francisco, CA.
Enyedy, N., Danish, J., DeLiema, D., Saleh, A., Lee, C., Morris, N., & Illum, R. (2017). Social Affordances of
       Mixed Reality Learning Environments: A case from the Science through Technology Enhanced Play
       project (STEP).
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of pragmatics, 32(10),
       1489-1522.
Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading research quarterly, 43(2),
       148-164.
Gutiérrez, K. D., Baquedano-López, P., & Tejeda, C. (1999). Rethinking diversity: Hybridity and hybrid language
       practices in the third space. Mind, culture, and activity, 6(4), 286-303.
Gutierrez, K., Rymes, B., & Larson, J. (1995). Script, counterscript, and underlife in the classroom: James Brown
       versus Brown v. Board of Education. Harvard educational review, 65(3), 445-472.
Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg,   M. (2013).   Emboldened    by embodiment:      Six precepts for research    on
       embodied learning and mixed reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 445-452.
Lindgren, R. (2014). Getting into the cue: Embracing technology-facilitated body movements as a starting point
       for learning. In Learning Technologies and the Body (pp. 51-66). Routledge.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The journal of the learning
       sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Ma, J. Y. (2016). Designing disruptions for productive hybridity: The case of walking scale geometry. Journal
       of the Learning Sciences, 25(3), 335-371.
Ma, J. Y., & Hall, R. (2018). Learning a part together: ensemble learning and infrastructure in a competitive high
       school marching band. Instructional Science, 1-26.
Paik, S. H., Kim, H. N., Cho, B. K., & Park, J. W. (2004). K-8th grade Korean students' conceptions of `changes
       of state' and `conditions for changes of state'. International Journal of Science Education, 26(2), 207-
       224
Schwarz, C. V., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Kenyon, L., Achér, A., Fortus, D., ... & Krajcik, J. (2009).
       Developing a learning progression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modeling accessible and
       meaningful for learners. Journal of research in science teaching, 46(6), 632-654.
Talanquer, V. (2009). On cognitive constraints and learning progressions: The case of "structure of matter".
       International Journal of Science Education, 31(15), 2123-2136.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 287                                                     © ISLS
