             Using and Perceiving Emoji in Design Peer Feedback
                             Na Sun, Pennsylvania State University, nzs162@psu.edu
  Elise Lavoué, University of Lyon, University Jean Moulin Lyon 3, iaelyon school of Management, CNRS,
                                        LIRIS, elise.lavoue@univ-lyon3.fr
                      Chulakorn Aritajati, Pennsylvania State University, cya5092@psu.edu
                 Aurélien Tabard, Université Lyon 1 & CNRS, aurelien.tabard@univ-lyon1.fr
                      Mary Beth Rosson, Pennsylvania State University, mrosson@psu.edu

        Abstract: Emoji are often used to express emotions or visually enrich text communications,
        but little is known about the impact of emoji in peer feedback. We conducted a qualitative
        study  on emoji's   roles in peer    feedback  in a small   group  collaborative  design  activity; the
        activity was   conducted    entirely online  as part of a   distance  education   class. Using  content
        analysis on the feedback peers provided, and thematic analysis on transcribed interviews, we
        analyzed how emoji are used and perceived in four types of design feedback. Our analysis
        suggests that emoji increase peers' awareness of affective status, and are also used to mark
        minor    cognitive   feedback   with   a   more    personal    flavor  as   part  of  document-based
        conversations. We found that emoji help to establish a general informality for peer feedback
        activities. We discuss the implications for the design of collaborative learning software that
        supports richer peer feedback.

Introduction
As Värlander argues, "emotions should not be considered as hindering learning. Rather, it underlines the focal
role of emotions in learning as being a natural part of it" (Värlander, 2008). Delivering and receiving feedback
among  peer  learners  is more  than   simply   transferring  information     (Falchikov,  2013;    Jacobs, 1974);  each
emotion-containing communication is influenced by students' emotions at the time of expression (Race, 1996).
With the prevalence   of  emoji and   their  prospects  of  expressing  emotions,    this paper  examines   the use and
perception of emoji in peer feedback.

The role of emoji in peer feedback work
Emoji are a very popular manner of expressing emotions in real-time communication, and have also become
increasingly prevalent   in a range  of social   computing    technologies    (e.g. Twitter,  Instagram,   SNSs).  In an
educational context, Zhang et al. showed that students annotated discussion posts with emoji or tags to signal
their confusions or curiosity; these signals directed instructors' attention to places where students needed help or
further clarification (Zhang, Igo, Facciotti, & Karger, 2017). In this case, the use of emoji rather than text-based
hashtags offered a relatively easy mechanism for conveying emotions. Such findings suggest that the use of
emoji among students may allow for transparent emotional exchanges and further direct instructors' cognitive
efforts. This motivated us to investigate the role of emoji in peer feedback within small groups in online classes
as a way to facilitate social interaction among distance learners.
        One recent work leveraged crowdsourcing intelligence to express emotions in feedback with pictures
versus text (Robb, Padilla, Kalkreuter, & Chantler, 2015).      The designers who created the work being critiqued
felt that both text and emotional images were more "threatening" than an abstract image; they also reported that
the abstract images   were  inspiring. Nonetheless,     text-based  feedback   is more    likely to be  used  for giving
conventional critiques: In a follow up study that examined how crowd workers felt when giving feedback using
abstract images, emotion images and text, Robb et al. revealed that the type of feedback preferred was correlated
with users' cognitive styles, and that over half of the participants valued engagement over clarity (Robb, Padilla,
Methven, Kalkreuter, & Chantler, 2017). Furthermore, some participants who provided feedback said that they
would have liked to use emoji in addition to image-based emotion feedback. Although images have been found
more  expressive  for emotions,   some  users   find   ambiguity    to be  a  desirable  advantage  of   giving emotion
feedback because it is harder to put emotions in words than to use an image, and emoji are prone to ambiguity
due to varying interpretations (Miller et al., 2016).
        In   addition to  expressing emotions    for  the user, the    use of ambiguous    and   playful expressions   of
emotions may   invite  and    leave more     space for  communicative      moves    from  the recipients,   which  could
encourage more social interaction. In this regard, ambiguous and abstract indicators (e.g. emoji) seem consistent
with Jakobson's   model   of  communication    (Jakobson,    n.d.). In  that  model,  the  simple   act of  continuing a

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     296                                                     © ISLS
conversation is valuable. Indeed, emoji have been used to manage conversation (Pohl, Domin, & Rohs, 2017),
and even have been perceived as a more efficient and playful way of expression than text.
         As    a complement     to text-based   comments,   emoji    may provide   additional   emotional   and  situational
information to the recipients. For example, a study that examined senders' intentions in US-based messaging
reported   that  emoji  are used   as a  social tool to engage   the recipients in   a conversation,   to  convey  intended
meaning, and to solicit certain reaction from the recipients, even when the senders intended nothing specific in
the emoji themselves (Cramer, de Juan, & Tetreault, 2016). More generally, in a quantitative study of Twitter
data  (Pohl   et al., 2017), emoji    have  been used   as message   decoration,   to  replace  words,  and   to enrich text
messages with respect to tones or meaning, in addition to serving the function of emotional annotation.
         Despite the fact that emoji have become prevalent as part of a growing and universal language in text-
based communication, researchers have not yet understood the role of emoji in remote collaborative learning
tasks. Emoji seems to be a promising but under explored option for engaging online learners in conversations
with  additional  situational   information.  We   are  especially interested  in  its potential  in expressing   emotional
information in online learning environments where students often feel isolated and yearn for social connections
with  others   (Sun,  Rosson,   &  Carroll,  2018).  However,    emoji  are  subject   to misinterpretations  according    to
individual    differences  and  varied  rendering  mechanisms    across  devices   (Miller  et  al., 2016). Although    it is
possible that reacting to others' learning artefacts may stem from different interpretation and lead to differing
emotional   states,   our study focuses    on the  impact  of such   emotions   in interactive   moves    and interpersonal
relationships situated in social learning activities. We now turn to our study of emoji as a mechanism for adding
emotional content to peer-based critiques as part of a collaborative learning activity.

Research setting
Situated   in collaborative  design   activities among   group   members    of an  online  bachelor   degree  program,   we
designed an online feedback tool called Emoviz to probe how peer feedback with emoji-entries affects the social
interactions and relationships among online students.

Selecting appropriate emoji for emotion feedback
Previous studies found that emoji can be perceived very differently within and across platforms, and thus lead to
senders' and receivers' misunderstandings (Tigwell & Flatla, 2016). In addition, there are certain emoji with
complex    emotion    interpretations  that can  cause  high  levels of  sentiment   misconstrual.   There  seems   to  be a
tradeoff between communicative expressiveness and the consistency of emoji interpretation. To wit, the simpler
an   emoji is,   the  more  uniform   are people's   interpretations (Miller et al.,   2016).  To make    our studies  more
generalizable    and  comparable   with   existing studies, we   adopted  the  Unicode    standardized    emoji, displaying
them consistently as a Portable Network Graphics (png) file to minimize the cross-device differences.
         We      used  existing emotion     frameworks   and  emotion-related     learning    models  (D'Mello,    Lehman,
Pekrun, & Graesser, 2014; Pekrun, Goetz, Titz, & Perry, 2002; Plutchik, 2003) to we select eleven emotions
that are relevant to academic peer feedback and design activity. These emotions include joy, surprise, praise,
pride, love, anger, confusion, anxiety, disapproval and boredom. Considering the functions of emoji in social
media research, we further included playfulness to extend the corpora of emotions in a broader sense (Pohl et
al., 2017).   As  Table   1 shows,    we  chose  three  emoji as representatives   for    each emotion  and   proceeded    to
investigate the effectiveness of each one with a survey distributed to crowdworkers.

Table 1: Selecting representative emoji for relevant emotions for feedback

       joy                                 n.s.             confusion                                 p < .001
       surprise                            n.s.             anxiety                                   n.s.
       praise                              p < .001         disapproval                               p < .001
       pride                               n.s.             boredom                                   p < .001

       love                                p = .001         playfulness                               p < .001
       anger                               p < .001

         We obtained 72 responses from Amazon Turk where we asked MTurkers to rate "To what extent do
you agree that the following emoji represent <selected emotion>," on a Likert scale from 0 (Strongly disagree)
to 100 (Strongly agree), excluding three that failed the quality test questions (we inserted two questions with

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        297                                                      © ISLS
clear answers to select the qualified respondents for emoji interpretations for our survey). Our participants are
all Americans (n = 69, 36 females), aged between 19 to 65, at an average age of 35.48. A majority of them
(88.4%) used emoji in their online communications at least sometimes. Based on the General Linear Model to
compare repeated measures, we found significantly different emoji for all emotions except for joy, surprise,
pride, anxiety at the significance level of .001 with a Greenhouse-Geisser correction (see Table 1 highest
emoji for  each emotion  is underscored).   Regardless of    the significance, the underlined    emoji in  Table  1
indicates which emoji candidates of each group were rated highest in the triplet. After this process, we selected
the highest-crowd-rated emoji  to represent each  emotion,   except for  the confusion   emotion;  in that case  we
chose the higher-rated emoji that was also graphically consistent with the other set (i.e.,    instead of    ).

Emoviz: An emoji-enabled online annotation tool
Emoviz  is the online feedback tool  depicted in Figure   1, offering customized   regions   for comments    in text
and/or emoji. Users can drag a rectangle over anywhere in a PDF file to leave comments (see Figure 1); the
emoji included in the software were carefully selected through the aforesaid crowdsourcing study. They are
displayed  against a light-yellow rectangular background;    any  emoji  can   be appended    to the end  of a  text
comment.   We  adapted  Emoviz for  within-group  feedback   activities: students can upload     documents in   PDF
format, give and receive peer feedback directly on the document. In addition, when comments are generated in
the PDF document, a notification is sent to the PDF owner every 24 hours so that the submitters are aware of the
feedback made to their document.

           Figure 1. Emoviz User Interface for Giving and Receiving Feedback on PDF documents.

Method

Procedure
Our study took place in an User-centered Design course offered by an online bachelor degree program of a
Northeastern American   university. Across  the semester,  the 50  students  are  tasked with  a mix  of  individual
assignments and group projects. In particular, our study built on two individual assignments that were embedded
within a larger group project: one is the persona assignment, which is individual work but supposed to have
other group members' feedback; another is the low fidelity prototype turned in PDF by individuals, aiming to
yield a final prototype that the whole group agrees to proceed with (either building on top of one individual's
submission or collaboratively generating a new prototype with all individuals' input). At the 8th week of the
Fall 2017, we recruited students for the aforesaid two design activities via an opt-in invitation: all students of the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  298                                                    © ISLS
class were invited via Email link sent from Emoviz system, preceded by a call for participation sent by the
course instructor on behalf of the research team and followed by a post-survey.

Data collection and analysis
Throughout this deployment of Emoviz, we collected both quantitative and qualitative data and analyzed the
emoji use and feedback activities among our participants to triangulate our findings (see Table 2). As for the
quantitative data, we collected survey responses after the first design activity with regards to their demographic
information,  group   cohesiveness, frequency   of using   emoji   and  emotional   awareness   of other  members  in
general. To  measure   group   cohesiveness, we  employed     six  items from   a well-established  scale (Podsakoff,
Niehoff, MacKenzie, & Williams, 1993). Only 7 students out of the entire class filled in this survey, and group
cohesiveness range from 5.29 to 6.29 on a 7-point Likert scale.

Table 2: Triangulated data for Emoviz use and feedback activity

                                           Data source               #
                                           Comment                   51
                                           Survey                    7
                                           Interview                 6

         To gather qualitative data, we recorded Emoviz use with respect to the uploaded design documents and
comments left during the collaborative process. The first author applied open coding and axial coding to analyze
the feedback content at the unit of a comment (n = 51) by first categorizing feedback content learners have left
in the document, and then scrutinizing the emoji's role in different types of feedback. Specifically, we began
with an    existing feedback   model that  distinguish   cognitive   feedback   (e.g. summarization,   specificity of
problems, explanations) and affective feedback (e.g. praise, mitigation) (Nelson & Schunn, 2009); in parallel we
adopted elements of grounded theory to label feedback with emergent codes (Strauss & Corbin, 1998).
         In addition to classifying feedback content and form, we interviewed six Emoviz users remotely over
Google Hangout after the design activities had been completed. We chose to use Google Hangout because this
particular real-time  communication   tool   is quite   familiar  to online  students  (Sun  &  Rosson,   2017). The
interviews lasted 53 minutes on average, and were transcribed by the first author. Using MAXQDA12 software,
the first author generated initial codes and reviewed and iterated the codes on using thematic analysis (Braun &
Clarke, 2006). In particular, we found these themes: general emotional connections felt in the remote group;
task reflection; other tools they have used for group activities in the class; usability issues of Emoviz; barriers
they faced   in using emoji or  expressing emotions     with  other  peers; and the  effect of using and  interpreting
emoji. For the purposes of this paper, we only present the codes from interview related to the use of emoji and
the perceived functions of using emoji in peer feedback activities.

Participants
For our study, 13 students uploaded at least one design assignment for peer feedback activities from six groups
in Emoviz.   However,   only   10 students representing   three   different groups   received  comments   from   other
members, while the other three students' uploaded design work was unmarked. Among the participants, two
were female, and half were Caucasian, followed by African American and Mixed Race. All but one student
were working full-time while pursuing online degrees. Most students were in their fourth year of study (mean
age = 33.14) and thus can be viewed as relatively experienced online learners.

Results
Among    the 13  documents  that  received comments     from  peers,  we    found 51  comments   from eight  different
learners; 22 of these contained a total of 30 emoji. Based on an existing cognitive and affective feedback model
(Nelson & Schunn, 2009) and open-coding of feedback that was not covered by that model, we identified four
types of feedback towards the design work or described scenarios in Emoviz (note that these are not mutually
exclusive, see table 3): 1) cognitive feedback (e.g. specific suggestions); 2) affective feedback (i.e. positive or
negative); 3)   conversational feedback (e.g.   raising attention,  showing  idiosyncrasy,  and responses  to others'
comments);   4)  comparative   feedback based    on feedback     givers' self-reflections.  Accordingly,  by  a  close
examination on each comment and the context in which the comment is made, we identified different roles
emoji play in these different types of feedback situations. In the following sections, we use the notation that

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     299                                                   © ISLS
combines the data collection name and the participant ID in the following sections. For example, IP28 refers to
participant 28 in the interview data, whereas DP28 refers to the same person's data in the content analysis.

Table 3: 4 Types of feedback and the use of emoji

 Type             Cognitive                Affective                Conversational              Comparative
 # of comments    19                       43                       20                          10
 # of emoji       0                        28                       18                          7
                  DP13:                    P13: "Clean looking      DP38: "She is rice          DP33: "Well written
                  "You probably want       recap screen option!     crispy lol...nice           short story. So much
 Examples         "the" instead of "to"        "                    detail though         "     more interesting
                  here"                    DP13: "Great size        DP27:                       than the bio I wrote:)"
                                           option!          "

Emoji were used only with non-negative feedback
Emoji were   more  pervasively used in  the   comments   that  expressed  favorable  review    of design  elements;  in
contrast criticisms or suggestions for improvement were shared as text only. More specifically, we observed that
all the cognitive feedback (e.g. suggestions for improvement or critiques) was articulated in a text-only manner.
However, participants wrote 28 positive comments to recognize, compliment or make jokes about others' work,
and the remaining 23 comments were either neutral or negative, for example being used to ask for clarification,
point out errors and to provide specific suggestions for improvement.
        26   out of the  30 emoji and   emoticons    (e.g. :-) or  :)), such  as     ,      , were  used  to  praise or
acknowledge   others' good  work, for   example    commenting   on  a   clean layout   or a   specific design element.
Although the numbers are too small to make a statistical comparison, there seemed to be a tendency to prefer
emoji when commenting on graphical elements, such as persona photos or design sketches. For example, DP21
commented on a graphic photo at corresponds to DP28's persona description, "What a serious looking man.
Doesn't look like he's actually smiling             ," whereas DP28 responded with a                .
        Only two comments leveraged emoji for negative emotions (i.e.            , which, instead of being a critique
to the writing or design work, was a reaction to the story characters' unhealthy habits or behaviors. For example,
DP40 commented "Whoa!          " in response to DP33's persona description "Bob ordered nine cheese burger".
In general,    were used most often (10 times), followed by         (8 times), and        (4 times); meanwhile, most
of negative emoji were never used (e.g.     ,    ,    ).
        Our follow-up interviews revealed that students chose not to use emoji in negative comments because
the emoji available for negative emotion (e.g.,      ), were perceived as too aggressive for criticism that they
wished to express in a mild way. For example, IP27, a stay-at-home Mom with 5 kids, would never use a sleepy
face "with people you don't truly know that well- you only know them through group experience." IP25, a senior
male student, also felt it more appropriate to use positive emoji, thinking that "the thumbs down could be a bit
aggressive, especially if you are trying to approach from a `yes, and' perspective and not the `yes, but' one."
        Indeed,   honest expressions    of critiques  were    also associated    with  perceived      closeness among
collaborators: IP38 suggested that he feels comfortable joking with familiar teammates, those who he regarded
as "friends" even without emotional tones, such as "lol," as opposed to "when you are saying a statement you
want to make sure the receivers understand you are not being serious what you are saying". The unfamiliarity
and lack of intimacy prevent students of a virtual group from giving negative comments more frankly.

Signaling insignificant cognitive feedback with emoji markers
A closer scrutiny on the 22 comments that contain emoji revealed that, aside from the association between emoji
and positivity, these comments were often informal, casual, and light-hearted ­ anything but serious call for
attention. Examples include DP 38's comments on the described character, such as "Ha! They are lazy              ", and
DP13's reaction to the drawings of four types of bread in a User Interface sketch: "Oprah `I Love Bread' and so
do I        ". Such comments seemed to contain a hint by the comment giver that a comment is meant to be
expressing emotions at the moment (e.g. cheerful, surprised, etc.)  IP33 appreciated the expressiveness of emoji,
commenting "without emoji it is just hard to convey what you are feeling about something - it is a very simple
(way) of doing that." IP40 liked how emoji can articulate her real reaction in response to the described scenario

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   300                                                      © ISLS
at the moment: Looking at the document she commented on, she said, "That emoji face I put there was exactly
the big sad face I had after I read it (giggling). It is like a `Wow'. You know a jaw drop reaction." She liked
how the facial expressions of emoji in the feedback represented her real reaction.
        IP34  further  noted  that   emoji of  different facial expressions   enabled   more    nuanced   expression   and
capture of feedback givers' emotional statuses: "(if) you have somebody laugh with tears flowing from it- I tell
you there is a person who is cracking up or the person is really amused compared with a mild amusement.
Yeah,  so emoji  do make    differences    in those occasions."  He   further   explained  that   the explicit  emotional
annotations with emoji   denoted     one's real social indication   better than  audio,   "if a person    uses emoji,  you
precisely get that indication, but other than that, (like) audio chat without visuals, it is almost as limited as just
text without any emoji." In this regard, emoji provide subtle social cues that enlighten the social interaction in
an online environment where emotional statuses are hard to convey or perceive.
        In addition to articulating the emotions right at the moment, emoji also helped to provoke an interesting
conversation, by communicating       an open   posture of  being  engaged    or  sociable. For    instance, 12  out of  20
conversational comments were decorated with emoji. IP34 attributed emoji to cues that remote collaborators
"can easily pick and follow," since use of emoji indicates "when somebody is relaxed and engaged when we are
having those conversation compared with someone (who) is not really engaged." Therefore, use of emoji gives
students like IP34 a sense of "if somebody is open to more communication." IP40 suggested that emotional
elements evoked through humor also help online student get through course projects easier as they come and go
from one course to another. For instance, after reading DP 27's description about an old grandma user "her
bones snap, crackle and pop with each movement" (Figure 1), DP38 joked about how the character is extremely
vulnerable, pointing  out "she    is rice  crispy lol...nice detail though       ," and   another  team   member    DP13
responded to the joking comment with a          . DP38 explained in the follow-up interview that he liked to leave
the impression  of himself  being    humorous,    and that emoji  or  its  alternative, such   as "lol",  allowed   him to
express his personality more boldly. IP32 also found emoji help to create feelings of closeness to their peers
who  used  them. As   another example,     DP31   joked  about  the looking   of   the  persona   picture along  with  the
described scenario in text format when the persona was hesitating of quitting his job: "Judging by the look of his
picture, he plans to quit his job    "
        Whether    emoji  are used   to express   emotions   or initiate  an interesting  conversation,   comments     that
contain emoji should not be taken seriously (as opposed to how to improve the design work or to praise). Such
non-serious signals are also perceived and accepted by feedback receivers - students interpreted the traditionally
"negative emoji" in a positive way, appreciating the reaction from the readers. For example, IP33 regarded               ,
    and     altogether as positive feedback, articulating that he likes them. As he elaborated, "it shows that she
read it and she was not really disagreeing but empathizing with what I have written." In this way, emoji help to
assure that designers' creative   composition,    such as  illustrative  depiction  of  a character   or situation, in the
design work has been understood in the intended way. IP27 also found it a relief to see others' funny comment
on her carefully composed design persona, "the fact they talked about how they enjoyed, the funny comments in
return saying that they enjoyed it makes me think that `okay, good'. It gave me a good feel as to whether or not
what I was trying to say came across right, or what I said is alright to say." This use of emoji extended how
people usually use emoji to complement a text and express their emotions (Zhou, Hentschel, & Kumar, 2017)
with enriched semantics of feedback content.

Self-Reflection and Conversational Feedback
Surprisingly, we   found  a number     of  feedback   comments   that   referred to a   feedback-giver's    own  work   or
situation. For example, DP33 wrote "Well written short story. So much more interesting than the bio I wrote :)"
in DP40's submission as a compliment while comparing it with his own submission. Description in a persona
also sometimes evokes a sense of self-reflection, for example, DP27 felt a desirable state in reflection on her
own tight schedule when reading DP13's work, commenting that "Nice job! I kinda envy Noah's availability. :-
)" In another example, after reading the isolated living atmosphere of a grandma described in a scenario, DP38
expressed his empathy with the written character by DP27 in a sense of humor with "Thanks for the guilt trip
    ." It seems the reviewing experience is not only a critique session about a peer's work quality, but also
sometimes a venue to share personal reflections with reference to personal work or experiences.
        Meanwhile, we coded 20 comments as conversational feedback because of their dialogic nature, as if
the feedback givers are talking with the feedback receivers in a social chit-chat: For instance, DP27 commented
on the scenarios with an obvious conversational tone: "This is so very true, I empathize with this user! For
sure!". The emotional sentiments aroused by the design were depicted via emoji; Vice versa, as a feedback

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     301                                                       © ISLS
receiver, IP27 found comments with emoji more impressive and fun to be remembered.            In particular, she took
content related comment as indicators that her original meaning has been clarified enough to be understood by
the reader to the effect that is intended by the designer.

Discussion
In contrast to previous studies that looked at emoji in message-based communication or social media (Miller et
al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2017), our study is the first to examine the role of emoji in a group learning activity. Our
study confirms the speculation from previous studies on emoji' advantage of representing ambiguous emotion
feedback content (Robb et al., 2017). We describe how learners utilized the toning-up effects of emoji to signal
non-verbal cues and personality, such as sense of humor and facial expressions. Embedding emoji as part of
feedback options allows for more casual and in-situ marks of one's own emotion, and thus enhances perceived
sociability in CSCL environments (Kreijns, Kirschner, Jochems, & van Buuren, 2007).
         We also found that emoji served to initiate and manage conversation as part of a learning activity, as
documented in social media contexts (Cramer et al., 2016). In this sense, emoji seemed also to carry over the
norm of being socializing with other users as in social media platforms. Emoji in the peer feedback scenarios are
used by  feedback   givers  for  initiating informal  and  light-weighted   conversations. They   are interpreted by
feedback receivers as a social posture of the other interlocutor being friendly and responsive to their creativity
and personality. In addition, we also observed the role of emoji to in eliciting empathized self-assessment and
generating feedback based on social comparison with one's own design work. Therefore, our study points to the
design opportunities of leveraging emoji to add more nuanced peer feedback content, such as depiction of in-
situ emotional responses, and to elicit personal interaction among learners.
        Further, we    propose   emoji  can enrich  the markers   to specify  the anchor points  during the learning
process beyond using emotional vs non-emotional markers (Lavoué, Molinari, Prié, & Khezami, 2015). With
the lightened tones of emoji alongside the text comments, feedback givers can mark the "insignificance" of the
feedback, enabling more nuanced layers of feedback types in addition to affective and cognitive feedback. In
particular, feedback givers' use of emoji hints at the informal nature of the particular comment, and thus helps
feedback   receivers' distinguish  casual   content for entertainment,  fun  or  other engaging  gestures for social
purpose from serious comments, which aligned with the conventional critique formats (Robb et al., 2015).

Limitation and future work
Although we have found evidence of using emoji to support peer feedback interaction, we admit the potential
limitation introduced    by our  small  sample  size   and the   particular online class environment    where group
members are relatively cohesive. Although we do not have enough data to investigate this point, the use of
emoji may also encourage more casual discussions which may hinder knowledge building dynamics. Besides,
our interviews asked participants to recall their emoji use and response after finishing the peer feedback task,
which may lead to memory lapse and inaccurate descriptions.
         As discussed in the literature, the interpretation of emoji depends on platforms and situational factors.
For the purpose of the study, we controlled the number and design of emoji to learning related emotions. Future
research could expand to open-ended use of emoji and study their relationship to learners' perceived emotions.
More quantitative research could also examine the association between emoji use and feedback perceptions.

Conclusion
Our  study presents   the first attempt of  involving  emoji  in the context  of  design feedback activity, and also
demonstrates  ways    of  engaging distance   students  with  emoji  as feedback   options in an asynchronous   peer
learning activity. Our findings revealed how emoji are associated with different types of feedback, and indicated
the potential of emoji to transform a formal peer critique task into a more emotion-aware collaborative process.
We also provide implications of utilizing informal language cues, such as emoji, in designing learning systems
that consider and support socioemotional dimensions of online interaction.

Acknowledgement
Our research was conducted as part of the EmoViz project funded by the Région Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes. We
thank our student participants and Emily Wenk, the instructor who helped us recruit students.

References
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology,
         3(2), 77­101.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     302                                                  © ISLS
Cramer,   H., de   Juan,  P.,   &   Tetreault, J.  (2016).  Sender-intended   Functions   of  Emojis  in   US  Messaging.
          Proceedings     of  the   18th International   Conference     on  Human-Computer       Interaction  with    Mobile
          Devices and Services, 504­509. http://doi.org/10.1145/2935334.2935370
D'Mello, S., Lehman, B., Pekrun, R., & Graesser, A. (2014). Confusion can be beneficial for learning. Learning
          and Instruction, 29, 153­170. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2012.05.003
Falchikov,    N. (2013).   Improving     assessment     through   student  involvement:   Practical solutions     for aiding
          learning in higher and further education. Routledge.
Jacobs, A. (1974). The use of feedback in groups. The Group as Agent of Change, 408­448.
Jakobson, R. (n.d.). I960." Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics.". Style in Language, 350­377.
Kreijns,  K., Kirschner,     P. a., Jochems,     W.,  & van  Buuren,    H.  (2007).  Measuring   perceived    sociability of
          computer-supported       collaborative   learning environments.    Computers    &  Education,  49(2),   176­192.
          http://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2005.05.004
Lavoué, É., Molinari, G., Prié, Y., & Khezami, S. (2015). Reflection-in-action markers for reflection-on-action
          in  computer-supported      collaborative     learning  settings. Computers     and  Education,     88, 129­142.
          http://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2015.05.001
Miller, H., Thebault-Spieker, J., Chang, S., Johnson, I., Terveen, L., & Hecht, B. (2016). "Blissfully happy" or
          "ready  to fight":    Varying    Interpretations  of Emoji.    Association for  the Advancement      of Artificial
          Intelligence, 259­268. http://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2011.0179
Nelson, M. M., & Schunn, C. D. (2009). The nature of feedback: How different types of peer feedback affect
          writing performance. Instructional Science, 37(4), 375­401. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11251-008-9053-x
Pekrun,   R., Goetz,  T.,    Titz,  W.,  &  Perry,   R. P.  (2002).  Academic    Emotions   in   Students' Self-Regulated
          Learning   and   Achievement:       A   Program   of   Qualitative  and   Quantitative  Research.    Educational
          Psychologist, 37(2), 91­106. http://doi.org/10.1207/S15326985EP3702
Plutchik, R.   (2003).    Emotions    and  life:  Perspectives   from   psychology,  biology,  and  evolution.    American
          Psychological Association.
Podsakoff, P. M., Niehoff, B. P., MacKenzie, S. B., & Williams, M. L. (1993). Do substitutes for leadership
          really substitute for leadership? An empirical examination of Kerr and Jermier s situational leadership
          model. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 54(1), 1­44.
Pohl, H., Domin, C., & Rohs, M. (2017). Beyond Just Text: Semantic Emoji Similarity Modeling to Support
          Expressive   Communication???          ACM    Transactions    on  Computer-Human       Interaction, 24(1),   1­42.
          http://doi.org/10.1145/3039685
Race, P. (1996). The art of assessing 2. NEW ACADEMIC-BIRMINGHAM-, 5, 3­6.
Robb, D.   A.,   Padilla, S.,   Kalkreuter,   B.,  &  Chantler,  M.  J.  (2015). Moodsource:     Enabling  Perceptual   and
          Emotional Feedback from Crowds. Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference Companion on Computer
          Supported Cooperative Work &#38; Social Computing, 21­24.
Robb, D.   A.,   Padilla, S.,   Methven,   T.  S.,   Kalkreuter, B., &   Chantler, M.  J. (2017).  Image-based     Emotion
          Feedback. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems - DIS '17 (pp.
          451­463). http://doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064665
Strauss, A.,  &   Corbin,  J.   (1998).  Basics   of qualitative research:  Techniques    and procedures   for  developing
          grounded theory . Sage Publications, Inc.
Sun, N., & Rosson, M. B. (2017). Finding the Community in Online Education: It's in the Instructors' Eyes.
          Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Sun, N.,  Rosson,   M.    B., &   Carroll, J.  M.  (2018).  Where    is Community    Among    Online Learners?:    Identity,
          Efficacy   and  Personal    Ties.   In  Proceedings    of the  2018 CHI    Conference   on Human      Factors   in
          Computing Systems (p. 292). ACM.
Tigwell, G. W., & Flatla, D. R. (2016). " Oh that ' s what you meant!": Reducing Emoji Misunderstanding.
          Proceedings     of  the   18th International   Conference     on  Human-Computer       Interaction  with    Mobile
          Devices and Services Adjunct (MobileHCI '16), (Cmc), 859­866. http://doi.org/2957265.2961844
Värlander,    S. (2008).  The    role of   students'   emotions   in formal   feedback  situations.  Teaching     in  Higher
          Education, 13(2), 145­156. http://doi.org/10.1080/13562510801923195
Zhang, A. X., Igo, M., Facciotti, M., & Karger, D. (2017). Using Student Annotated Hashtags and Emojis to
          Collect Nuanced Affective States. Proceedings of the Fourth (2017) ACM Conference on Learning @
          Scale - L@S '17, 319­322. http://doi.org/10.1145/3051457.3054014
Zhou, R., Hentschel, J., & Kumar, N. (2017). Goodbye text, hello emoji: mobile communication on wechat in
          China.  In Proceedings      of the  2017   CHI Conference     on  Human   Factors   in Computing    Systems   (pp.
          748­759). ACM.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         303                                                     © ISLS
