           Expansively Framing Social Annotations for Generative
                        Collaborative Learning in Online Courses
                        Christopher D. Andrews, Grant T. Chartrand, and Daniel T. Hickey
                      andrewch@indiana.edu, gchartra@indiana.edu, dthickey@indiana.edu
                                                   Indiana University

         Abstract: This study extends the use of expansive framing, a discursive pedagogical practice
         for  supporting    generative    (i.e., transferable)  collaborative     learning,  to  a   fully online
         undergraduate Educational Psychology course. This study examined how students expansively
         framed   their engagement     in  a social  annotation  activity  across  the  semester.    Quantitative
         analysis confirmed the extent to which interactions in the annotation activity were expansively
         framed and found a significant correlation between expansive framing and open-ended exam
         performance.    Qualitative   analyses    confirmed    that expansively     framed  interactions   made
         numerous    connections     between     disciplinary course    knowledge    and    nascent  disciplinary
         teaching practices. More generally, the study showed that expansive framing can be easily and
         successfully used to support generative collaborative learning in online courses.

Introduction
Expansive framing (Engle, 2006; Engle, Lam, Meyer, & Nix, 2012) is a recent framework for explaining and
encouraging generative learning--learning that is more likely to transfer to subsequent contexts. The research
on transfer   is  plentiful   and  has  traditionally  focused    on    learners'  abilities to  create    abstract  mental
representations  of the content   to be   transferred (Day    & Goldstone,  2012).   Engle   (2006)   argued   that, from a
situative perspective, "transfer is more likely to occur to the extent that learning and transfer contexts have been
framed to create what is called intercontextuality between them" (p. 456).
         Intercontextuality is created when learners make enough connections back and forth between a learning
context and a transfer or imagined future context (Engle et al., 2012). This intercontextuality indicates that the
social context--the who, when, where, how, and why--expands to encompass both the learning context and the
transfer context. According to Engle (2006), "When this [intercontextuality] occurs . . . the content established
during learning is considered relevant to the transfer context" (p. 456). If learners perceive the learning context
and the transfer context to be relevant to each other, it is more likely that transfer will occur. Engle suggested
that this intercontextuality can be created through what she referred to as expansive framing.
         Expansive framing uses prompts or cues (usually from the instructor) that position learners as authors
of their own ideas and encourage learners to frame their immediate learning context across time (relevance of
prior learning to current learning context and relevance of current learning to potential future contexts), places,
topics, and participants. These "meta-communicative signals" (Engle, 2006, p. 456) create intercontextuality by
helping  learners see   prior learning  as  relevant  to  immediate   learning  contexts    and  the potential for   current
learning to  be  useful in  other  contexts  and  situations. Expansive    framing   pushes   learners to  (a) be   publicly
recognized as authors of the connections they are making to other learning contexts, (b) be held accountable for
their contributions, and (c) feel encouraged to adapt and generate new connections. Expansive framing contrasts
with bounded     framing   which   (a) focuses    on  the  contexts  defined    and/or provided    by  the  instructor, (b)
discourages learners from making connections or considering other contexts of use, and (c) expects learners to
explain the ideas of a text or the teacher (Engle et al., 2012).
         This study aims to extend the work of expansive framing in three innovative ways. First, studies of
expansive framing have primarily focused on the instructors' use of expansive framing in classrooms such as an
elementary   classroom  (Engle,    2006),  tutoring  sessions   (Engle  et al., 2011),  a   secondary  science  classroom
(Engle  et al., 2012),  and   a hybrid  second    language   undergraduate   course    (Mendelson,   2010).  More    recent
research has    acknowledged    the  role of the   learner and  examined    whether    learners' perceptions   and   beliefs
aligned  with   expansive   framing    (Lam,     Mendelson,   Meyer,   &   Goldwasser,    2014);   however,    few   studies
examined whether students took up expansive framing in their own discourse within a course (e.g., Fasso &
Knight, 2015). While expansive framing was originally conceived as a pedagogical tool used by teachers to
encourage learning, we reconceptualized expansive framing as a learning tool used by students to promote their
own  generative   learning.   This   view  also  prioritizes  students' agency    in taking   up   expansive   framing  for
learning. One aim of this study is to examine how and to what extent students took up expansive framing.
         Second,  we    argue   that expansive    framing  is relatively   easy to implement     in  asynchronous    online
settings and would likely support generative learning in those settings. A search of the literature returned few

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        33                                                       © ISLS
instances of expansive framing in fully online settings. Fasso and Knight (2015) incorporated expansive framing
into  a study  of adult  learning in  a hybrid a/synchronous    professional    development  course for  teachers  from
various  contexts  (e.g., P-12   education,   vocational  training, and   higher  education). Their    study found  that
"expansive framing of the discussions led to broadened perspectives, enhanced collaboration and sharing, and
evidence of the transfer of ideas across contexts that served to enrich the ideas of others" (p. 279). Hickey and
Rehak (2013) and Jaber, Dini, Hammer, and Danahy (2018) successfully implemented elements of expansive
framing  in asynchronous    online   settings by encouraging   learners   to connect disciplinary  knowledge    to their
relevant  disciplinary   practices;  however,  their studies   were   based  off  Engle's   prior  work  of  productive
disciplinary engagement (Engle & Conant, 2002). Therefore, a second aim of this study is to examine expansive
framing in a completely asynchronous online setting.
         Finally, this study extends expansive framing by combining it with the use of a social annotation tool.
Annotation tools are well known in the CSCL community for supporting anchored discussions, or discussions
anchored to an artifact such as a course reading (van der Pol, Admiraal, & Simons, 2006). Novak, Razzouk and
Johnson's (2012) literature review found mixed results from using social annotation tools for learning. Most of
those studies, however, focused on attitudes rather than learning outcomes. Social annotation has been shown to
foster elaborated discussions (Eryilmaz, van der Pol, Ryan, Clark, & Mary, 2013; Gao, 2013). Social annotation
aligns with expansive framing because it allows learners to layer their own expansively framed contexts directly
on top of content discussions and readings. The third aim of this study examines whether social annotation tools
can support the use of expansive framing.

Research questions and methods
This study asked (1) to what extent were students' interactions expansively framed, (2) how was expansive
framing related to individual learning outcomes, and (3) what was it about expansively framed interactions that
appeared generative.

Context and participants
This study took place in an online undergraduate Educational Psychology course for pre-service teachers which
took place in the Spring 2018 semester at a large Midwestern university. The first author was the lead instructor
for this course. There were 17 student participants from four different majors (visual arts education, n=10; world
language   education,   n=4;  physical   education,  n=2;  dietetics, n=1).   During    the 16-week    course, students
annotated   23 course   readings  using  the  online social   annotation   tool Hypothesis   (https://web.hypothes.is/).
Hypothesis allows students to select portions of text and directly annotate it by adding their own comments.
Hypothesis allows users to engage in further conversation via threaded comments on the direct annotations. The
course  readings  consisted   of  academic  articles that discussed   key  theoretical  principles from  several  major
learning theories. The students were asked to engage in the annotation activity but were not graded on their
participation in the annotations. Students were, however, asked to reflect on peers' and their own annotations on
a weekly  reflection    which was   graded. The  prompt   for  engaging   in the  annotation  activity was   deliberately
worded to encourage students to expansively frame their engagement and their annotations (see Table 1).

Table 1: Annotation activity prompt

  Before you start reading, you should think about a specific context for your engagement in the reading and
  annotations. To do this, you should:
  1. Pick a developmental level (e.g., Elementary, Middle, Secondary, etc.) you are interested in teaching.
  2. Pick a content standard(s) from the State Standards that you are interested in focusing on.
           As you read and make web annotations, consider the relevance of the reading and annotations as
  applied to your context. At the end of most units, you will be designing a lesson plan that you could actually
  use in a current or future classroom as part of our Theory/Practice Workshops. Picking a developmental level
  and   content-area standard(s)    should  help you  think    about  how    what you   are  learning  applies to  the
  Theory/Practice   Workshops     as  well as other  potential future contexts   (e.g., classroom,  student  teaching,
  other classes, etc.).
           In this class we will be using web annotations using a web tool called Hypothes.is to participate in a
  larger discussion of articles that we will read as well as facilitate making connections to other content such
  as other articles we are reading in the class or content you may read or interact with outside of class. The
  web   annotations  can  also   help us   make  connections   to   prior experiences   you  may   have  had,  current
  experiences you are having, or potential future experiences you may have (e.g., your field experience, future
  classroom, or work-related experiences).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      34                                                     © ISLS
        At the end of the course, students took a written exam that included two different prompts relating to
learning theory. One prompt provided students with an op-ed article written in the New York Times arguing for
the pedagogical practice of lecturing. Students were asked to analyze that article from two different theoretical
perspectives of their choice. For each theory, students needed to (1) describe what learning looks like in that
theory, (2) describe a specific concept or aspect of that theory, (3) explain how that theory and concept would
disagree with the article, and (4) provide an appropriate link to the course readings to back up their argument.
The   second prompt   asked  students to (1) design     an assessment  and  two   activities for a   specific academic
standard in their content area provided for them by the instructor, (2) describe how a particular learning theory
informed their design, and (3) provide an appropriate link to the course readings. The exam was designed to
assess students' understanding of the major learning theories discussed in the course and their ability to apply it
to classroom design. Within the constraints of a typical teacher education course, this exam was a reasonable
proxy for a transfer measure that was indicative of generative learning and was likely to transfer to subsequent
educational and professional contexts.

Table 2: Coding scheme for aspects of expansive framing

Code             Description                                               Example
Time Past        Refers to a past time that what was learned then          "I had an English teacher senior year..."
                 can, should be, or has been used.                         "This reminded me of last semester..."
Time Future      Refers to a future time in which what is learned          "In my future classroom I'd like to..."
                 can, should be, or would be used.                         "Teachers need to..."
Place            Refers to another place outside of the course in          "In my field experience..."
                 which what is learned can, should be, or has been         "At the high school..."
                 used.                                                     "At home..."
Topic            Refers   to a   non-course  topic   in which    what is   "In my content area of visual arts..."
                 learned can, should be, or has been used.                 "My    Pluralism   in   Education     course
                                                                           talked about this..."
Participants     Refers to person(s) other than the teacher that one       "Pre-service   teachers    could   use   this
                 can,  should    be, or has communicated      what one     to..."
                 has learned.                                              "This really applies to students..."
Accountability   Holds others accountable for sharing knowledge            "How would you...?"
                 by   directly   engaging   others   with  questions  to   "Leslie's   comment     helped     me  think
                 encourage threaded discussion and/or responding           about..."
                 directly to a peer's statement by answering and/or        "I agree with your claim that..."
                 referring to a specific question/comment.
Authorship       Presents themselves as authoring knowledge.               "I think this is important..."
                                                                           "We also should consider..."

Data collection and analysis
All of the annotations during the course of the semester were exported from Hypothesis. This data included the
text of students' annotations, the annotated text from the article (if applicable), the level of the annotation (for
threaded comments), and other metadata.
        To address the first research question, these annotations were first coded for enlistment of expansive
framing using  the coding   scheme   in  Table 2 following    from Engle   et al. (2012).  This  coding    revealed the
proportion of annotations that were expansively framed with each aspect. To determine how expansive those
annotations were, we developed a second coding scheme (Table 3). For this degree of expansiveness coding
scheme, the first two authors coded 20% of the annotations separately and achieved an inter-rater reliability of
0.70 using Cohen's Kappa. The first author then coded the remaining annotations alone.
        To address the second research question and determine whether students' engagement in expansive
framing appeared   to be generative   to a  transfer task, we  ran a  Pearson  correlation   between  students'   mean
expansive framing  score  (i.e., degree  of expansiveness)    and  student  scores on  the   written final exam.  Two
students dropped the course before the final exam and thus were not included in this analysis. To address the
third research question, we  drew    upon   discourse   analysis (Wooffitt, 2005)   to identify  what  students   were
actually doing in their annotations that might lead to generative learning. Looking across the dataset, we were

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      35                                                    © ISLS
interested in patterns that emerged around how students used framing in their annotations and how that framing
shaped the subsequent discourse in the threaded annotations.

Table 3: Coding scheme for degrees of expansiveness

Code          Description                                   Example
     U        The annotation makes no reference to any      "I'm   not   sure  I fully  understand     the  difference
Unframed      aspect of expansive framing.                  between the two."
     0        The annotation references at least one        "Further analysis and application of what is learned
 Bounded      aspect of expansive framing, but the          can occur when knowledge of subject matter exists.
              annotation is confined to the course and      How the subject matter is organized and connects to
              content from the current reading.             itself matters."
     1        Uses at least 1 aspect of expansive           "I  think  the things  that   they learn   in  school  will
 Slightly     framing; Uses vague descriptions or           have an effect on their lives outside of school, it just
Expansive     connections to aspects of expansive           depends    on  the   student   and  how      much   of   the
              framing; AND/OR Does not go beyond            information they retain. I do agree though that the
              the framing established by the original       teachers should try to have an understanding of the
              document or annotation it responded to.       students' lives outside of school."
     2        Uses more than 1 aspect of expansive          "In high school, I had a Spanish teacher that taught
Moderately    framing; Uses specific examples when          English in Spain for about 7 years. She was fluent
Expansive     connecting to aspects of expansive            in Spanish so I thought I would learn a lot during
              framing; OR Explicitly orients towards        my time in her class. It was the complete opposite,
              others in a future setting.                   which     is  interesting   to   me  because       of  this
                                                            highlighted portion. Just because she was an expert
                                                            on the topic, she could not teach it well."
     3        Uses more than 2 aspects of expansive         "This  is  a  great  way   to engage  students     in  their
    Very      framing; Uses specific examples when          learning   and  understanding    of  art  history.  When
Expansive     connecting to aspects of expansive            analyzing a painting, students must first understand
              framing; AND Explicitly orients towards       how to use contextual clues to describe and explain
              others in a future setting.                   what   the   painter might  have   been   communicating
                                                            through his/her work. Taking a step further, to help
                                                            students   improve    their   flexibility in   transferring
                                                            knowledge, a teacher might ask, `What if the figure
                                                            on the right was looking toward the viewer, rather
                                                            than away. What might we say about the painting
                                                            then?'"

Results
The first major finding was that students did indeed reference aspects of expansive framing in their discourse
(see Table 4). Across the course, students generated a total of 459 annotations. Students referenced Participants
most often (76%    of student annotations),  followed by   Authorship    (71%)   and  Topics   (61%).    The   types of
Participants referenced most often were teachers and students. The types of Topics referenced varied but were
generally related to three different categories: their own content area, other courses they were enrolled in, or
general education topics and activities. Students did not reference all aspects of expansive framing equally,
however. Students did not reference Places (28%) or Accountability (39%) as often. This shows that students
have expansively framed their discourse, favoring some aspects over others.
         The coding results of degree of expansiveness provides further evidence that students used expansive
framing in their discourse. Only nine (2%) of the 459 annotations were unframed and 12 (3%) were bounded to
the course and course   reading. This means    that more   than 95%    of  the   annotations were     at least slightly
expansive and 62% of the annotations were coded as moderately or very expansive.
         The Pearson    correlation between    students    average score   on    expansive   framing      (degrees   of
expansiveness) and their written final exam score was 0.56 (p<.05). In other words, students who performed
better on the final written exam also, on average, were more expansive in their annotations. The final exam
assessed students' ability to analyze educational   practices from  a  theoretical  perspective  as   well  as  design

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   36                                                      © ISLS
towards   educational   practices grounded  in  theory. These results   were promising but   warranted a qualitative
exploration to examine how students used expansive framing for generative learning.

Table 4: Coding results of students' use of expansive framing in their annotations

                                   Code                           #          %
                                            Aspects of expansive framing
                                   Time Past                   179          39%
                                   Time Future                 227          50%
                                   Place                       129          28%
                                   Topic                       279          61%
                                   Participants                349          76%
                                   Accountability              179          39%
                                   Authorship                  324          71%
                                               Degree of expansiveness
                                   U (Unframed)                   9          2%
                                   0 (Bounded)                   12          3%
                                   1 (Slightly expansive)      152          33%
                                   2 (Moderately expansive)    203          44%
                                   3 (Very expansive)            83         18%
                                   Total                       459          100%

          Discourse analysis of the annotations revealed several patterns that appeared both productive (Engle &
Conant, 2002) and generative. One such pattern was that students were connecting disciplinary practices in their
own content areas to the disciplinary knowledge in the course. Students made connections to their own content
areas in  all but  four of the course  readings  (19 of 23)  and  in 92  annotations (20%  of all annotations). The
example below (see Table 5) shows a threaded conversation between students on an article about assessment.

Table 5: Threaded annotations connecting content-area disciplinary practices to course content (Excerpt 1)

Anchor text from Shepard (2000):
Students also reported that they had to be more honest about their own work as well as being fair with other
students, and they had to be prepared to defend their opinions in terms of the evidence. (p. 12)
1. Leslie, direct annotation (coded as moderately expansive)
This  is  directly applicable  to  art critiques where   students must   analyze  and  evaluate the   work of   their
classmates, and give them feedback. They must also receive feedback on their own work and be prepared to
respond to this feedback (which requires self-assessment).
     2. Bethany (coded as moderately expansive)
     I feel like this can also apply to students studying a foreign language, if they are speaking to another student
     that is more skilled at the language than they are, then they can learn more and get assistance if they are
     struggling on vocabulary.

In this example, the original article was discussing implications of self-assessment practices and Leslie, a visual
arts education student, points out a "direct" connection to her own content area and provides an example of a
disciplinary  practice  in her content   area. Likewise,  Bethany,   in her reply to Leslie, sees  an application to
students in her content area of foreign language learning. Both students expansively framed their learning by
recognizing the relevance of prior knowledge from their own content area and made productive generalizations
from the content to disciplinary practices in their own content area. Additionally, Bethany's response suggests
she read Leslie's connection to art ("this can also apply", emphasis added). Connecting to one's own relevant
contexts and being exposed to other relevant contexts likely promotes productive and generative collaborative
learning.
          Another  pattern  was   students making  connections   to  general disciplinary contexts and  practices of
teachers. This pattern was found in all but one of the course readings (22 of 23) and in 156 annotations (34% of
all annotations). Table 6 shows a threaded conversation about deficit approaches to education.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     37                                                  © ISLS
Table 6: Threaded annotations connecting general disciplinary practices to course content (Excerpt 2)

Anchor text from Paris (2012):
Simply put, the goal of deficit approaches was to eradicate the linguistic, literate, and cultural practices many
students of color brought from their homes and communities and to replace them with what were viewed as
superior practices. (p. 93)
1. Rose, direct annotation (coded as moderately expansive)
In one of my other classes, we are learning about Native American education. One thing that I have learned is
that by   eradicating student's culture, can make  them   feel unimportant   and   unvalued.  I  think  this is a really
important idea to keep in mind in a future classroom because students will not feel motivated or engage if they
feel like their voice is not important.
     2. Jamie (coded as very expansive)
     I agree with you and in my own experiences, I have seen school trying to do special holidays related to
     China such as the (Chinese New Year), but after talking about it with my friends from China, they all say
     that the school   got some  of the  major information    incorrectly. For example,    there  is no such    thing as
     fortune cookie and lion dance in mainland China on Chinese New Year. Although it is great to see that
     American schools are embracing different cultures from other countries, it is also important to keep in mind
     as future teachers that we get the facts correct before presenting to the students to avoid conflicts between
     teacher and student.
          3. Instructor (not coded)
          As I mentioned in the mini-lecture, this is very similar to the difference approaches to education where
          we try to incorporate other cultures but in a way that "fits into" the dominant culture (which is why
          there are so many inaccuracies as you mentioned). So how do we value our students ways of doing and
          knowing and being in our classrooms in more culturally sustaining ways?
              4. Brittney (coded as very expansive)
              In one of my other courses (pluralism in education), we discussed this and similar questions. One
              of the  best  solutions we  thought  of  was to  bring  in people,   that held a  certain view    point or
              background, to talk to students. Bringing in people who have first hand experience, in a culture for
              example, allows the students to feel valued if they are from that culture and the others to learn
              about them in an authentic way.
                  5. Marrin (coded as moderately expansive)
                  I am in class with Brittney and took a lot away from this topic in class. We also talked about
                  how bringing in an outside resource can help bring a different learning experience than a daily
                  teacher can lead. By simply having a new face leading sometimes allows students to be more
                  engaged but also different methods of teaching is important in some instances. Another aspect
                  we talked about is that a specific person teaching a subject can go a lot further than what the
                  teacher may be. For example, if a white male were to be teaching a lesson about american
                  indians students may not be as interested because he obviously would not be a direct source of
                  their culture, though if an american indian were to come into class and teach a lesson students
                  would value the information he shared much more.

In this annotation thread, Rose connects the content of the reading to another course she is taking and views her
learning  as  relevant  to the  disciplinary practices of  "a  future classroom."    Jamie   responds   by   sharing  an
experience that validates Rose's prior learning. Jamie concludes her response by explicitly orienting towards
herself and others in the class ("as future teachers . . . we") in sharing an example of how this applies to general
disciplinary  practices ("get   the facts correct" about   cultural   activities). This  type  of comment       was   not
uncommon throughout the annotations as students often used the phrase, "we need to" or "as future teachers we
should" when writing about future applications of the content for students and teachers. The instructor of the
course (the first author) responds to Jamie and connects back to the course content, followed by a question that
asks students to imagine how they might apply the content of the article to their own future students. Brittney
replies to the instructor's question by providing an example from another course she is enrolled in. Marrin states
she is "in class with Brittney" suggesting that her response is not oriented toward Brittney, but rather towards
others in the class. Marrin then reiterates Brittney's suggestion, validating her contribution, and connects to
general disciplinary practices by briefly suggesting that "different methods of teaching" may be helpful. Finally,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     38                                                      © ISLS
Marrin shares an additional example of a disciplinary practice that connects to the previous responses. This set
of threaded annotations showed students sharing examples of prior learning that was relevant to the content they
were engaging in and generalizing the content to their future disciplinary practices.
          A final example (see Table 7) demonstrates a pattern that was less common--found in 18 of 23 course
readings and 46 annotations (10%)--but was productive for student's engagement and likely to be generative.
Most  of  the annotations  that were   coded   for   accountability were   simply    students responding  to  a   peer's
annotation. However, some of the most productive responses occurred when students requested ideas from their
peers. These questions often led to students sharing potential disciplinary practices from their own content area
or for general education practices.

Table 7: Threaded annotations stemming from a student question (Excerpt 3)

Anchor text from Ito et al. (2013):
Further,  when individual   competence    is assessed  based   on grades,  test  scores, and  other standardized   and
summative    metrics, one  student's success  highlights  another   student's  failure. Environments   like the   HPA,
Quest to Learn, or Clarissa's online writing group have a different dynamic (p. 48)
1. Anna, direct annotation (coded as very expansive)
How   can we  create  this in a classroom?   What    can we   as teachers  do  to create an   environment   where  one
student's success does not highlight another's failure, because standardized tests and evaluative exams will be
inevitable. How can we create a group of students that genuinely enjoys collaborating and wants to do well for
the good of the class, and not themselves, when we will undeniably have tension between individual students
because of personality difference and difference in interest? Please respond w ideas: I'm genuinely interested
in how we can do this! (emphasis in original)
     2. Abby (coded as very expansive)
     These are great questions that I'm wondering about myself also! For your first Q "What can we as teachers
     do to create an environment where one student's success does not highlight another's failure?" One example
     that popped into my head is how during many classes I took during high school (and even in college) the
     teacher/prof would state "the highest grade was a 98 and the lowest was a 32" or something like that. I feel
     like this isn't appropriate to do, especially in a high school classroom where it is VERY easy to find out
     which student it was that the highest or lowest score belonged to. I feel like announcing the scores out loud
     kind of pits the students against one another, and highlights failures. Instead of the teacher announcing the
     scores, they should talk to the struggling students privately and see what needs to be done to bring their
     grades up. There's no point in discouraging the students by stating how much better another student did
     compared to them. That's just one example for the first question, but I'd also like to hear more from others!
     (that goes for the rest of the questions, too)
     3. Brittney (coded as moderately expansive)
     Personally I have found goal setting to be a great way to motivate students without creating a competitive
     environment.  I'm  currently in  a 1    credit swimming     class, and at   the beginning  of  the semester   the
     instructors asked us to write down several goals we wanted to accomplish. I thought this activity helped
     make the class more personal to all of us and helped us appreciate when we or others accomplished their
     goals. This task would obviously look very different in a school classroom, but I think there are always
     ways to apply goal setting to our individual content areas.

In this example, Anna asks a series of questions on how to implement the ideas from the original article to their
own potential future educational practices. At the end of her questions Anna emphasizes her request by using
bold font to catch the attention of her peers and elicit their responses. Anna is promoting the authorship of her
peers and holding them accountable for their ideas by requesting them to share. In Abby's response, she recalls
a bad example from a prior situation (highlighting students' failures) and suggests a general alternative practice
(talking with struggling students privately). Abby ends her annotation with a request for more responses ("I'd
also like to hear  more from   others!").  Brittney's response   shares  a prior  experience  that is relevant (setting
goals) to the questions Anna asked and suggests that this practice could be applicable in anyone's content area.
Holding   students accountable  for  their own  ideas  by asking    questions,  although  not  used as  often  as other
framing aspects, encouraged generative learning.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      39                                                   © ISLS
Discussion and implications
This study provided initial evidence that online course readings can be expansively framed, that students can
collaboratively take up expansive framing in online annotations, and that expansive framing appears to result in
more generative learning. While acknowledging that a course with pre-service teachers may have been
particularly conducive, expansive framing via Hypothesis enabled these students to collaborate in productive
threaded conversations by connecting content-specific and more general disciplinary practices to the
disciplinary knowledge presented in course readings. As Engle and colleagues (2006; 2012) have argued, these
connections encourage generative learning which will likely transfer to future educational, personal, and
professional contexts. This study showed that expansive framing is possible in online settings. Additionally, the
prompt (see Table 1) could easily be modified to function in other similar online courses, especially pre-
professional courses where students are working towards specific future contexts.

References
Day, S. B., & Goldstone, R. L. (2012). The import of knowledge export: Connecting findings and theories of
         transfer of learning. Educational Psychologist, 47(3), 153­176.
Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing interactions to foster generative learning: A situative explanation of transfer in a
         community of learners classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 451­498.
Engle, R. A.,  &  Conant,    F. R.  (2002). Guiding    principles  for fostering productive   disciplinary engagement:
         Explaining an emergent argument in a Community of Learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,
         20(4), 399­483. http://doi.org/10.1207/S1532690XCI2004_1
Engle, R. A., Lam, D. P., Meyer, X. S., & Nix, S. E. (2012). How does expansive framing promote transfer?
         Several proposed explanations and a research agenda for investigating them. Educational Psychologist,
         47(3), 215-231. http://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2012.695678
Engle, R. A., Nguyen, P. D., & Mendelson, A. (2011). The influence of framing on transfer: Initial evidence
         from a tutoring experiment. Instructional Science, 39(5), 603­628.
Eryilmaz, E.,  van  der   Pol,  J., Ryan,   T., Clark, P.    M., &   Mary, J.   (2013). Enhancing   student knowledge
         acquisition  from     online  learning   conversations.     International    Journal of  Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 8(1), 113-144.
Fasso, W.,   & Knight,    B. A.  (2015).    Knowledge     transfer in community-embedded       learning:  A case  study.
         Journal of Education Research, 9(3), 267­281.
Gao, F. (2013). A case study of using a social annotation tool to support collaboratively learning. Internet and
         Higher Education, 17(1), 76­83. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2012.11.002
Hickey, D. T., & Rehak, A. M. (2013). Wikifolios and participatory assessment for engagement, understanding,
         and achievement in online courses. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 22, 407­441.
Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salor, K., ... Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connected
         learning: An agenda for research and design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media and Learning Research Hub.
Jaber, L. Z., Dini, V., Hammer, D., & Danahy, E. (2018). Targeting disciplinary practices in an online learning
         environment. Science Education, 102(4), 668­692. http://doi.org/10.1002/sce.21340
Lam, D. P., Mendelson, A., Meyer, X. S., & Goldwasser, L. (2014). Learner alignment with expansive framing
         as a driver of transfer. In J. L. Polman, E. A. Kyza, D. K. O'Neill, I. Tabak, W. R. Penuel, A. S. Jurow,
         ... L. D'Amico (Eds.), The International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 689­696). Boulder,
         CO: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Mendelson, A. (2010). Using online forums to scaffold oral participation in foreign language instruction. L2
         Journal, 2(1), 23­44. Retrieved from https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8xs1r2tq
Novak,  E.,  Razzouk,  R.,   &  Johnson,  T. E.  (2012).  The    educational use   of social annotation  tools in higher
         education: A literature review. Internet and Higher Education, 15(1), 39­49.
Paris, D. (2012).  Culturally    sustaining  pedagogy:    A   needed   change   in stance,   terminology,  and practice.
         Educational Researcher, 41(3), 93­97. http://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X12441244
Shepard,  L.  A.  (2000). The   role  of assessment    in a  learning  culture. Educational   Researcher,  29(7), 4­14.
         Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9780470690048.ch10/summary
Wooffitt, R. (2005). Conversation analysis and discourse analysis: A comparative and critical introduction.
         London, UK: SAGE.
van der  Pol, J., Admiraal,     W., &  Simons,   P. R.    J. (2006).  The affordance    of anchored discussion    for the
         collaborative    processing     of  academic     texts.   International   Journal    of  Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 339­357. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-006-9657-6

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        40                                                   © ISLS
