From Material Objects to Social Objects: Researching the Material-
 Dialogic Spaces of Joint Attention in a School-Based Makerspace

                                   Kristiina Kumpulainen and Anu Kajamaa
                        kristiina.kumpulainen@helsinki.fi, anu.kajamaa@helsinki.fi
                                             University of Helsinki

         Abstract: In  this paper,   we  investigate the material-discursive spaces  of joint attention
         between students and their teachers in a school-based makerspace. Drawing on sociocultural
         theorizing, Bakhtinian inspired notion of the "dialogic space", and material-discursive onto-
         epistemology, we introduce the concept of social object to explain how material objects can
         turn into joint attention and meaning-making in ongoing interaction. Video recordings (75
         hours) of 94 students' aged 9 to 12 years old and their teachers' interactions in the makerspace
         were analyzed. The study shows how the material objects of the makerspace were enacted into
         social objects via joint attention about the objects, around the objects and with the objects. The
         study  demonstrates the need   to rethink  the meaning  and role of material objects in  novel
         educational makerspaces for establishing and negotiating joint attention, mediating learning
         opportunities and tensions.

         Keywords: social object, material-dialogic space, joint attention, educational, makerspace,
         engagement and learning

Introduction
Emerging digital technologies and infrastructures are changing educational practices with new possibilities and
tensions for interaction and learning (Kumpulainen, Mikkola, & Rajala, 2018; Rasmussen & Ludvigsen, 2010;
Säljö, 2010). Hence, continual investigation of how people interact with new cultural tools, the meanings they
give to these tools, and how these new tools are hybridized with and across people, existing tools and practices is
essential. In this paper, we focus on how tools, in specific, material objects of a novel educational makerspace are
enacted in the material- discursive spaces of joint attention between students and their teachers. We argue, that at
present, little attention has been directed to the meaning and role of material objects in mediating students' joint
attention, engagement and learning in novel, material-rich educational makerspaces, encompassing the generative
use of both traditional and more recent technologies, such as, 3D-printers, electronics, and design apps. Our study
holds that that joint attention, that is, the human capacity to coordinate actions and attention with others on an
object (Tomasello, 2000) is crucial for collaborative meaning-making and problem-solving, and it creates the
foundation for social, cognitive and emotional learning (Bruner, 1995). It is hence important to generate new
knowledge on the ways in which material objects of educational makerspaces can turn into joint attention in
ongoing interaction with possibilities and tensions for students' engagement and learning.
         Educational makerspaces prescribe a constructionist model of student-centered pedagogies in which
students can work on personally meaningful Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics (STEAM)
design projects, where they can make choices about their activities: simultaneously navigating through several
fields of knowledge and using novel technologies that enable them to externalize, share and build ideas into
concrete material objects (Halverson & Sheridan, 2014; Honey & Kanter, 2013; Peppler, Halverson, & Kafai,
2016). Emerging research around makerspaces suggests that they can foster students' creative problem-solving,
STEM learning and 21st century skills, including digital literacy (see e.g. Honey & Kanter, 2013; Kafai, Fields,
& Searle, 2014; Lindtner, 2014; Martinez & Stager, 2013). However, more research is deemed necessary to
generate a more comprehensive understanding about the educational potential of makerspaces.
         We know from earlier body of research that achieving and maintaining joint attention, collaboration and
knowledge co-construction are important but demanding activities on their own right (Bruner, 1995; Ludvigsen,
2012). This complexity related to achieving and negotiating joint attention and meaning is likely to increase in
educational makerspaces in which students work on complex interdisciplinary design challenges that encompass
not only processes of creating specific material objects supported by a wide range of technologies and media, but
also cognitive, emotional,  relational and cultural  processes surrounding the use  and construction of     material
objects  (Kumpulainen, Kajamaa,    &   Rajala, 2018).   There  are hence  important insights  to be  gained    from
researching the material-dialogic spaces of joint attention between students and their teachers in educational
makerspaces as to identify learning opportunities and tensions that can inform further educational design and
support.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   352                                                    © ISLS
Conceptual background
Drawing on sociocultural theorising (Vygotsky, 1986, 1997), Bakhtinian inspired notion of the "dialogic space"
(Wegerif, 2011), and material-discursive onto-epistemology (Barad, 2003, 2007), in this study, we introduce the
concept of social object to explain how material objects can turn into joint attention and meaning-making in
ongoing interaction in an educational makerspace. In our conceptualising, we do not automatically view material
objects as social, but only then when they are integrated and taken up in the material-discursive activity. We
consider social objects as transactional, facilitating joint attention and productive exchanges among those who
encounter them (Knorr-Cetina, 1997; Simon, 2010).
         Vygotsky   and  his     co-investigators seminal   sociocultural  work    on tool-mediation,    widens   our
understanding of how humans, through tool-mediated activities, transform the environment in which they live
(Vygotsky 1986; Vygotsky & Luria 1994). Vygotsky saw material-semiotic tools as constitutive of human activity
and a prominent driving force for the development of human mind and culture (Vygotsky, 1986, 1997). For
Vygotsky, language was the tool of tools, however, he did not undermine the mediational role of material objects
(i.e. tangible tools and artefacts) for human learning and development. In fact, the centrality of materiality in
human activity advocated by the sociocultural theories remind us of how social action and tangible and conceptual
(signs and  language)   tools are   intertwined   (see also Ingold,  2010;  Mäkitalo,  2011).   Material  objects are
particularly important as they carry cultural knowledge both for the individual and collectives about their history,
purpose and use, including values and ideologies. Furthermore, material objects can act as mediational means for
personal and/or  collective  remembering   (Cole,   1996;   Wertsch, 2002),   and enhance  students'  joint  attention,
engagement, learning and development (Wartofsky, 1979; Paavola et al., 2004; Kumpulainen, Kajamaa, & Rajala,
2018).
         Sociocultural  studies  often refer to the Bakhtinian   (1986)  notion of a  `dialogic  space'  as a specific
communicative    event  that  evidences  exploration,    problematization  and  elaboration  of  diverse  views   and
understanding in reasoned dialogue (Wegerif, 2011; Mercer et al., 2010). We extend this idea by introducing the
notion of material-dialogic space. Following Hetherington & Wegerif (2018), we hold that a material-discursive
emphasis can be used to extend the original dialogic account of the production of meaning in a way that it re-
focuses attention on the multiple `voices' of the material in co-mediating students' joint attention, engagement
and learning. In the material-dialogic spaces, the material and discursive are seen as entangled and intra-acting,
with phenomena performed as a result of ongoing intra-actions. Hence, the notion of intra-action underscores the
mutually  constitutive, entangled   nature   of   matter   and meaning   (Barad,   2007).  These  intra-actions   and
performances generating from them, to which both people and materials contribute, co-create material-dialogic
spaces with implications to ontological, epistemic, social, and ideological processes.
         In this paper, we   empirically investigate   the  material-dialogic spaces  that constitute joint  attention,
engagement and learning between students and their teachers in an educational makerspace. To this end, we ask;
How do material objects turn into and function as social objects in the material-dialogic spaces of joint attention?
and How do social objects create opportunities and tensions for students' engagement and learning?

Empirical study
The empirical data stem from a city-run comprehensive school. The school follows the national core curriculum,
which has been defined locally. The local curriculum of the school stresses design learning, which is considered
to enhance  students'  creative  problem-solving    skills across  the curriculum. The    school strives for  learner-
centeredness and for innovations in learning and teaching as expressed in its local curriculum. As a response, the
school has recently introduced a new educational makerspace, the FUSE Studio as part of its elective courses.
         The FUSE   Studio    is an educational   makerspace,   `a choice-based   digital infrastructure for  STEAM
learning' (see Stevens & Jona, 2017). The technological infrastructure of the FUSE Studio offers students with
different STEAM challenges that `level up' in difficulty like video games. The challenges include Spaghetti
Structures, Jewellery Designer, Robot Obstacle Course, Keychain Customiser, Electric Apparel, Coaster Boss and
Solar Roller. The challenges are accompanied by various tools, such as computers, 3D printers and other materials
(e.g., a foam rubber, a marble, tape and scissors), as well as instructions on how to process the challenges.
         Each FUSE challenge is designed to engage students in different STEAM topics and skill sets. The
challenges have been carefully structured to introduce students to new ideas and to support them through more
complex iterations of those ideas. Students can choose, based on their own interests, which challenges they want
to work on, when and with whom. They can choose to work alone, in pairs or in small groups. There is no formal
grading or assessment by teachers. Instead, by using photos, video or other digital artefacts, students can document
their completion of a challenge, and the completion unlocks the next challenge.
         Altogether, 94 students aged 9-12 years old and their teachers (six male and two female teachers) took
part in the study. Due to the elective nature of the course, the groups consisted of students from several classes.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     353                                                   © ISLS
Group 1 consisted of 32 students (22 boys and 10 girls), Group 2 consisted of 30 students (19 boys and 11 girls)
and Group 3 consisted of 32 students (19 boys and 13 girls). Each group was supported by two to four teachers
and teaching assistants. At the beginning of the autumn, each group had one 45-minute FUSE session a week.
Later in the autumn, each session was extended to 60 minutes.

Methods
The primary data comprise 75 hours of video recordings of students carrying out design challenges in the FUSE
Studio makerspace. The recordings were collected intermittently every week over a period of one semester by our
team of researchers with four cameras in total. The episodes significant to our research focus in this paper, were
transcribed and analyzed.
        The video data were analysed using interaction analysis methods that took account of verbal, visual and
material conduct in the students' and teachers' activity in the makerspace (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). The data
were approached inductively by first approaching the video corpus as a whole and then focusing on selected events
in greater depth (Derry et al., 2010). In particular, we were interested in those moments in the video data that gave
evidence of the emergence of material-dialogic spaces of joint attention among the students and their teachers.
Central to our analysis is a multi-step, multi-phase recursive analysis process, following the ethnographic logic of
inquiry (Canstanheira, Green, & Dixon, 2009). For this, we watched the videos several times in an attempt to
identify the regularities and patterns in the data source (Roth, 2005). Selecting interactional episodes evidencing
the emergence and negotiation of joint attention (see also Gresalfi, Martin, Hand, & Greeno, 2009), we were able
to trace how material objects turned into and began to function as social objects, mediating students' engagement
and learning opportunities.

Major findings
Our findings reveal three distinct, yet often overlapping, interactional processes during which the material objects
of the makerspace developed into social objects in the material-dialogic spaces of joint attention between the
students and their teachers. Namely, the study shows how the material objects of the makerspace were turned into
social objects via joint attention and social interaction about the objects, around the objects and with the objects.
We shall illuminate these three dominant manifestations of social objects in the vignettes below. These vignettes
also make visible how  the   material dialogic spaces of joint attention created opportunities  and    tensions for
students' engagement and learning in the makerspace.

Vignette 1: Hey, what's this `hole thing'?
This vignette illuminates a material-dialogic space of joint attention in which the students are wondering and
experimenting about the use and functioning of a FUSE Studio design software, supported by the teacher. The
vignette demonstrates the students' sense-making about the material objects in the educational makerspace. Here,
it becomes clear how engagement with and learning to use the advanced technological tools of the FUSE Studio
makerspace is pivotal for gaining access and authority in making activities in this space.

        1. Student 1/Mel: Hey, what is this hole thing?
        2. Teacher: What thing?
        3. Student 1/Mel: Hole. That hole.
        4. Teacher: Yeah you're supposed to make a hole there.
        5. Student 1/Mel: What hole?
        6. Teacher: Or what?
        7. Student 1/Mel: No, I mean what is that hole?
        8. Student 2/Anne: Yeah, what does it do?
        9. Teacher: Is it that it turns transparent for a while so you can... Click on it again so it goes
        into the hole-mode. [girl clicks]
        10. Teacher: Yeah so it shows that you can, it turns transparent so you can see through it. If
        you have that kind of situation that your planning requires you to be able to look through it.
        11. Student 1/Mel: What do we do now that we're ready?
        12. Student 2/Anne: We should probably look at the video.
        13. Teacher: Look at the directions, I can't remember by heart.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  354                                                    © ISLS
         14. Student 1/Mel: You're guiding it now Anne, I can't be using that thing [the laptop] the
         whole time.
         15. Student 2/Anne: Okay. So, let's continue. [clicks open the directions video on the website]
         16. Student 1/Mel: This is so slow... We have done that already.
         17. Student 2/Anne: Okay, new video. [girls continue watching, teacher leaves]

In this example, two   girls are sharing a  laptop  and working  together on   a design  challenge the   Keychain
Customizer. They are designing a model of a keychain but are unsure of the software Tinkercad's commands. For
that reason, they ask for the teacher's help. The teacher suggests that they try out the hole-command (line 9). He
does not demonstrate using the command himself but encourages the students to do it. Then, the teacher explains
what the command does and why one might use it (line 10). When the students ask what to do next, the teacher
guides the students to look at the directions, like Anne suggests herself (12). By asking the students to do so, the
teacher confirms a  practice  advocated  by the educational   makerspace  that  students should try to   use other
resources before asking for a teacher's help. Consequently, the material-dialogical space of the students' joint
activity is expanded to involve the set of resources found in the website to support the students' independent
engagement with the challenges and the associated technology. Therefore, the teacher points to the rules of the
task and refocuses the students on it. This makes Mel assign the computer turn to Anne (line 14) who agrees (line
15). When Mel and Anne start looking for the directions, the teacher stays and listens to their discussion. When
they are refocused on the task, the teacher leaves.

Vignette 2: The stickiness of social objects

                                     Figure 1. 3D printer as a social object.

Our analysis of the data reveals that often times the social objects of the educational makerspace functioned as 'a
glue' that brought the participants, both  students  and teachers, together   around the material  objects   of the
makerspace to jointly observe, wonder, discuss and/or share, as demonstrated by the above picture (see Figure 1).
Often times, in these situations joint attention was achieved by gesture and other non-verbal modes of interaction.
These material-discursive spaces were filled with silence and everyone intensively observing what was happening
whilst the technology (such as 3D printer) or a human (a student or teacher) constructed or developed something
with the material objects. We could also identify conversations about the matter and its meaning situated in the
present, the students explaining what was happening or giving instructions about alternative ways of working or
using other material objects than those available in the makerspace. Excitement and interests, and emotional

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   355                                                 © ISLS
engagement in general were made visible by non-verbal and verbal communication in the material-dialogic spaces
around social objects.

Vignette 3: Messing around with ones' own social objects
Our third vignette illuminates an alternative or, in fact, a competing material-dialogic space of joint attention
constructed into being in the FUSE Studio makerspace around a material object. In this case, the student's own
mobile phone. Here, the students are engaged in another activity they have found more meaningful instead of
working on a FUSE design challenge. That is, they are playing around the Clash Royale game with their mobile
phones.

        [teacher walks into hallway to check on boys]
        1. Student 1/Pekka: They're just playing...
        2. Teacher Greg: Hey, what game do you have going on here?
        3. Student 1/Pekka: They're playing Clash Royale...
        4. Teacher Greg: Hey, put Clash Royale in your pocket and games away.

In this episode, the teacher walks into the hallway where a group of boys are working on a Coaster Boss design
challenge. One of the students Pekka in the group responds immediately to the teacher's presence by explaining
why their work is not coming along ("They are just playing", line 1). The teacher has a strong stance with his
arms on his waist which can also be interpreted as a nonverbal sign of authority as he asks the students to stop
playing the game. (line 4). The students obey the teacher's request and continue working on the FUSE design
challenge. Overall, this example demonstrates the co-presence of at least two material-dialogic spaces that are
performed in parallel, that is, working on the design challenge and playing the digital game. The co-presence of
multiple material-dialogic spaces is enhanced by the fact that the online world and students' mobile phones are
also commonly used in the FUSE Studio makerspace for the design challenge activities and their documentation.
The teacher's actions in the vignette can be seen as an attempt to contain and constrain the dialogical-material
space of the students' activity. However, it also demonstrates how digital tools define and alter the nature of the
material dialogic space and the objects of joint attention.

Vignette 4: Making a Dream Home
Vignette 4 demonstrates how material objects intra-acted in the material-discursive spaces of joint attention as
explicit mediational means to explain with. In this example, the students are working on a Dream Home design
challenge.

        1. Student 1/Tara: I would like to turn this, so I could get to the other side.
        2. Student 2/Hanna: Me too, because I don't even know how to get there.
        3. Teacher John: Well wait, let's see who is furthest along in Dream Home. Eric and Ian, have
        you rotated the angles there, so you can get to the other side of the house?
        4. Student 3/Rick: I have!
        5. Teacher Greg: Hold down the mouse's button and then spin.
        6. Teacher John: Okay, Rick can come instruct.
        7. Student 3/Rick: [comes over to the girls] What?
        8. Student 2/Hanna: How on earth do you turn this?
        9. Teacher John: Hold down the mouse and...
        10. Student 3/Rick: What did you want to do?
        11. Student 1/Tara: Rotate the angle.
        12. Student 3/Rick: Take that and then...[Tara rotates]
        13. Teacher John: Which one was it Rick? Why don't you show me too.
        14. Student 3/Rick: This tool.
        15. Teacher John: Oh!

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  356                                                    © ISLS
Here, Tara and Hanna have asked the teacher for help in rotating the view, so they could see the whole house. The
teacher's first response is to find other students to help (line 3). By asking other students to help, the teacher is
encouraging relative expertise in which the students can act as experts on the challenges. Student Rick is eager to
help and comes over to advice the girls. After this, the teacher asks Rick to show him how to do it as well (line
13). By doing so, the teacher indicates that it is acceptable that teachers do not always know what to do in all of
the challenges. He also reinforces Rick as an expert of the challenge. Interestingly, other teacher Greg exclaims
the instructions in the middle of the conversation (line 5), even though he is helping other students at the time.
Teacher Greg is probably aiming to speed the helping process, but this is in conflict with the other teacher's
intervention strategy and that of the pedagogical model of the FUSE Studio makerspace that advocates for relative
expertise. Teacher John does repeat these instructions partly (line 9) but then lets the student Rick to help and
explain it to the two girls.

Conclusions and implications
Our findings that stem from our ongoing research work on an educational makerspace in a school context, make
visible the  nuanced  ways   in which the  material objects  of the educational makerspace   were   turned into   and
functioned as social objects in the interactions between and across the students and their teachers. Our findings
reveal three distinct and overlapping interactional processes during which the material objects of the makerspace
turned into social objects via joint attention and social interaction about the objects, around the objects and with
the objects.
          First, there were material-dialogic spaces in which joint attention was established via social interaction
about the material objects themselves. This mode of joint attention in relating to material objects became evident
especially  when the  habitual  ways  of engagement    were  disrupted, for example, by  technological   failures  or
discrepancy between means and ends of the activity (Kumpulainen, Rajala, & Kajamaa, in press). The problems
in the  technological infrastructure  also created  uncertainty among   the teachers and challenged    their role  as
authority as they did not always have control over the material objects themselves either. Secondly, we could also
identify material- dialogic spaces in which joint attention was enacted and negotiated around the material objects.
Our analysis suggests that the contemporary pedagogical and digital infrastructure engender dynamically shifting
and expansive material-dialogic spaces that create new possibilities and tensions for students' engagement and
learning opportunities. For example, the group configurations in the FUSE studio makerspace are flexible and the
students are invited to work across groups to help each other. Similarly, digital tools offer vast possibilities for
expanding the scope of the activity and dialogue (Kumpulainen, Mikkola, & Rajala, 2018). This imposes tensions
for joint attention among students and between students and their teachers. Thirdly, we depicted material-dialogic
spaces in which joint attention was established and maintained with the material objects. Here, the meaning
potential of material objects   in co-ordinating joint action   and attention was pivotal.  In all, it was in these
sociomaterial and dialogic encounters that constituted the material-dialogic spaces of joint attention, when the
material objects of the educational makerspace turned into social objects and mediated the students' engagement
and learning opportunities.
          The study reveals a dynamic interplay of multiple voices emerging in the material-dialogic spaces of
joint attention. The inter-animation of voices that were performed into being in ongoing interactions evidence
delicate and at times strong power relationships in the positioning of different voices, with consequences for
engagement and learning opportunities. At times, the voices of material objects dominated the material-dialogic
space of joint attention, and undermined the voices of others. At other times, it was the teacher's voice that become
more authoritative from other voices, with opportunities and tensions for student-centered learning. We could also
depict material-dialogic spaces that demonstrate joint reasoning and meaning making between the students and
teachers, giving rise to relative  expertise and   enhancing  the students' interest-driven creative   activities and
learning opportunities.
          The results make visible how the material objects of the makerspace when turned into social objects of
joint attention are important mediators of power and educational equity, making materiality a pivotal research
focus for future studies in education. In our research not all the students were found to engage in interest-driven
STEAM learning activities in the educational makerspace despite free choice of the design challenges they could
work on. Our observations resonate with existing research that has pointed out how makerspaces hosted by various
educational and cultural institutions often fail to attract and engage the broader population of young people in
learning due to culturally biased materialities and activities (Barton, Tan & Greenberg, 2016; Peppler et al., 2016).
Our research joins in with these concerns and calls for the quality and inclusivity of makerspaces and their
materialities, and urges further investigation into novel, material rich educational spaces as they are related to
creating democratic, equitable, and deep learning experiences for diverse student. Moreover, further research on

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    357                                                  © ISLS
materiality is a pivotal research focus for future studies in education for promoting productive interaction in novel
educational settings. In sum, the study demonstrates the need to rethink the meaning and role of material objects
in novel educational makerspaces for establishing and negotiating joint attention, mediating learning opportunities
and tensions.

References
Alexander,  R.  J.  (2008). Towards  Dialogic   Teaching:    rethinking classroom talk  (4th edition). New  York:
          Dialogos.
Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. Trans. Vern W. McGee. Austin, Texas: University of
          Texas Press.
Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter comes to matter. Signs,
          28(3), 801­31.
Barad, K.  (2007).  Meeting  the  Universe  Half-Way:   Quantum   Physics  and the    Entanglement of  Matter and
          Meaning. Durham: Duke University Press.
Barton, A. C., Tan, E., & Greenberg, D. (2016). The makerspace movement: Sites of possibilities for equitable
          opportunities to engage underrepresented youth in STEM. Teachers College Record, 119(6), 11-44.
Bennett, J. (2010). Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Braidotti, R. (2013). The posthuman. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Canstanheira, M.L., Green, J., & Dixon, C. (2009). Interactional ethnography: an approach to studying the social
          construction of literate practices. Linguistics and Education, 11, 353-400.
Bruner, J. (1995). From Joint Attention to the Meeting of Minds: An Introduction. In C. Moore & P. J. Dunham
          (Eds.), Joint Attention. Its Origins and Role in Development. New York: Psychology Press.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Deleuze, G. & Guattari, F. (1994). What is philosophy? New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 1489-
          1522.
Gresalfi, M., Martin,  T.,  Hand,  V., & Greeno,    J. (2009). Constructing  competence:   an analysis  of student
          participation in the activity systems of mathematics classrooms. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70,
          49-70
Dewey, J. (1933). How We Think A Restatement of the Relation of Reflective Thinking to the Educative Process.
          Boston, MA D.C. Heath & Co Publishers.
Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R. & Sherin, B. L. (2010). Conducting
          video research in the learning sciences: Guidance on selection, analysis, technology, and ethics. The
          Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(1), 3 ­ 53.
Fenwick, T., & Landri, P. (2012). Materialities, textures and pedagogies: socio-material assemblages in education,
          Pedagogy, Culture & Society 20(1), 1-7, DOI: 10.1080/14681366.2012.649421.
Halverson, E. R. & Sheridan, K. (2014). The maker movement in education. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4),
          495-504.
Hetherington. L.   & Wegerif, R. (2018). Developing a material-dialogic approach to pedagogy to guide science
          teacher education. Journal of Education for Teaching, 44(1), 27-43.
Ingold, T. (2010). The textility of making. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 34, 91­102.
Jordan, B. & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Kafai, Y., Fields, D., & Searle, K. (2014). Electronic textiles as disruptive designs: Supporting and challenging
          maker activities in schools. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 532-556.
Knorr-Cetina, K. (1997). Sociality with objects. Social Relations in Postsocial Knowledge Societies. Theory,
          Culture and Society, 14(4), 1-30.
Kuby, C. R. & Roswell, J. (2017). Early literacy and the posthuman: Pedagogies and methodologies. Journal of
          Early Childhood Literacy, 17(3), 286-296.
Ludvigsen, S. R. (2012). What counts as knowledge: Learning to use categories in computer environments.
          Learning, Media and Technology, 37(1), 40-52.
Kumpulainen,    K., Kajamaa,  A.,  &   Rajala, A., (2018).   Understanding educational  change: Agency-structure
          dynamics in a novel design and making environment. Digital Education Review, 33, 2638. 
Kumpulainen, K., Rajala, A., & Kajamaa, A. (in press). Researching the materiality of communication in an
          educational makerspace: The meaning of social objects. In N. Mercer, R. Wegerif, & L. Major (Eds.),
          The Routledge International Handbook of Research on Dialogic Education. London: Routledge.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    358                                                 © ISLS
Kumpulainen, K., Mikkola, A., & Rajala, A. (2018). Dissolving the digital divide: Creating coherence in young
        people's social ecologies of learning and identity building. In J. Voogt, G. Knezek, R. Christensen, &
        K.-W. Lai (Eds.), Second international handbook of information technology in primary and secondary
        education. New York, NY: Springer.
Mercer, N., Hennessy, S., & Warwick, P. (2010). Using interactive whiteboards to orchestrate classroom dialogue.
        Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 19(2), 195-209.
Mäkitalo, Å. (2011). Professional learning and the materiality of social practice. Journal of Education and Work
        25(1), 59-78.
Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., and Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of innovative knowledge communities and three
        metaphors of learning. Review of Educational Research, 74(4), 557­576.
Peppler, K., Halverson, E., & Kafai, Y. B. (Eds.). (2016). Makeology: Makerspaces as learning environments
        (Vol. 1). New York: Routledge.
Rasmussen, I., &  Ludvigsen,  S.  (2010). Learning  with  computer  tools and environments:     A sociocultural
        perspective. International handbook of psychology in education, 399-435.
Resnick, L. B., Asterhan, C., & Clarke, S. (Eds.). (2015). Socializing intelligence through academic talk and
        dialogue. Washington D.C.: American Educational Research Association.
Roth, W.-M. (2005). Doing qualitative research: Praxis of method. Rotterdam
Simon, N. (2010). The participatory museum. Accessed from: http://www.participatorymuseum.org/read/
Stevens R. &   Jona,  K. (2017). Program   Design. FUSE    Studio - website.  Retrieved May     20, 2017 from
        https://www.fusestudio.net/program - design
Säljö, R. (2010). Digital tools and challenges to institutional traditions of learning: technologies, social memory
        and the performative nature of learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 26(1), 53-64.
Taylor, C.A. (2016). Edu-crafting a cacophonous ecology: Posthumanist research practices for education. In C.A.
        Taylor & C. Hughes (Eds.), Posthuman Research Practices in Education (pp. 5-24). New York: Palgrave
        MacMillan.
Tomasello, M. (2000). The cultural origins of human cognition. London: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1997). The instrumental method in psychology. In R. Reiber & J. Wollock (Eds.), The collected
        works of L. S. Vygotsky (Vol. 3). Problems of the theory and history of psychology (pp. 85­89). London:
        Plenum Press.
Vygotsky, L. S., & Luria, A. (1994). Tool and Symbol in Child Development. In R. Van Der Veer, & J. Valsiner
        (Eds.), The Vygotsky Reader. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Wartofsky, M. (1979). Models, representation, and the scientific understanding. Boston: Reidel.
Wegerif, R. (2011). "Towards a Dialogic Theory of How Children Learn to Think." Thinking Skills & Creativity
        6 (3): 179­190.
Wertsch J.V. (1991).  Voices of  the Mind: A Sociocultural  Approach  to  Mediated   Action. Cambridge,  MA:
        Harvard University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (2002). Voices of collective remembering. Cambridge University Press.
Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry. Towards a sociocultural practice and theory of education. USA: Cambridge
        University Press.

Acknowledgments
The research work reported in this chapter has been financially supported by Learning by Making: The educational
potential of school-based makerspaces for young learners' digital competencies (iMake) project funded by the
Academy of Finland (project no: 310790).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 359                                                 © ISLS
