   Analyzing Students' Synergistic Learning Processes in Physics
                      and CT by Collaborative Discourse Analysis
                       Caitlin Snyder, Vanderbilt University, caitlin.r.snyder@vanderbilt.edu
                    Nicole Hutchins, Vanderbilt University, nicole.m.hutchins@vanderbilt.edu
                      Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University, gautam.biswas@vanderbilt.edu
                      Mona Emara, Damanhour University, mona.emara@damanhour.edu.eg
                         Shuchi Grover, Looking Glass Ventures, shuchig@cs.stanford.edu
                           Luke Conlin, Salem State University, luke.conlin@gmail.com

          Abstract: The introduction of computational modeling into science curricula has been shown
          to  benefit students'  learning, however     the synergistic learning processes   that contribute  to
          these benefits are not fully understood. We study students' synergistic learning of physics and
          computational thinking (CT) through their actions and collaborative discourse as they develop
          computational    models  in   a visual  block-structured   environment.   We   adopt   a case  study
          approach    to analyze students  synergistic   learning processes  related  to stopping  conditions,
          initialization, and debugging episodes. Our findings show a pattern of evolving sophistication
          in synergistic reasoning for model-building activities.

Introduction
Computation    is  at the  forefront of   21st century   education  (Wing,   2006). Technological    advancements    are
resulting  in the  introduction  of  a  variety   of computational   tools  and practices   into Science,  Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) curricula through computational modeling, simulation, data analysis and
visualization.   Working   in technology-enhanced       environments   also  presents  opportunities   for collaborative
learning and problem-solving. We aim to integrate computational thinking (CT) concepts and practices into
STEM curricula (Sengupta, et al., 2013) so that learning of STEM and CT can be mutually supportive and help
to  develop    important   STEM      practices    like  model-based    reasoning,   explanation,   and   argumentation.
Computational modeling serves as an effective vehicle for science learning in K-12 (e.g. Basu, et al., 2016;
diSessa,   2001;  Wilensky    &  Reisman,     2006).   Designed   learning  environments    can  support   this mutually
supportive integration (Basu, et al., 2013; Hutchins, et al., 2018), and such environments have helped students
achieve significant learning gains in both STEM and CT concepts and practices (Basu, et al., 2017; Sengupta, et
al., 2013). But the mechanisms and processes students employ to develop and apply synergistic learning skills
are not well understood.
          In this paper, we take on the challenge of understanding and unpacking students' synergistic learning
processes while they develop computational models of scientific phenomena using a block-based programming
language.  Typically,    computational  modeling     involves an  iterative process of conceptualization,   algorithmic
design, implementation as a program, and testing and refining the program to generate a correct model. Students
activities related to  these  processes   can  be analyzed  using  log data  collected from   computer-based     learning
environments.    However,     students' underlying     reasoning  mechanisms    when   invoking    and  applying   these
processes,   the difficulties they  face,  and  how    they overcome   them   are hard   to unpack   from  their  logged
activities. To better understand these mechanisms, we ran a pilot study with students who worked in groups of
two or three on model building and problem-solving tasks in physics. We used a screen recording system that
simultaneously    captured   students'  interactive  dialog as  they worked   on  the  system,   and then  performed  a
qualitative case study that combined analyses of log data and the interactions among the students to understand
students' reasoning processes in synergistic learning of physics and CT concepts.

Collaborative learning and problem-solving
Roschelle and Teasley (1995) defined collaboration as "a coordinated, synchronous activity that is a result of a
continuous attempt to construct and maintain a shared conception of a problem." Further research has shown the
importance    of developing   shared   understanding    among   the  group  members    for  successful task  completion
(Larkin, 2006). In addition, interaction skills of making and encouraging contributions of ideas, monitoring of
progress, and providing constructive feedback through argumentation and explanation are essential components
of collaborative learning (Garrison & Akyol, 2013; Grau & Whitebread, 2012). In the context of our work, this
translates to students developing and utilizing their shared understanding of domain and CT concepts to co-
construct their physics models, analyze and understand the behaviors generated by simulating their models, and
where necessary, apply debugging processes to make refinements to and improve their models.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       360                                                    © ISLS
         Working   in  close   proximity  and sharing    a  computer    screen,   provides   students  opportunities    to
explicitly discuss the  model  construction  process,   and develop  arguments     and    explanations  that  support   or
challenge  model   constructs  they  propose or  are proposed   by   their partners   (Sins, et  al., 2005).  Therefore,
students' interactive discourse provides opportunities for studying and understanding the reasoning processes
they employ for synergistic learning during their computational model building activities. We briefly review
discourse frameworks that have been developed for analyzing collaborative discourse in STEM domains.

Collaboration discourse frameworks
The ICAP    framework   (Chi   & Wylie,   2014)  defines four   different  modes   of engagement      when    considering
learning   behaviors: Interactive, Constructive,  Active,   and Passive.      A   learner who    is engaging    passively
receives information but does not respond. An actively engaged learner receives information and manipulates it
in some way. A learner who is receiving information, manipulating it and then constructing something with that
knowledge is considered to be constructive. Finally, if two constructive learners are conversing about constructs
they have generated from information, they are considered to be interactive.
         The  framework   proposed   by  Weinberger   &  Fischer  (2006)   to analyze     knowledge   construction   in a
collaborative learning environment includes five categories of social modes: externalization, elicitation, quick
consensus   building,   integration-oriented  consensus     building  and   conflict-oriented     consensus     building.
Externalization is defined by a learner articulating their thoughts. Elicitation refers to the idea of using the other
group partners as resources, this can be seen when a learner questions other group members. Quick consensus
building is the act of accepting the contributions of another learner in order to continue progress. Integration-
oriented consensus    building occurs when   one  learner's   understanding   about   a concept  is   changed   based on
another  learner's reasoning.   Conflict-oriented consensus     building   refers to  the  idea  of   different  learners'
perspectives contradicting each other, which leads to the debate and modification of conflicting ideas.
         In our work,   we   superimpose    Weinberger   &    Fischer's categories   of   social modes    in  knowledge
construction on  the  ICAP     framework  to develop    our coding   scheme. This     combination     results in a more
encompassing framework that considers a learner's social modes along with their mode of engagement on the
collaboration task. A collaborative interaction is categorized by the highest level of engagement reached by one
or more learners in the group combined with the type of social mode associated with the group.           All three types
of consensus  building  modes    are only present when     the collaboration  is  considered   interactive   because  the
group can only reach a consensus when both learners participate in model building. Constructive externalization
or elicitation is categorized by a single student (the lead) is participating in model building and is narrating their
actions and thought processes while the other students engage passively by following along silently, or actively,
by verbally agreeing. During constructive elicitation, the lead student questions the other students in the course
of building the model and receives little to no response. If questioning by two or more students is substantial
and leads to responses that indicate the students are acting constructively, the collaboration is considered to be
interactive elicitation. If neither student is participating in the model building but are reading aloud resources or
instructions, the collaboration is categorized as active externalization. Finally, when none of the students are
actively working on the model or saying anything they are in a passive state.

Framing our research
Learning physics by building computational models
We use C2STEM, a learning-by-modeling environment that incorporates a physics domain-specific modeling
language (DSML) into a block-based programming environment to promote learning of domain-specific and CT
concepts and practices through computational modeling and problem-solving exercises. C2STEM uses Netsblox
(Broll, et al., 2017), an extension of Snap! (http://snap.berkeley.edu/). The use of a physics DSML aims to help
students focus on physics concepts, while also helping students to write self-documenting code. In addition, we
scaffold the model-building    process   by  explicitly providing  a  simulation     framework,     where  students   can
initialize variables and the use blocks to update the variables at each time step to capture dynamic behaviors.
         Figure 1  illustrates a computational   model   that  simulates  the dropping    of a   package  from   a drone
hovering at a specified height above a target. This requires students to think of the impact of gravity on the
package's velocity and position with time that increments in steps of t when the simulation is run. The student
also has to model a stopping condition, using a conditional construct to model the object's motion stopping
when it hits the ground. Students can use graphing and tabulation tools shown as icons at the bottom of the
stage.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    361                                                       © ISLS
                           Figure 1. Example final computational model for package drop.

Synergistic learning
The notion of synergistic learning is predicated on the idea that the simultaneous learning of two domains in an
integrated context can lead to better learning of concepts and practices in both domains than when the domains
are learned separately. Previous work has shown that integration may initially increase the conceptual burden
for students, but students are quickly able to overcome these difficulties and learn both domains better (Basu, et
al., 2013;   2016).  Our previous   studies with    C2STEM     have  shown    that learning by  building   computational
models  of   kinematics  phenomena    helps   students  gain  a deeper  understanding    of the  underlying    kinematics
concepts, while also helping them gain a better understanding of CT constructs, such as variable initialization,
conditional,   and   loops (Hutchins,   et  al., 2018).    Besides,  a  number     of practices,  such     as abstraction,
decomposition, and debugging transcend both domains (Sengupta, et al., 2013).              However, to our knowledge,
limited work has focused on identifying the synergistic STEM+CT processes that lead to these learning benefits.
          In this paper, we identify some of the synergistic learning processes that we have observed in previous
studies, and develop a framework for analyzing and understanding students' reasoning processes as they work
through   synergistic  learning  episodes   during   their  model   building  tasks.  In   particular, we   focus   on   the
synergistic modeling practices of initialization, debugging, and conditional behavior changes. In our modeling
framework, the initialization process can be identified by the addition, editing, and/or deletion of physics-DSML
set blocks under the "When Green Flag Clicked" block (see Figure 1). Not only is variable initialization a key
CT   practice  (Grover   & Pea,  2013), students'   selection   of physics variables  to   initialize in the  context   of a
particular   task offers insight into their  conceptual    understanding   of  the  motion  processes      being modeled.
Debugging, a key CT skill (Grover & Pea, 2018), is related to analyzing model behaviors, identifying sources of
error in the models, and then correcting the identified errors in physics modeling. In C2STEM, the debugging
process   is a truly synergistic process,  as  students   must  diagnose whether    errors  in their  models  result   from
incorrect representation (modeling) of physics concepts (e.g., an incorrect use of velocity in computing a look-
ahead distance (specific point at which object slows down to stop) or an incorrect specification of the CT (or
programming)      constructs (e.g., writing  the    Boolean   condition expression    that  initiates  the slowing     down
behavior). Finally, we include the use of conditional expressions to indicate changes in motion behavior (e.g.,
slow down to avoid a collision). In all of these situations, the nature of the modeling tasks requires students to
go   back  and  forth between    applying  and   checking   their  physics concepts   and   practices  and    their CT   (or
programming)      concepts   and practices  to  succeed    in their model-building    and   model-checking       tasks. We
hypothesize    that back and  forth  transition  of concepts   and  practices across  domains   provides     students   with
synergistic  learning  opportunities  leading    to better model    building, and   eventually  better   learning   in  both
domains.

Study description and data analysis methods
The   qualitative research   method  presented   in  this paper is  guided by  the   question:  What     characteristics   of
synergistic learning and reasoning processes can we derive from students' collaborative discourse as they work
on computational modeling tasks? The primary data source used to answer this question was screen-capture
video (using OBSTM software) that recorded students' actions in C2STEM, along with webcam video and audio,
of two students (`S1' & `S2') engaging in collaborative model building.
          Our team conducted a two-month-long study that included 26 advanced sophomores assigned by our
research team to work in groups of 2 or 3 on a kinematics and dynamics curriculum in C2STEM. The research
team met with participants one school-day a week over a two-month period. Students completed one 45-minute
CT training unit and four physics modules: three in Kinematics: 1D motion (with acceleration), 2D motion with
constant velocity, and 2D motion with gravitational forces, and one in mechanics, i.e., an introductory unit on
1D Force. All students worked collaboratively, either in pairs or triads.
          We used the rubric outlined in Table 1 to define and assess key learning objectives in physics and CT
from the models that students constructed. The assessment results help us determine how successful students
were in different aspects of model building and how their performance could be explained by their proficiency
in synergistic learning and reasoning processes.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       362                                                      © ISLS
Table 1: Rubric for evaluating students Models

Expressing physics relations in a computational model (physics component):                                         Point(s)
Program expresses correct relations among and units for needed Physics variables.                                     2
Program reflects the effect of [velocity/acceleration] on [position/velocity] each time step.                         1
Program resulted in an accurate calculation of given task submission question.                                        1
Using programming concepts to model physics phenomena (CT component)                                               Point(s)
Program makes the distinction between actions that need to happen once during initialization and actions that         1
need to be repeated in the simulation step
Program correctly determines which actions always happen or happen under certain conditions                           1
Program updates the variable corresponding to the package's velocity: (1) under the correct conditions (e.g.          2
correct conditional logic), and (2) in the correct fashion (e.g. each simulation step)
All code in the program is reachable and can be executed; No duplicate code                                           1

        For analysis, we extracted and coded students' discourse mechanisms from the OBS video and voice
recordings, capturing sequences of actions that that closely related to learning objectives in the two domains
(see rubric), while also recording the challenges they faced, and how they overcame them. Two coders coded
the above episodes. Inter-rater reliability was checked by calculating Cohen's kappa value which resulted in
excellent agreement (k = 0.94) for collaborative discourse and good agreement (k = 0.71) for synergistic coding.
For each task, we noted key actions and conversations that highlighted synergistic learning episodes and parsed
these episodes to determine if the students' focus was on the physics or the CT aspect of their model.

Student task performance in physics and CT
Our qualitative  case study   analyzed      the model-building   activities    and     the  accompanying  dialogue  of  two
students who worked together on a laptop. We chose this group because they were the only pair in our study (all
other students worked in triads), therefore, exchanges between them were easier to code. Besides this group was
quite expressive, so we derived a lot of rich information from their dialog. Typically, one of them controlled the
mouse and the keyboard, but the other student was always very attentive, and often initiated interactive dialog to
discuss aspects of the modeling and debugging tasks. Their model scores (Figure 2) were assessed using the
rubric described above   on   four model       building tasks from each   curriculum        unit: 1D  Motion, 2D   Constant
Velocity, 2D Motion with Gravity, Forces. As demonstrated, the group initially struggled in CT (3 out of 5), but
improved  to a  perfect  CT score   by     the final unit, even though  the    CT      constructs  and practices were more
difficult. In physics, the group started off well, scoring a 3 out of 4 on the first two modeling tasks, improving to
4 out of 4 on the final modeling tasks. It is important to note that for both 1D motion and 2D constant velocity,
the group did not receive a point for "program resulted in an accurate calculation of given task submission
question," because this rubric item requires appropriate use of CT constructs. As such, further analysis of the
modeling process is needed to understand issues related to transitions between physics and CT applications in
the modeling process in order to understand the cause for their error.

                                    Figure 2. Group 1 model building scores.

Case studies
Utilizing our synergistic learning framework) we have extracted segments of work and accompanying dialog
that correspond to episodes of initialization, formulating conditional logic/stopping conditions, and debugging.
The segments are presented in the order in which they occurred to study the students' progression in their model
building skills and synergistic learning skills (Figure 2).

Segment 1: Conditional logic and stopping conditions
Episode 1 below describes a conversation and activity segments for a dyad (students S1 and S2) working on the
1D  Motion module.    In this task, students     model   the  motion of a   truck      that speeds up  from rest to a given

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       363                                                       © ISLS
maximum speed (defined by a speed limit), maintain that speed and slow down and stop at a stop sign. This
requires the students to calculate a lookahead distance from a stop sign. These two segments demonstrate their
application  of   synergistic  learning    processes    (their back    and   forth reasoning    between   the physics    and  CT
concepts)  to  model     the motion    changes    of  the truck.  We   use   the characterizations   developed   from    the two
collaborative frameworks to analyze and interpret the dialog constructs.
Table 2: Episode 1 (use of conditionals)

Student's Words and Actions                               Physics and CT                             Collaboration

S1: "15 m/s. So it needs to hit 15 m/s and then stop      CT focused: S1 and S2 agree on the         Interactive     conflict-
accelerating. So... If statements. If statements is the   physics concept but disagree on how to     oriented      consensus
easiest way to do this."                                  model it computationally, i.e., what CT    building: S2 challenges
S2: "I thought you would do a when block.                 construct(s) to use. S1 and S2 attempt     S1's  reasoning   about a
S1: Why would you do a when block?"                       to  develop  a  shared understanding   of  CT      construct.     S2
S2: "when the speed reaches..."                           different conditional operators            suggests a different idea
S1: "Well,   that's the  thing because    this starts a                                              and  S1   pushes    S2  to
sequence, we need to put it inside the simulation                                                    verbalize his reasoning.
step so that it will constantly repeat."

S2: "Oh, I see."                                          Physics focused:      Since S2  seems  to  Interactive        quick-
S1: "Right so if x velocity is greater than or equal      agree, S1 brings the conversation back     consensus building: S2
to 15 then just change the x position by velocity.        in   context   of  physics.    Using  the  seems    to   agree  with
Else, change x velocity by acceleration."                 language of the conditional block, S1      S1's    reasoning  but  as
                                                          describes   the   relationships  between   seen in the continuation
                                                          position, velocity and acceleration.       of  the conversation,   he
                                                                                                     is not fully convinced.

S2: "And you're telling me that's the easiest way?"       CT focused: S2 turns the conversation      Interactive     conflict-
S1: "That's   the   easiest  way  to   do  it  because    back to CT and challenges S1 again on      oriented      consensus
otherwise we have to do this and that's not a loop."      the choice of conditional structure.       building: S2 challenges
                                                                                                     S1 again on the choice
S2: "I would think like just like if velocity equals      Physics   focused:     S2   attempts   to  of conditional structure.
... like if velocity equals 15 m/s set acceleration to    support his   reasoning  by  bringing  in  After showing S2 on the
0 m/s..."                                                 the  relationship  between  velocity  and  screen,   S1    and    S2
                                                          acceleration.                              develop     a   common
                                                                                                     understanding     of   the
S1: "We could do that but that would be... eh... I        CT   focused:   S1    shows  S2   on  the  physics       and      CT
just I don't like the way that sounds cause yeah but      model how his idea would work              concepts to use in their
yeah I know what you're saying."                                                                     model.
S1: "Ok so basically if velocity is equal...is greater
than or equal to whatever. then change. then both of
these...else just the bottom part. Ok."
S2: "Oh I see why you put that there."
S1: "Exactly"

In  this segment,   the   dyad was   having    trouble  converting     their physics   understanding    into the computational
constructs because they were unsure about the conditional constructs. Their consensus-building collaborative
dialog demonstrates how they applied explanations, and argumentation to develop a shared understanding of the
model building task (e.g., why select the "if" block and not a "when" block). However, their explanations are
not deep, therefore, their justification for their model building steps is shallow. For example, S1 verbalizes his
actions to develop a consensus and shared understanding with his partner, but the explanation "just doesn't like
the way that sounds" implies an incomplete understanding of CT. In contrast, the physics knowledge is strong
(including a correct calculation of the lookahead distance), and this is reflected in their task performance score.

Segment 2: Initialization
The  second    episode    in our  case   study  involves   the  2D  constant     velocity  task  focused  on  the  initialization
process.  In this   task, students   needed    to program    a boat   to  cross  a river, stopping   at two  islands   located  at
different points    on  the  way. The    key   physics  concepts    students    have  to  learn are 2-D  velocity, and    how   to
compute    the resultant     velocity,   given  that  the river  current.    In  this episode,   students are  considering    the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                          364                                                         © ISLS
importance of initializing the heading variable of the boat given the need to change the boat's direction when
moving towards a new target.
Table 2: Episode 2

Student's Words and Actions                                             Physics and CT                   Collaboration

S1: "So it's 5 m/s in the x and y. So, we could set a different x       Physics   focused:     S1   is   Constructive
velocity and different y velocity. Because it needs to go 15, so we     verbalizing          thought     externalization:    S1
could set the x to 5 and in the same three seconds if we set the y      process on the relationship      externalizing       his
velocity to 2, then it would go 6 forward and 15 to the right."         between x and y velocities       modeling
S2: (agreement sound)                                                   and     the        respective    constructs with     S2
                                                                        distances moved in 3s            following         along,
                                                                                                         occasionally agreeing
S1: "let's move this back and set the heading."                         CT  focused:     S1  adds  an
[S1 ADDS "set heading to" block and hardcodes it to the value           initialization  blocks     that
291.28. Clicks on the block to change direction of the boat and         supports his verbalization
then removes block from stage.]
S1: "so we need to set position to 0, -10.6"
[S1 ADDS and EDITS set position block]

S2: "How come you threw that block away?"                               CT       focused:          S2    Interactive   conflict-
S1: "What, that block? (pointing) Because we've already set the         challenges S1's removal of       oriented   consensus
heading."                                                               one  of   the    blocks    --    building:           S2
S2: "Alright, but when you reset it's..."                               presumably     place   in  the   challenges        S1's
S1: "Right."                                                            wrong location causing the       action of discarding a
[S1 ADDS set heading block under GF and hardcodes to 291.28]            simulation  to   reset  to an    set block, S1 tries to
S2: jokingly says other student's name                                  initial value.                   explain his reasoning
S1: "My wits have taken leave."                                                                          and   after     further
                                                                                                         prompting      by  S2,
                                                                                                         sees the error

S1: "And then, set position, set velocity"                                                               Constructive
[S1 ADDS set x velocity block under GF]                                                                  externalization:
                                                                                                         S1     reverts      to
S1: "and  that's all we  need  to  know,    because it won't    let us  Physics     focused:       S1    narrating actions with
accelerate. It will let us accelerate in 2D air because that is when    concludes   that   they   have   S2 following along
we start factoring in gravity. So then, start simulation, simulation    completed      the    physics
step."                                                                  required for the model
[S1 ADDS start simulation to GF and simulation step flag]

This   segment   illustrates a synergistic   process   where    an  understanding   of   the   physics   variables  is  needed    to
accurately model the object behaviors. We analyze how the students collaborate to resolve issues in the link
between   initialization and   the modeling     of  the updates     to capture  dynamic      behavior.    The  conflict-oriented
consensus    building approach    allowed    both  students  to  consider   the initialization     process  in the  context  of   a
complete model. By questioning the deletion, the group went from a predominantly constructive externalizing
approach focused on the physics content, to an approach centered on generating consensus in understanding
how the computational model should be set up. This conflict-oriented approach also occurred in Segment 1 in
which the students also came to a consensus via questioning of the selection of a conditional block, but in this
initialization scenario, we    are beginning    to  see better   justification  as  part   of  their reasoning.    Although   the
improvements are observed in the synergistic discourse, the students' model score on this task was similar to
Segment 1.

Segment 3: Debugging
The final episode is an example of synergistic learning during debugging in a 2D gravity drop motion task,
where the students modeled the delivery of two packages by a drone moving horizontally, calculating the look-
ahead distance needed to release each package in order to safely land each at the desired targets on the ground.
It is important to note that the group's score in both Physics and CT improved in this scenario, with the group
developing a model that they used to correctly answer the task submission question.
Table 3: Episode 3

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        365                                                            © ISLS
Student's Words and Actions                                   Physics and CT                        Collaboration

S1: "Did we miscalculate? Did we miscalculate? Does it        Physics focused: S1 is pointing out   Interactive
need to be like 9 meters or something? Let's try 9 meters     that the  physics  calculations put   integration-
just to be sure. I have a sneaky, sneaky suspicion."          into the model may be incorrect.      oriented   consensus
                                                                                                    building: S1 and S2
[S1 edits subtraction in if via hardcode].                    CT focused: S1 and S2 are using       work      together    to
S1: "Let's try this again." [S1 presses play]                 the  model  to determine  why    the  find the error in their
S1: "Drop..."                                                 package  is not  ending  up in   the  model,     and     they
S2: "It's not.."                                              correct place                         conclude   that    it is
S1: "Yeah, that's not right."                                                                       likely     a       time
S2: "Wait, I want to see it" [S2 takes control of mouse]                                            miscalculation

S1: (inaudible) "Did we miscalculate the time?"               Physics focused: After their model
S2: "We might have"                                           does not work as expected, S1 and
S1: "We might have miscalculated the time. Let's go back      S2 go back to determining where
and look at the time equation. We could do this one, too,     they made an error in modeling the
couldn't we?"                                                 physics relations.
S2: (agreement sound)

This segment illustrates how the students use the animation of the object's motion to realize they have made an
error, and then work together to find its source. The discussion is mostly physics-focused, but it does require
them to analyze how the sequence of blocks they have used to build the model relates to the behavior they are
observing.  Their suspicion is that they did not model the release time of the object correctly. The episode does
show some switching between a physics and CT focus in their conversations. This was also observed in the
earlier episodes, but this one demonstrates a level of maturity in that they are not arguing over what construct to
use, but are trying to related behavior back to model structure, which implies higher level synergistic reasoning.

Discussion
When the S1 and S2 are successful in their modeling tasks, the conversation has the characteristic of integrating
both CT and physics reasoning, and adopts a back and forth between the two domains in the model construction
task. We believe that this back and forth, i.e., analyzing relevant domain concepts required for modeling and
representing them using computational constructs, and going back and forth to establish the correctness of the
physics  and     its computational   representation    is a key   element   of   synergistic  learning and    reasoning.     A
conversation that integrates both CT and physics reasoning does not necessarily imply students will succeed, as
seen in Episode 3. The students go back and forth between the physics concepts and the CT construct in their
conversation, but run out of time before they come up with the correct form of the model. However, they gain a
synergistic understanding that they apply later in their modelling process. The dyad also discusses look-ahead
distance calculations    in   the 1D constant   velocity  module,  but  this earlier  conversation   does   not  have     them
switching between physics and CT reasoning. The discussion that can be split into two completely separate
conversations; one where students determine the physics calculations separately and then a second discussion
about the computational modeling. When comparing the progress made between episode 1 and 3, it is clear that
the students are better able to integrate their physics and CT knowledge. Their synergistic learning gains are
shown as their modeling score increase in physics and CT from the 1D constant velocity to Forces modules
(Figure 2).

Conclusions and future work
One  challenge     of using   video analysis   to study   synergistic learning   is recognizing    evidence   of synergistic
learning in practice.    Another challenge in using video analysis to study synergistic learning is knowing where
to look, amongst the many hours of video data.        We have found evidence of synergistic learning in three specific
contexts: when students were (1) using conditional blocks, (2) initializing variables, and (3) debugging code.
These findings will help us hone our search for episodes of synergistic learning in future research.
         Focusing on one student dyad, we first found evidence of synergistic learning, initially in their inability
to reconcile     the physics  conceptual    knowledge    with the  computational    constructs required    to construct    the
computational model. This involved a lot of dialog about whether the physics knowledge was correct, and then
whether the computational construct reflected that the physics knowledge had been applied correctly. Studying
the students' conversations in this phase provides us with some understanding of their difficulties, which can be

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        366                                                       © ISLS
in the domain concepts, the computational constructs, or the representation of the domain concepts correctly in
the computational form. It is also clear from the students' dialog that such exercises force them to think deeper
about both the domain concepts and the computational constructs. Initially, this may increase their difficulties.
However,      by  executing   their  computational   representations,    i.e., simulating   their model,    they   have  the
opportunity to implement debugging processes that may help them understand and overcome their difficulties. It
also provides us with opportunities to detect such episodes, and adaptively scaffold students who are unable to
overcome their difficulties. In our particular case study, the two students succeeded in working through their
difficulties on their own, after some initial stumbles.
          Our    next  steps include   expanding our    analysis  to a  broader   group  of  students  and  extending   our
analysis to gain insights into collaborative regulation.

References
Basu, S., Dickes, A., Kinnebrew, J. S., Sengupta, P., & Biswas, G. (2013). CTSiM: A Computational Thinking
          Environment for Learning Science through Simulation and Modeling. In CSEDU (pp. 369-378).
Basu,   S.,   Biswas,   G.   &   Kinnebrew,     J.S.  (2016).    Using   multiple    representations   to   simultaneously
          learn computational thinking and middle school science. In Thirtieth AAAI conference on Artificial
          Intelligence (pp. 3705-3711). Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
Basu, S., Biswas, G., & Kinnebrew, J.(2017). Learner modeling for adaptive scaffolding in a computational
          thinking-based science learning environment. User Modeling & User-Adapted Interaction, 27(1), 5-53.
Broll, B., Lédeczi, A., Volgyesi, P., Sallai, J., Maroti, M., Carrillo, A., Weeden-Wright, S., Vanags, C., Swarts,
          J., &   Lu,  M.    (2017). A  visual  programming      environment     for learning   distributed programming.
          In Proceedings of SIGCSE 2017. ACM.
Chi,  M.  T.,  &   Wylie,  R.  (2014).  The   ICAP   framework:     Linking    cognitive engagement    to   active learning
          outcomes. Educational Psychologist, 49(4), 219-243.
DiSessa, A. A. (2001). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. MIT Press.
Garrison,   D.   R., &  Akyol,   Z.  (2013). The Community       of  Inquiry   Theoretical  Framework.     In Handbook     of
          distance education (pp. 122-138). Routledge.
Grau, V., & Whitebread, D. (2012). Self and social regulation of learning during collaborative activities in the
          classroom: The interplay of individual and group cognition. Learning and Instruction, 22(6), 401-412.
Grover, S., & Pea, R. (2013). Computational thinking in K­12: A review of the state of the field. Educational
          Researcher, 42(1), 38-43.
Grover,   S.  &   Pea, R. (2018).   Computational    Thinking:   A   competency   whose     time  has come.  In  Computer
          Science Education: Perspectives on teaching & learning, Sentance, S., Barendsen, E. & Carsten, S.
          (Eds). Bloomsbury.
Hutchins,    N.,  Biswas,  G., Maroti,   M.,  Ledezci,  A.,   &   Broll, B.    (2018). A    Design-Based    Approach    to a
          Classroom-Centered     OELE.    In   Intl. Conf.   on  Artificial    Intelligence in  Education   (pp. 155-159).
          Springer.
Larkin,  S.   (2006).  Collaborative   group   work   and    individual  development     of  metacognition   in  the  early
          years. Research in science education, 36(1-2), 7-27.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving.
          In Computer supported collaborative learning (pp. 69-97). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Sengupta, P., Kinnebrew, J. S., Basu, S., Biswas, G., & Clark, D. (2013). Integrating computational thinking
          with K-12 science education using agent-based computation: A theoretical framework. Education and
          Information Technologies, 18(2), 351-380.
Sins, P., Savelsbergh,    E.,  &  van  Joolingen,    W. (2005).   The   Difficult Process    of Scientific  Modelling:   An
          analysis of novices' reasoning during computer-based modelling. Intl. Journal of Sci. Ed, 27(14), 1695-
          1721.
Weinberger,    A.,   &  Fischer, F.  (2006).  A  framework     to analyze   argumentative      knowledge    construction   in
          computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & education, 46(1), 71-95.
Wilensky,     U., &  Reisman,  K.    (2006). Thinking   like a wolf,  a  sheep,  or  a firefly: Learning   biology through
          constructing    and  testing computational    theories--an    embodied     modeling    approach. Cognition    and
          instruction, 24(2), 171-209.
Wing, J. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 49(3), 33­35.

Acknowledgments
We thank our C2STEM collaborators at Vanderbilt University, SRI International, Stanford University, and ETS.
This research is supported by NSF grant #1640199.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        367                                                     © ISLS
