     On a Making-&-Tinkering Approach to Learning Mathematics in
   Formal Education: Knowledge Gains, Attitudes, and 21st-Century
                                                     Skills
 Stella Timotheou, Cyprus Interaction Lab, Department of Multimedia and Graphic Arts, Cyprus University of
                                   Technology, stella@cyprusinteractionlab.com
   Andri Ioannou, Cyprus Interaction Lab, Department of Multimedia and Graphic Arts, Cyprus University of
     Technology, Research Center on Interactive Media, Smart Systems and Emerging Technologies (RISE),
                                           andri@cyprusinteractionlab.com

          Abstract: Making and tinkering, as learning practices, have gained a lot of attention during the
          last decade,  especially in STEAM     education. Despite the  significant interest in making-&-
          tinkering activities, most of the research has focused on implementations in non-formal and
          informal educational settings, with learners of older age (i.e., students in secondary school). The
          present   study sought  to investigate young  students'  knowledge  gains,  attitudes  towards  a
          making-&-tinkering approach to learning mathematics in formal education and the development
          of 21st-century skills as they engaged in a collaborative making-&-tinkering project using a
          variety of arts, crafts, and technological tools such as a physical robot. The making-&-tinkering
          approach involved making, tinkering, programming, and play in a group project integrated into
          the formal mathematics curriculum. Findings from the study suggest that young students can
          greatly benefit from such an approach. The study has demonstrated the applicability and value
          of such methods for young learners in formal educational contexts, with implications for future
          research and practice in the field.

Introduction and theoretical background
There  is a    lot of recent discourse on   learning in STEAM     (Science, Technology,      Engineering, Arts,  and
Mathematics) and how it is promoted through making, tinkering, programming, and play activities in various
contexts and settings, including CSCL ones. STEAM education has been given a lot of attention during the last
decade, and it has become an emphasis in many curriculums around the world (Vossoughi & Bevan, 2014).
Increased pressure has been placed on teachers to improve performance in the above disciplines (Vossoughi &
Bevan, 2014). This improvement can be achieved through new ways of teaching. Students who have been taught
through traditional methods may have limited critical thinking ability as these methods emphasize only on the
right answer to the problem through a determined process (Rode et al., 2015). In contrast to traditional methods,
newer ones that support making, tinkering and play, set the significance of the process (and not only the end-
result) and provide better ways to attract students with diverse thinking styles (Rode et al., 2015). In the present
investigation, we adopt a making-&-tinkering approach to learning Mathematics (M), together with Science (S),
Technology (T), Arts (A) and Engineering (E), in formal education with young students in elementary school,
aged 8 to 9 years old.
          Making is a process of creating something (Hsu, Baldwin, & Ching, 2017), and specifically, it is "the act
of creating tangible artifacts" (Rode et al., 2015, p. 8). The movement of making, called "the maker movement",
as an active process of building, designing, and innovating with tools and materials to produce shareable artifacts,
has gained enormous momentum during the last years (Papavlasopoulou, Giannakos & Jaccheri, 2017). Making
is a learner-driven   educative  practice that supports learning, participation, and understanding  (Vossoughi     &
Bevan, 2014). Tinkering as a part of making (Vossoughi & Bevan, 2014), is a problem-solving technique and
learning strategy, which promotes a practice of improvement, and it is associated with experimentation and "trial
and error" methods (Krieger, Allen, & Rawn, 2015). As Martinez and Stager (2013) indicate, making and tinkering
involve a  playful    approach to  solving problems  through   direct experience, experimentation,  and   discovery.
Programming and physical computing are very often making and tinkering activities (Hsu et al., 2017), as students
can build and rebuild their robot, make the program design, code and debug. Both in programming and in making
and tinkering activities, the play is diffused. Play in this work is defined as a dynamic, active and constructive
behaviour, and it's contiguous with the gamification of learning (Deterding, 2011; Ioannou, 2018). The connection
between all the above concepts and learning in CSCL, including students' attitudes, are examined in this paper.
          Both making and tinkering in education are not new ideas. They have their theoretical roots in Papert's
constructionism, which is built upon Piaget's constructivism (Papavlasopoulou et al., 2017). Making is also noted
by educators such as Froebel, Montessori and Dewey when they advanced practical, physical and playful learning

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     384                                                   © ISLS
(Vossoughi & Bevan, 2014). As Vossoughi and Bevan (2014) indicated, the theories of Vygotsky, Lave and
Wenger are related to making, too, in the notion that making can support learning and development.
          The benefits of making in the learning process have been identified for many decades, thus during the
last years a growing interest has been shown on making or "maker culture" as a philosophy or phenomenon
(Papavlasopoulou et al., 2017), which should be examined more thoroughly through more empirical studies (Hsu
et al., 2017). Making can change learners' role from passive recipients to active ones, taking control over their
own knowledge (Papavlasopoulou et al., 2017), which it is a vital characteristic of learner-driven pedagogies that
are compounded in curriculums. Learning by doing gives learners the opportunity to engage in problem-solving,
self-directed  and collaborative  work  (Hsu  et al., 2017)    through   the  development   of interests, identity and
knowledge, as it may involve the use of physical materials in traditional crafts or hobby techniques (such as
woodworking, cooking, etc.) or the use of technology. During making, learners are engaged in tinkering, which
also builds on inquiry-based pedagogy and exploits learner-centered learning (Papavlasopoulou et al., 2017).
According to Sheridan et al. (2014), tinkering supports learning and promotes 21st-century skills. As programming
involves  tinkering,  educational robotics as learning tool    can also  benefits teaching  and learning   in STEAM
education.   Making,   tinkering  and programming     are   closely   related to  playful and   gameful   learning,    as
experimental and hands-on activities are involved. Robots can be used as a game in students' hands and alongside
with gameful design (Deterding, 2011; Ioannou, 2018), the learning outcomes can be beneficial.
          Although a few researchers focus on the value of making, tinkering, programming, and play in learning
(Krieger et al., 2015; Hsu et al., 2017; Martinez & Stager, 2013), studies which document the child's learning
experience in making-based activities are currently lacking. A growing number of efforts in making-enhanced
activities is observed in non-formal or informal learning environments, such as workshops, libraries, museums,
summer-school and after-school programs rather than in formal education. Yet, most of these efforts are practice-
oriented  in contrast  to only  few research-oriented studies   (Chu,  Angello,   Saenz,  & Quek,   2017).  Moreover,
typically such  activities  are  done with  students  of   older age   e.g.,  secondary  education, 12-18   years   old
(Papavlasopoulou et al., 2017).
          In the present investigation, we adopted a making-&-tinkering approach to learning Mathematics (M),
together  with Arts   (A) and  Engineering (E),  in formal     education with  young  learners. The  study  sought     to
investigate young learners' knowledge, attitudes towards a tinkering-&-making approach to learning mathematic
and their development of 21st-century skills, as they engaged in a group project using a variety of arts, crafts, and
technological tools. The study sought to answer the following research questions:
          RQ1: What kinds of learning gains do young students experience during making-&-tinkering activities?
          RQ2: What are their attitudes towards this approach of learning in formal (math) education?
          RQ3: How this approach seems to enact the development of 21st-century skills?

Methodology
The study adopted a mixed methods research design, relying on both quantitative and qualitative data collection
and analysis to answer the research questions under investigation.

Participants
The sample was composed of 18, 3rd-grade students (aged 8 to 9 years old), 12 girls and 6 boys. The students
came from a small public primary school in a rural area in northeastern Mediterranean. The majority of the
students  came  from   families  of middle  socioeconomic      status and  education.   The school  was   selected     by
convenience sampling, as the researcher was teaching at the school.

Procedures
The research work took place in the participants' regular classroom. The desks were set in a way so as students
could work in six groups of three. The group formation constituted children from different cognitive, emotional
and social behavior levels. Two groups used the classroom's computers and four groups used tablets. On each
group's table, there were pencils, rubbers, rulers, variety of reused materials and an Edison robot. The 5-sessions
intervention lasted four weeks as summarized in Table 1 (see also pictures in Figures 1, 2).

Table 1: The 5-sessions intervention

 Sessions       Activity             Description
 1st            craft                -the problem is given
                                     -brainstorming about how they could make their craft and materials they could use

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      385                                                  © ISLS
                                       -students in groups create their craft
 2nd            math goals             -small exhibition in the classroom of their "monster robot vacuum cleaners'
                                       -students write a four-digit price for their monster
                                       -they are taught about rounding to the nearest hundred
                                       -they choose six of their monsters' prices (the number six was given to limit the
                                       task) and try to round them to the nearest hundred
 3rd            finish the artefacts   -students work in three-members' group
                and program the        -they choose which monster is suitable to be set on the robot
                robot                  -they find a way to put the monster on the robot
                                       -they program their artefacts to move continuously
 4th            improve the            -groups look for ways to improve their programming, by making their robot moving
                programming            continuously without getting out of the borders
 5th            prepare posters        - groups prepare their poster and organize their presentation

Data collection and analysis
Data collection included knowledge pre- and post- tests, questionnaire on students' attitudes, video data and focus
groups data.

Knowledge test
A knowledge test was used pre and post intervention to measure students' acquisition of mathematical knowledge.
The test included two exercises on the content of the math lesson. The same test was given a month later (i.e., as
delayed-test) to measure the retention of knowledge. The tests were examined for face validity by an experienced
teacher-colleague at the school. Another teacher-colleague examined and ensured that the lesson was relevant and
in-line with the National Curriculum.

                      Figure 1. Making-&-tinkering activities to set the craft onto the robot.

Attitudes questionnaire
The questionnaire used is known as the My Class Activities (MCA), an instrument developed by Gentry and
Gable (2001) to measure students' attitudes toward their class activities, specifically their level of: (a) interest
e.g., "What I do in my class fits my interests", "I have an opportunity to work on things in my class that interest
me", (b) challenge e.g., "The activities I do in my class are challenging", "I have to think to solve problems in my
class", (c) choice e.g., "I can choose to work in a group", "I can choose materials to work with in class", and (d)
enjoyment e.g., "I look forward to my class", "I have fun in my class". The questionnaire has previously reported
good psychometric properties (Gentry & Gable, 2001). The questionnaire was translated from its English version

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      386                                                       © ISLS
to Greek, following the standard test adaptation guidelines (Chapman & Carter, 1979). Initially the MCA items
were translated by the researcher, who is a native speaker of Greek and then the items were translated back to
English by an English teacher, and finally they were compared. Two more experts reviewed the translated MCA
items, to ensure the content validity of the items. Then it was piloted with four students of the same school age,
coming from another school of the same district. The MCA questionnaire was administered at the end of the 5th
session of the intervention.

Video data and analysis
Observational data were collected via video analysis, which was held in two rounds. In the first round, which was
based on the Critical Incident Technique (Flanagan, 1954), general but important episodes and themes were noted
(e.g. "Making and tinkering was detected during the phase of the craft's construction", "Tinkering helped students
to  improve their  craft and  their programming,   to remember   the   result, and  to feel satisfaction  about their
achievement", "Collaboration during the making and tinkering activities helped them to improve their artifact and
to find the best programming solution"). These themes helped in the organization of the focus groups' protocol.
The second round of video-analysis was conducted using the Manifest Content Approach (FitzGerald, 2012) on
the episodes identified  during the  first round; the episodes  were   coded   based on the  Tinkering   Dimensions
Framework (Bevan et al., 2015) which was used as per Table 2. Both, the first and second video-analysis rounds
were conducted separately by the researcher and another expert and inter-rater reliability (present agreement) was
assessed to 87% and 89% respectively. Upon percent agreement computation, the raters discussed and resolved
all disagreements.

Table 2: Learning Dimensions Framework developed by the Tinkering Studio (Bevan et al., 2015)

 Learning Dimension                                                     Indicators
 Engagement                                   ·   Spending time in tinkering activities
                                              ·   Displaying motivation or investment through effect or
                                                  behavior
 Initiative & Intentionality                  ·   Setting one's own goals
                                              ·   Seeking and responding to feedback
                                              ·   Persisting to achieve goals in the problem space
                                              ·   Taking intellectual risks or showing intellectual courage
 Social Scaffolding                           ·   Requesting or offering help in solving problems
                                              ·   Inspiring new ideas or approaches
                                              ·   Physically connecting to others' works
 Development of understanding                 ·   Expressing a realization through effect or utterances
                                              ·   Offering explanations for a strategy, tool or outcome
                                              ·   Applying knowledge
                                              ·   Striving to understand

Focus groups
Semi-structured focus-group interviews with students (3 focus groups with 6 students each, 40 minutes each) were
conducted at the end of the experience. The focus-group interviews were organized based on the framing of the
study, the themes derived from the video analysis, and the research questions of the study (e.g.," What did you
learn from the experience?", "How do you feel about this approach to learning mathematic at school?"). The
focus-group  interview   data were   video-recorded   and  transcribed for subsequent    data  analysis.  Data  were
transcribed and qualitatively analyzed using a thematic analysis approach (Attride-Stirling, 2001).

Findings

Knowledge gains
A Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test demonstrated statistically significant gains in students' knowledge from pre- to
post- testing (W(18) = 2, z = -2.18, p <.05). Also, a Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test was used to examine knowledge
retention (i.e., delayed test data); results showed   that knowledge   gains   were  preserved    since there was no
statistically significant difference from post to delayed testing (W(18) = 1, z = -1.34, p >.05).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    387                                                   © ISLS
Consistent with the quantitative data, during the focus group discussions, almost all the children (n=15 out of 18)
mentioned that they could explain how to round a four-digit number to the nearest hundred. Specifically, a girl
noted:

        I really liked the session where we gave four-digit prices to our monster-hoovers and organized
        a small shop. And it was nice when we walked around the classroom -to the shop-desks- to
        choose 6 prices and try to round them to the nearest hundred...We didn't know how to round
        the numbers and we were trying [...] Only John was right and when he explained to us, I
        understood and now I know!      [#12, Girl]

Attitudes towards the tinkering-&-making approach
Descriptive statistics on the attitude subscale mean-scores showed that the students appreciated and enjoyed the
tinkering-&-making approach to formal (math) learning, particularly the opportunity to choose the way they could
work in the project and to face challenges during the project, which triggered their interest (Table 3).

Table 3: Subscale mean-scores for attitudes

                                    Subscale            Mean                SD
                                    Interest                 3.30          0.61
                                   Challenge                 2.88          0.66
                                     Choice                  1.90          0.77
                                   Enjoyment                 3.50          0.61

Findings from the video-analysis supported the results from questionnaire data on attitudes, as 27% of the incidents
concerned the presence of the dimension of "Engagement" (see Figure 2), based in the framework by (Bevan et
al., 2015).

                  30%

                  25%

                  20%

                  15%

                  10%

                   5%

                   0%
                          Engagement          Initiative and   Social Scaffolding  Development of
                                              Intentionality                       understanding

                    Figure 2. Results according to the "Learning Dimension Framework".

The focus-group interviews provided additional evidence of students' attitudes, in fact, demonstrating a positive
shift in attitudes over time, e.g.
        At the beginning, we couldn't work [...] by the end, I liked it!
        When you gave us the programming challenge, we thought it was something difficult, but after
        we tried it was easier[... ] I liked the project because we programmed the robots through the
        computers!  [#1, Girl]

        I was enthusiastic! Basically, we felt happiness![...] All the sadness we felt at the beginning had
        gone away by the end as we were happy about our achievements! [...] That time I felt I was a
        scientist who invented something very great. And we learned a thousand of things we didn't
        know before! And using all those materials you gave us, we managed to do something we never
        did before[...] Will we make again a lesson with robots? [#4, Girl]

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     388                                                   © ISLS
21st-century skills
Most of the results derived from the focus-group interview data referred to the 21st-century skills. The data were
grouped into three categories -- Learning & Innovation Skills, Information Media & Technology Skills, and Life
& Career Skills ­ per  framework    by the Partnership    for   the 21st Century Learning (P21, 2015).   Findings
concerning the "Learning & Innovation Skills" are organized below in categories.

Creativity and innovation
The focus-group data revealed that creativity and innovation skills were worked throughout the project. The
students used their imagination to construct their craft and design and to prepare their poster. During the project,
the students improved their crafts and their programming, invented new ideas, improved or changed their initial
ideas and found ways to fasten their craft onto the robot, e.g.

       At the beginning, I had an idea, later I got another idea, and finally, I got another idea...
       We put our imagination to make our monsters and posters!
       I mostly liked the craft part and when I used my imagination!
       [...] and we managed to fasten our monster on the robot without any lego or anything else! We
       just set it on the robot and it wouldn't fall.
       My team found another way [...] we set the monster onto the robot, but when we realized that
       there was no space to put our fingers to press the robot's buttons, we used the small wood chips
       that were set on the monster to press the buttons. So, we turned the monster in a way that the
       yellow wood chip could press the circular button, the green wood chip could press the square
       button, and the other wood chip could press the triangle!!!     [#13, Girl]

In most groups, the students worked creatively with others and they implemented or suggested innovations, e.g.

       I liked the moment we invented new things.
       That time I felt I was a scientist who invented something very important!
       When you are engaged in such a kind of activities you feel like you are Einstein!
       Instead of the monster-hoover robot, we could have made the caveman robot related to our
       history [...]
       Yes! Or to use the idea in Gymnastic where the robots could be our bodies!"
       And invent more outdoor activities, not only indoor activities.
       [...] the teacher could use more puzzle challenges leading us to a treasure, for more mystery
       and fun!
       Oh! We could also write the programming commands on a paper and later when we find the
       treasure, we could test them on the tablet. [#18, Girl]

Critical thinking and problem-solving
In students' reporting we could easily identify strategies related to critical thinking and problem solving e.g.

       We learned how to describe step by step the process we followed from the beginning to the end
       [...] we planned with all the steps until we could solve the problem and reached our goal!
       [...] we made questions to find other solutions [...]
       We should be careful, and we should observe what we were doing to avoid making mistakes...
       We knew why we made each step, and we were able to explain it...
       At the beginning, we couldn't find the right programming solution, but later we understood how
       to do it! I know how to do it!" (talking about rounding to the nearest hundred)
       I realized that we must finish something before we review and make judgments [...] it may not
       be so difficult [...]
       why the other group found the programming and we did not?
       [...] I saw the other posters full of colours and I felt nervous.  [#12, Boy]

Communication and collaboration
It became apparent in the focus-group interview data that the students communicated clearly with others via a
variety of communicative ways, ranging from body movements and discussions to the usage of descriptions,
posters and narrative stories. They also learned to collaborate with others especially their groupmates, e.g.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   389                                                   © ISLS
          At the beginning, when one child told us to do it like this, the other one disagreed and we started
          to quarrel each other, but later, we managed to collaborate [...]
          I would like to have more group works and collaborate with more kids.
          We learned to work in groups without loud voices and quarrels.
          We learned to respect each other in our group, especially we learned to help, and give advice
          [...]
          When my groupmate resigned and didn't want to try again in finding the right programming, I
          was telling her to continue and that we could make it!      [#8, Boy]

Even though most data were categorized as "Learning & Innovation Skills", students also reported ideas related
to "Information Media & Technology Skills", e.g.

          We learned how to use the technology [...] our robot, the computer, the tablet, and we first saw
          and touched an iPod and a camera!        [#3, Boy]

          We managed to program our robot...We learned to use the computer or the tablet, and to
          program the robot...I learned robotics and programming!           [#6, Boy]

Furthermore, students also reported learning gains related to "Life & Career Skills", e.g.

          The   project taught  me   that I must   have  patience and  persistence,   because  I had   to finish
          something. [#2, Girl]

          We were so happy, because we tried again and again, to make it [...] to what we wanted to...
          we never stopped trying. [#12, Girl]

          We've been taught to respect others [...] and help each other [...] We've been taught to be
          hard-workers [...] to reach our goals! [#1, Girl]

Discussion and implications
The present     study  sought to investigate  students'  knowledge    gains,   attitudes towards a  making-&-tinkering
approach to learning mathematics and development of 21st-century skills as they engaged in a making-&-tinkering
project using a variety of arts, crafts, and technological tools such as a physical robot. The approach involved
making,   tinkering,   programming,    and  play   in  a multidisciplinary    project integrated into   the mathematics
curriculum. Findings from the study suggest that young students can greatly benefit from such an approach. While
making-&-tinkering activities are typically enacted in informal learning settings with learners of older age e.g.,
secondary   education,   12-18   years old   (Papavlasopoulou     et  al., 2017), the  present study   demonstrated  the
applicability and value of such methods, in formal educational context with young students.
          RQ1: What kinds of learning gains do young students experience during making-&-tinkering activities?
Findings demonstrated that students' mathematical knowledge was improved by the end of the project and that
the knowledge gained was retained, consistent with previous work reporting that making is in favour of knowledge
acquisition (Chu    et al.,  2017). Indeed, previous   work   has also reported   that making  activities   helped young
children develop knowledge whilst the nature of these activities helped them share the new knowledge with others
(Sheridan et al., 2014).
          RQ2: What are their attitudes towards the tinkering-&-making approach in formal (math) education?
Findings from the present investigation suggest positive shifts in students' attitudes towards the making-&-
tinkering  approach.    Interestingly,    while at  the   beginning   students    exhibited   negative  behaviours,  the
implementation of the interdisciplinary project allowed shifts towards more positive attitudes; the shifts seemed
to be related to students' opportunity to choose the way they could work and to overcome challenges throughout
the project. The "engaging" nature of the project was demonstrated in the video data (27% of the observed
incidents concerned this dimension) as well as students' statements in the focus-group interview data. Relevant
findings, that  is, making-&-tinkering      activities influencing   students' attitudes  towards   STEAM,    have  been
reported in recent studies (Chu et al., 2017; Harnett et al., 2015).
          RQ3:   How    this approach  seems    to enact  the development     of 21st-century  skills? The  study  further
supports  that   making-&-tinkering    projects    can   support  the development     of  students' 21st-century   skills,
particularly in all the three categories of the framework by the Partnership for 21st Century Learning (P21, 2015).
Throughout this experience we documented multiple episodes of critical thinking, problem solving, creativity and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       390                                                    © ISLS
innovation, communication and collaboration. Similar results were found in previous works (Bevan, Gutwill,
Petrich & Wilkinson, 2015; Harnett, Tretter, & Philipp, 2015).
            Although the study, confirms to a large extent, findings already reported in previous works, the field is
still in maturing    and  therefore replicability helps to enhance   the validity of such methods    and practices in
education. The present study is one of very few with young children of this age (8 to 9 years old), engaging in
making-&-tinkering activities in the context of formal mathematics curriculum and therefore, has a unique merit
in the research literature with implications for researchers and practitioners in the area. The small (N=18) sample
of convenience in the present investigation does not allow for generalizability of findings, yet the rich description
of our methods and procedures should enable other researchers and practitioners to transfer these findings into
similar contexts and settings. Overall, a better understanding of how making-&-tinkering occurs in formal settings
with young learners will enable researchers and practitioners to nourish learning environments which can serve
the development of the 21st-century skills.

Acknowledgments
This work is part of a project that has received funding from the European' s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme     under   grant agreement   Nº739578    and  the government    of the  Republic of   Cyprus  through the
Directorate General for European Programmes, Coordination and Development.

References
Attride-Stirling, J. (2001). Thematic networks: an analytic tool for qualitative research. Qualitative research, 1(3),
            385-405.
Bevan, B., Gutwill, J. P., Petrich, M., & Wilkinson, K. (2015). Learning through stem-rich tinkering: Findings
            from a jointly negotiated research project taken up in practice. Science Education, 99(1), 98-120.
Chapman,     D.  W.,  &  Carter, J. F. (1979). Translation   procedures  for the  cross-cultural use of measurement
            instruments. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 1(3), 71-76.
Chu, S. L., Angello, G., Saenz, M., & Quek, F. (2017). Fun in Making: Understanding the experience of fun and
            learning through  curriculum-based     Making    in the  elementary   school  classroom.    Entertainment
            Computing, 18, 31-40.
Deterding, S., Dixon, D., Khaled, R., & Nacke, L. (2011, September). From game design elements to gamefulness:
            defining gamification.  In Proceedings   of  the   15th international  academic MindTrek     conference:
            Envisioning future media environments (pp. 9-15). ACM.
Ioannou, A. (2018). A model of gameful design for learning using interactive tabletops: enactment and evaluation
            in the socio-emotional education classroom. Educational Technology Research and Development, 1-26.
Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incident technique. Psychological bulletin, 51(4), 327.Gentry, M., & Gable,
            R. K. (2001). From the Student's Perspective--My Class Activities: An Instrument for Use in Research
            and Evaluation. Journal for the Education of the Gifted, 24(4), 322-343.
Harnett, C. K., Tretter, T. R., & Philipp, S. B. (2014, October). Hackerspaces and engineering education. In
            Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 2014 IEEE (pp. 1-8). IEEE.
Hsu, Y. C., Baldwin, S., & Ching, Y. H. (2017). Learning through making and maker education. TechTrends,
            61(6), 589-594.
Krieger, S., Allen, M., & Rawn, C. (2015, February). Are females disinclined to tinker in computer science? In
            Proceedings of the 46th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (pp. 102-107).
            ACM.
Martinez, S. L., & Stager, G. (2013). Invent to learn: Making, tinkering, and engineering in the classroom (pp.
            31-41). Torrance, CA: Constructing modern knowledge press.
Papavlasopoulou, S., Giannakos, M. N., & Jaccheri, L. (2017). Empirical studies on the Maker Movement, a
            promising approach to learning: A literature review. Entertainment Computing, 18, 57-78.
P21- Partnership for 21st Century Learning. (2015). P21 Partnership for 21st Century Learning. Partnership for
            21st            Century                Learning,              9.             Retrieved              from
            http://www.p21.org/documents/P21_Framework_Definitions.pdf
Rode,    J. A.,  Weibert, A., Marshall,  A., Aal,   K., von  Rekowski,   T., El  Mimouni, H.,    & Booker, J.  (2015,
            September). From computational thinking to computational making. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
            International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (pp. 239-250). ACM.
Sheridan, K., Halverson, E. R., Litts, B., Brahms, L., Jacobs-Priebe, L., & Owens, T. (2014). Learning in the
            making: A comparative case study of three makerspaces. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 505-531.
Vossoughi, S., & Bevan, B. (2014). Making and tinkering: A review of the literature. National Research Council
            Committee on Out of School Time STEM, 1-55.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      391                                                  © ISLS
