     Parent and Educator Perspectives on the Benefits of an Online
         Space to Promote Offline Program Collaborative Learning

            Susan K Walker, Cheuk Hei Cheng, Alize Rattenni, Caroline Reynolds, and Sam Lapham
   skwalker@umn.edu, cheng539@umn.edu, arattenn@umn.edu, reyno574@umn.edu, lapha018@umn.edu
                                               University of Minnesota

          Abstract.    This   multiple     perspective,     qualitative  investigation   with    parents    and
          teachers/teaching  assistants   provided   insight  on  values of a  virtual  platform to aid  parent
          collaborative  learning   in a  dual focus   early  childhood  program.    Benefits were  viewed   as
          complementary    or supplementary      to  face-to-face program   components    and  context.  Parent
          access to information about their children not available to them during program participation
          may deepen understanding and strengthen feelings of connectedness, particularly important to
          parent-teacher relationships. While there was synergy on most platform benefits, teachers did
          not  observe   parents' value   in  maintaining    the program    climate  of trust and   safety, and
          extending feelings of community. These may be essential for the platform to represent the
          learning supports   aligned    with  the   offline  program    experience. Study    findings  lead to
          hypotheses on the role of an online environment in parents' mental models of programs for
          collaborative learning, and in social presence that strengthen collaborative learning.

Virtual environments and interactive digital applications hold powerful potential for extending learning beyond
face  to face  settings.  Efforts to   hybridize  formal K-16     education with    complementary   technologies   show
positive impacts on student collaborative learning outcomes (e.g., Heflin, Shewmaker, Nguyen, 2017). Less well
studied is technology-enhanced learning in nonformal education and with adult learners, specifically parents of
young    children who    participate in  community-based      education  programs.     These  learners  and  settings are
critically important to the wider study of computer-supported collaborative learning. There is obvious societal
value to  promoting   parenting   role competence.     And   nonformal   education   group-based  programs   for parents
prove successful   at  facilitating  domain    and   practice learning   through collaborative   inquiry  and   reflection
(Campbell & Palm, 2018). The conscientious integration of technology in ways that complement nonformal
program aims for parent learning is rare (Strickroth & Pinkwart, 2013). The current study extends the authors'
work employing design-based implementation research (DBIR) (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng & Sabelli, 2011) to
explore technology integration in a dual focus early learning program (Walker, 2017).

Theoretical and empirical background
Socioconstructivist perspectives on parent learning view the acquisition of knowledge about parenting and the
self in the parenting role as a continuous process, involving reflection of experience and observation of and
interaction with   others who    reinforce norms    and validate  experiences  (Azar,   2003).  As  facilitated in group
parenting education, collaborative inquiry occurs in discussion, critical self-reflection and exploration of the role
through the sharing of experiences. This encourages the development of mental models, or conceptual schemes
that guide parent action (Lam & Kwong, 2012; Marineau & Segal, 2006). Facilitators foster group cohesion and
social capital through a climate of respect, trust and security (Campbell & Palm, 2018).
          Research on technology's role in parent social learning has largely focused on individual participation
in what Henri and Pudlelko (2003) label `communities of interest' (e.g., specialized groups on social media)
(Nieuwboer, Fukkink, & Hermanns, 2013; Zero to Three, 2016). Parents seek others online for information and
support in ways that complement the personal and professional sources in their lives (e.g., family, friends, the
pediatrician) (Zero to Three, 2016). And their investment in these online contacts varies with their technology
comfort,  and   access.   To  a   lesser  extent,   parents   may  participate in   structured   online  parent  `learner
communities'   and  research     suggests  benefits  similar  to offline collaborative  settings (Gray,   2004).   Online
formats   may  also  blend   effectively   to  meet  offline  learning   program  aims.  For   example,   Guldberg    and
Pilkington (2006) observed that, as facilitated by a trained peer as part of a credential program, a complementary
online community for the caregivers fostered context (creation of a safe space, defining common values) and
process (emergence of challenging questions, resolution-focused goal attainment) dimensions of collaborative
learning. Theoretically   then,   if parents   in  a nonformal    education   program   benefit  from   a   collaborative,
constructivist format    offline and   experience   an online  complementary     experience,  learning  gains   would  be
greater. This was the premise for our platform design and implementation research, as discussed below.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        392                                                   © ISLS
Social learning technology and the early childhood family education program
Minnesota's   Early    Childhood  Family   Education    (ECFE)    is a  parenting   education   program    that adheres  to
constructivist principles. Operating through local school districts, ECFE offers weekly no/low cost two-hour
classes  and access  to  community    resources   to  parents of  children    from birth   through age five   (ECFE.info).
During the classes, parents and children interact together for the first hour, guided by licensed early childhood
and parenting educators, then separate for the second (Figure 1). Unlike other group parent education, ECFE
does not use an established curriculum; educators tailor learning content to individual groups, guided by field
guidelines   of  early  childhood   program   quality  (Minnesota    Department       of Education,   2001).    ECFE   sites
generally  offer multiple   class sections  per  site and  hold   several  site-wide,  all-family  events per year. ECFE
research  has   demonstrated  processes    and   contexts of  learning  and   instruction  consistent  with   collaborative
learning principles    (Campbell  &  Palm,    2018).  Weekly    discussion    time with  other parents,   as facilitated by
parenting educators, fosters learning through information exchange, reflection on experiences and joint problem
solving. Attention   is given to  a climate   and context  of   support   and  respect.  The first authors'  own  research
indicates that parent relationships fostered in ECFE endure beyond the program and are supports throughout
their child's life (Walker, 2018b).

 Figure 1. Elements and Program Structure of ECFE. (PE = parent educator; EC = early childhood educator).

         Partnership    with an ECFE   site   in an  urban school    district resulted  in the development    of an online
platform to support ECFE's learning objectives (Walker, 2017). Participatory design research revealed parent
preference for between-class social connectivity, information about parenting and about their child's learning;
employing technology that was easy to use, mobile and ensured privacy (e.g., restricted access to class pages).
The developed     platform    features   a Facebook-like      news   feed  for   posts   and   discussion,   and  area   for
announcements, a shared calendar, dynamic photo album, external links, and members visual display (Figure 2).
A user dashboard provides access to class pages, private messaging and notifications. Posts can be directed to
the full site or to selected classes. Launch of the completed platform occurred in early 2017. Google Analytics
tracking to the end of the school year revealed steady use by repeated visitors, with approximately  of sessions
(i.e., group of site interactions per visit) by parents. Expanded platform use by additional ECFE sites in the
subsequent school year showed similar proportionate use by parents (Walker, 2018a).
         To date, investigations of the virtual platform show promise regarding usability, perceived usefulness
by parents   and staff  and  integration into  program    operations  (Walker,   2018a).   Contributing   to new  learning
theory  (Penuel,  et al, 2011),   requires deeper     examination  into   cross-environment    collaborative    learning by
parents inclusive of the roles played by teachers. Parenting educators are key to the parents' meaning making
process  (Lam   & Kwong,     2012). And    in early   childhood   settings that also  serve  parents, the  perspectives  of
teachers and parents represent their adult roles (teacher; learner, parent) and are proxy for the children who also
participate (Katz, 1993). Multiple perspective research allows a more complex and nuanced understanding of
the shared experience [so that] views can be situated within the social relationships wherein they are constructed
(Vogl, Zartler, Schmidt & Rieder, 2018, p.179).

Method
In-depth  interviews    with multiple  perspective    qualitative analysis    were employed    to  understand   shared   and
unique perspectives from teachers, teaching aides, and parents on technology's role in promoting parent
collaborative learning in ECFE.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       393                                                      © ISLS
                                 Figure 2. Desktop view of ECFE virtual platform.

Sample
The sample consisted of 25 parents (19 women, six men) and six ECFE staff members (five women, one man)
from the original ECFE design site. That site and parents for the study were selected for their demographic
diversity and representativeness of families who attend ECFE in the school district. Parents were also sampled
to represent all 8 weekly   site classes. They ranged   in age from 20 to 57   years (M = 35.3, S.D.  = 1.5), and
reported from    one to six  children  (M  = 2.7, S.D.  =  1.7). Five parents  reported caring for children   with
disabilities. Six parents came from the two Spanish-speaking classes. Parents were fairly evenly distributed by
length of program participation (first year to more than 3 years). Staff held positions as licensed teachers (2
parenting educators, 1 early childhood teacher; all female) and as classroom assistants (3; 1 male). Their years
of working in ECFE ranged from three to 35 years (M = 21.3). Staff ages ranged from 39 to 56 years (M = 48).

Data collection and analysis
Semi-structured interviews explored participation or instructional experiences with the ECFE program and the
use of technology in ECFE. Each interview lasted on average 1 hour (range: 45 minutes to 3 hours, 30 minutes).
Audio-recorded interviews were conducted at the ECFE site by one of the three trained interviewers. Informed
consent was obtained from participants prior interviews. Interviews were transcribed to text, then audited for
accuracy by a second transcriber, and pseudonyms applied to all names identified for confidentiality.
         An  informed   constructivist  grounded  theory   approach (Charmaz,   2014;   Thornburg, 2012)  guided
coding and analysis. Additional considerations in coding and analysis were deployed to compare within and
across groups    consistent with  multiple  perspective analysis  (Vogl, et al 2018).   The coding  process   with
memoing consisted of three phases, initial coding, focused coding, and theoretical coding. Coders were assigned
in pairs to analyze parent and staff interviews separately and together to enhance trustworthiness (Denzin, &
Lincoln, 2018). During initial coding, transcripts were read and coded with the incident-by-incident approach,
informed by sensitizing concepts from the literature on collaborative learning in parenting education. Second,
focused codes emerged after reviewing initial codes. Themes identified within one relational unit (e.g. parents,
teaching staff) were compared by coding pairs to generate central theoretical codes by unit. Finally, theoretical
codes emerging from each relational unit were compared with each other. The themes emerged from staff and
parents were compared across pairs of coders to understand the meanings of the perspectives, and shared and
differing aspects of the perspectives.

Results
A summary of parent and staff perspectives on collaborative learning as supported by the virtual platform is
provided in Table 1. Learning supports were identified as process (e.g., aiding the acquisition or interpretation
of content) or context (e.g., climate, tone) and as being supplementary (in addition to) or complementary (an
extension of) the face-to-face program experience.

Table 1. Perspectives on technology benefits to collaborative learning in ECFE

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    394                                                © ISLS
Construct                  Evidence

Information about          Parents
Children                            Positive emotion at seeing pictures of children in classroom while away
                                    Feel taken care of, thought of by staff
Process/Supplementary               Understand more about child and children
                           Staff
                                    Opportunity to add information that parents don't get while in parenting
                                    education
                                    Reflect interest by parents to learn more about children in classroom
                                    Strengthen relationships between parents and teachers:

Engagement with            Parents
parenting content                   Access information if can't attend (supplementary)
                                    Share information with co-parent who can't attend (supplementary)
Process/Complementary               Gather information from parents in other class supplementary)
(main)/                             Read or view before or after class (complementary)
Supplementary                       Get advice and information from parents and teachers (complementary)
(secondary)                Staff
                                    Content to stimulate thinking before or after class (complementary)
                                    Additional materials provided in handouts, drive links, URLs to deepen
                                    learning (complementary/supplementary)

Relational/supportive      Parents
engagement with                     Support to parents from other parents, from staff
families                            May use with other methods to connect with family and friends for support
                           Staff
Process/Complementary               Continue to provide 1-1 communication of support to parents.
                                    Sharing images and videos with other children and families helps retain
                                    connections beyond class, over summer.

Program                    Parents
communication and                   Easy access to program reminders, events, 1-1 communication
information                         Maintains `idea' of program continually availability
                           Staff
Process/Complementary               Easy provision of program reminders, events, 1-1 communication
                                    Makes work more efficient; easier to complete administrative tasks

Climate, tone, safety,     Parents
privacy and trust                   Feels like a safe space to post and view pictures of my child
                                    Tone in discussion similar to what is experienced face to face
Context/Complementary               Appreciate member only access for privacy

Maintain Community         Parents
                                    Able to maintain connections to others that extends community
Context/Complementary               Able to connect and see families who attend other classes. Represent
                                    diversity in community.

Supplementary information access: Child
Of all identified, this was the dominant subtheme expressed by parents and by staff. Both observed how teachers
and occasionally, other parents posted pictures or videos of children. At times they augmented the images with
text to identify developmental gains or processes. Parents expressed appreciation for the chance to learn more
about their child, and  what their child was  doing in the   classroom when   they were  in parenting education.
Parents spoke with pride at seeing their child's activity or accomplishment; some also spoke of learning more
about the child in context with other children. They also felt cared for by staff. Mother of 2, Mia said, "So it's
nice to, like, have them vested in, like, 'hey the parents probably want to see their kids doing this'." For early

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   395                                                 © ISLS
childhood staff who have limited interaction time with parents, it was the opportunity to help parents learn more
about the child and child development. Staff also shared positive emotions about the exchange: Teacher Jade:
"You know, I think that, that's a priceless tool, because in the moment I can have that [image of what a child is
doing] with me, and I can look back to it; I can share it with the parent. I can say that I'm noticing something
changing. We can look for patterns together. For both parents and early childhood staff, the opportunity and
action in posting and reading/seeing information about the child appeared to strengthen the sense of connection.

Supplementary information access: Parenting
Parent access to information about parenting when they weren't in class due to absence or inability to attend (as
is the case   of many  co-parents) was   less frequently   but consistently  mentioned   across   parents and the two
parenting educators. The parenting educators felt that this helped them better reach all members of the class
learning  community.   Parents  appreciated feeling   caught   up.  Supplementary   access also   meant learning from
someone in a different class. Stella noted, "She had a special needs child ... and she put an article online that
we could all read.... that's very cool and I think we need to know more about that...[there are] cool things that I
can  access   now  and I can  learn  more   and I   can become     a better parent  now  because   I  get to see what
everybody's doing"

Parenting information complementary to classroom discussions
Parenting educators appreciated being able to post a video, reading or webpage to stimulate thinking before the
weekly class or extend discussion afterward. Although parents were generally positive about having access to
this information (e.g. "I think that would be really valuable because there's stuff that we're all interested in and
I'm sure there's information and resources that it's being drawn from and it might be interesting to spend you
know rather than flipping through Facebook, one night."), few spoke about continuing discussions outside of
class. As mother of 6 Bella observed,

          "You know and that's kind of sad but it's the truth because our lives are so busy and fast
          moving. And then for me, I don't want to scroll through and see like what questions someone
          asked today, because they're not really my questions. I don't know. So if I have a burning
          question or something that's really is on my mind, I'm not going to probably take the time to
          like post it and then wait to see if anyone responds. Because it's not immediate as a text would
          be or a discussion with someone face to face."

Continued access to program information
Parents   and teachers liked easy  access to  information    for registration, events, activities and reminders.  The
platform was a characterized as a one stop location to coordinate and find site information. Parents remarked
that this helped  simplify their busy lives;  staff  liked the efficiency of   reaching more   parents, more  quickly.
Reduced time in email and phoning, freed up time for teaching or other program responsibilities.

Access to support from parents and teachers
Use of the platform as a vehicle to continue supportive connections between parents, and from staff to parents
was  a common     theme  across  parents and  teachers,  especially  the  parenting educators   and  one  of the early
childhood aides (who'd worked in ECFE for over 20 years). Three parents from one class spoke of using the
platform to organize meals for an ECFE family who'd just given birth to triplets. Parents also relayed a sense of
relief or gratitude to extend 1-1 access to the parenting educator. In turn, staff commented that the platform
complemented other virtual and real time means for providing support to parents. Parenting educator Everly
said,: [...] you know I give parents my phone for texting, e-mail,[the platform] is great for that of course. And
parents will call me, parents will text me. They'll reach out and...and not just me. I'm saying that sometimes it's
a starter place. But I encourage them also to reach out to each other. So that's where the platform is helpful for
that as well."

Continuity of community and climate (parents)
A difference between parents and staff related to the platform extension of feelings of community, and program
climate   and tone. Parents  observed this;   staff did not.   This quote from   21 year   old Brooklyn   conveys the
extension of community:

          "And just being able to kind of like someone's picture of their kids you know kind of makes you
          feel like you're friends with that person and so it has that very Facebooky feel to it and that

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      396                                                  © ISLS
         creates I think a kind of that community. And maybe give you an idea, you know, `oh I saw
         that picture of you guys doing this and that looks fun' and it gives you maybe something to
         talk about when you see them in class...I have used it to connect with people outside of class
         and say like 'hey let's have a playdate go to the park' kind of thing. So that's a nice way to
         keep building that community."

Parents were also vocal about the maintained tone of civility and the sense of safety that they felt from the
private, ECFE member only access. As Lily stated:

         "...having like a respectful place that we had just communicate with each other that you still
         feel like, ECFE feels like a safe space to me and I feel like Parentopia is kind of like, also it
         offers that as well, because they know that there is an administrator and there's not going to
         be any kind of negative thoughts or comments. I mean everyone's really supportive. Yeah and
         I think it's a place that I can kind of share my ideas too and with everyone and they can do the
         same"

Conclusion and implications
This study offers preliminary support that parents and staff alike find shared and unique values to an online
platform as an extension of the face to face weekly program, and identify a variety of benefits to collaborative
learning. Platform interactions allow for continuity of connection (important for parents with infants, multiple
children and single parents, and for co-parents and other caregivers who cannot attend). It extends access to
parenting content, emotional and informational support, and to program events and activities. And significantly,
it serves as a means to receive information about the child that the parent can't acquire due to the program
structure that separates parents and children. Staff see the platform as improving the quality of their teaching
and outreach,  it may  make  their   work   easier and  more efficient, and this  may   bring a sense   of emotional
satisfaction. While there is potential evidence of the platform's practical value to collaborative learning, insights
from this study also suggest possible theoretical or conceptual advancements.

Strengthening parent-teacher partnerships and educator presence
In the traditional ECFE program, parents separate from their 2 ½ -5 year old children during parenting education
time and leave their children in the capable hands of the early childhood staff. While they look forward to time
to themselves and the interaction with other adults for reflection, sharing and discussion, many wonder about
their children's activity and happiness. The platform allows staff to post information, videos and text-augmented
photos of the child(ren). Because of the community (class) and site (families) nature of the program, pictures of
the child with other familiar children can help reinforce the parent's sense of the child in a wider social context.
Parents expressed a range of positive emotions when voicing appreciation for the information about their child
provided by the staff. Many conveyed sentiments of feeling closer to staff. In turn, early childhood staff who
cannot interact with parents as much during the all family parent-child interaction time appreciate the ability to
share information in other ways. Parents' sense of learning community membership is not exclusive to peers,
but includes their children and ECFE staff (Walker, 2018b). Children are the reason that parents join ECFE, and
raising healthy children is the value that all adults ­ parents and teachers - share in the program. Supplementary
interactions may strengthen the sense of trust and connection between parents and professional staff who teach
and care for the child (Lauluvein, 2010). Stronger parent-teacher relationships in early childhood bode well for
children's  learning outcomes    and set the   stage for partnerships  in later  school years (Froiland,Peterson  &
Davison, 2012).
         This aspect of collaborative learning by parents facilitated online by teachers' actions may also have an
emotional component. Sharing and receiving information about the child at the center of the teacher and parent's
interest in ways  that bring satisfaction   to both  may  deepen   the  learning experience   and offer a  reciprocal
interaction that sustains learning online and offline. Teachers like Everly observed the benefits to relationships:
"the more the parents see the teachers posting and they see their name up there and they see their face and they
see what they posted they see a photo. Parents are bridging- they're connecting more. They're building stronger
relationships."). Lehman's (2006) framework of presence in online learning suggests that addressing emotional
considerations   in  interaction activities  can   help  learners' confidence,    focus  and  excitement    to learn
collaboratively.

The importance of community and climate: Lessons for professionals

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    397                                                   © ISLS
Whereas parents appreciated how the platform mimics the climate, tone, privacy and feelings of safety of the
face to face site, and extended community and connection to others who share a parenting and program identity,
staff didn't speak to these. The difference may be due to the 4 to 1 ratio of parents to professionals in the study,
affording more observations by the former. The difference however, may be due to differences in perspectives
of being a community member vs one whose job it is to foster learning as community. Staff were more articulate
about the specific technologies they use for instruction and communication, and pedagogical purposes related to
sharing information, communication, extending class content and lending support. A focus on technology for
teaching over the social experience of the learner may limit teachers from their seeing themselves as participants
in discourse or as members of parents' learning community (Lauluvein, 2010). They may focus on providing
content when a busy parent with other content resources may more highly value their presence and affirmation.
         Staff may    need   guidance   to extend  community     in ways   that   maintain the  visual membership      and
emotional  tone    of the face  to  face   program. This   means    encouraging   families  to  post   information    about
themselves, pictures from neighborhood events, and posting in a site-wide forum. It can also mean monitoring
discourse to maintain exchanges in the civil, positive and nonjudgmental tone that led parents in this study to
make    favorable  comparisons     to  the platform  over    their  less then   positive   experiences  with    Facebook.
Encouraging  a  respectful   online   climate and sense   of community     can  help  parents make   connections    across
classes and build bridging social capital valuable to learning (Wenger, White & Smith, 2009).

The platform as representation of whole program participation experience
Parents, teachers   and teaching   assistants  identified a  range  of  ways   in which  using  the  platform   served  to
complement the weekly face to face learning experience. These included exposure to parenting content curated
by professionals, provision of up to date program information, access to supportive others, outlets for ongoing
communication to peers and professionals, and continued visual and text reminders of membership in a learning
community. As these informational, interactive and relational elements align with constructivist, collaborative
inquiry approaches in parenting education (Campbell & Palm, 2018; Lam & Kwong, 2012) and represent the
values and operation of ECFE, they may indicate the potential of a virtual platform as useful to the multiple
process and context mechanisms that foster parent collaborative learning.
         Theoretically however, the platform may also facilitate parent learning from a conceptual standpoint.
That the platform serves many learning and engagement functions complementary to parents' ECFE experience
may support parents' mental image of themselves as participating in a learning community beyond the weekly
session  structure.   The notion   is  expanded   as   they  are   also  "in the  children's   classroom"   through     the
supplementary images and information about their children. This may give them a sense of participating in all
components   of the   weekly  program    depicted in Figure   1. And    as ECFE    is a place  that is positive, as   busy,
stressed parents, the platform sends the message of ECFE being continually present, reliable and responsive, and
this may bring them comfort. This includes the consistently strong presence of staff who for some, function as
significant emotional supports. So, the platform's ability to extend the `idea' or mental model the program that
parents  affiliate with   as a  supportive    space  for  learning  with    others,  including  staff, may   be   another
complementary value of the platform for parents' collaborative learning.
         This study is, to be sure, preliminary in its findings. It depended on the voices of parents and staff at a
single ECFE site, about their experiences with a newly designed platform early in its implementation. Yet, there
is promise in the findings to buoy continued platform implementation in the school district program that will
allow use by larger numbers of parents and staff, at more ECFE sites. And it encourages further investigations in
the program-platform coordinated role in parent learning. To date the platform is being used by eight ECFE
programs  in four   school   districts and reaching  over   450  parents   and  teachers (Walker    2018a).  The  current
findings validate   employing   design-based   implementation      research  when   identifying innovation   for  a   long-
standing face-to-face parenting education program. Attention to the needs of the program and of the participants
and staff allowed development of a useful and possibly critical innovation to face to face parent education and
extending adult learning benefits. Continued research on implementation of the platform will suggest avenues
for its  contribution  to  learner  success   and  for sustainability    within   nonformal,  community-based       parent
education settings.

References
Azar, S. T.  (2003).   Adult development      and parenthood:   A   social-cognitive  perspective.  In  J. Demick     & C.
         Andreoletti (Eds.), Handbook of adult development (pp. 391-415). New York: Springer.
Campbell,  D.  and    Palm,  G. (2018).  Parent   education:  Working    with  groups   and individuals    (1st ed.).  San
         Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing grounded theory. London; Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      398                                                      © ISLS
Denzin, N. K. and Lincoln, Y. S., Editors. (2018). The SAGE handbook of qualitative research, 5th edition.
         Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Froiland, J. M., Peterson, A., & Davison, M. L. (2012). The long-term effects of early parent involvement and
         parent   expectation   in  the   USA.     School     Psychology     International,  34(1),    33-50.   doi:
         10.1177/0143034312454361
Gray, B. (2004). Informal learning in an online community of practice. Journal of Distance Education, 19, No 1,
         20-35.
Guldberg, K. & Pilkington, (2006). A community of practice approach to the development of non-traditional
         learners through networked learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 22, 159­171.
Heflin, H., Shewmaker, J., & Nguyen, J. (2017). Impact of mobile technology on student attitudes, engagement,
         and learning. Computers & Education, 107, 91-99.
Henri, F. and Pudelko, B. (2003). Understanding and analyzing activity and learning in virtual communities.
         Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19, 474-487.
Katz, L. G.   (1993). Multiple    perspectives on  the quality   of early   childhood  programs.   European    Early
         Childhood Education Research Journal, 1(2), 5-9.
Lam,  C. M.,  &   Kwong,    W. M.  (2012). The   "paradox   of empowerment"     in parent   education:   a reflexive
         examination of Parents' pedagogical expectations. Family Relations, 61(1), 65-74.
Laluvein, J. (2010). Parents, Teachers and the "Community of Practice".The Qualitative Report, 15(1), 176-195.
Lehman, R. (2006). The role of emotion in creating instructor and learner presence in the distance education
         experience. Journal of Cognitive Affective Learning, 2(2), 12-26.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry (Vol. 75). Sage.
Marienau, C. & Segal, J. (2006). Parents as developing adult learners. Child welfare, 85(5), 768-784.
Minnesota Department     of Education (2001).   Early  childhood    quality indicators of progress.   St Paul, MN.
         https://education.mn.gov/MDE/dse/early/ind/
Nieuwboer, C. C., Fukkink, R. G., & Hermanns, J. M. (2013). Online programs as tools to improve parenting: A
         meta-analytic review. Children and Youth Services Review, 35(11), 1823-1829.
Penuel,  W. R.,   Fishman,  B. J., Cheng,  B.,   & Sabelli,   N. (2011).    Developing  the  area  of  design-based
         implementation research. Educational Researcher. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Strickroth, S., & Pinkwart, N. (2013). An Approach for Supporting Hybrid Learning Communities: The Case of
         a Regional Parent Community. In Proceedings of the CSCL.
Thornberg, R.   (2012). Informed grounded theory. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, (56), 3, 243-
         259.
Vogl, S., Zartler, U., Schmidt, E. M., & Rieder, I. (2018). Developing an analytical framework for multiple
         perspective, qualitative longitudinal  interviews  (MPQLI).   International   Journal  of Social  Research
         Methodology, 21(2), 177-190.
Walker, S. (2018a). Parentopia: Overview of social interaction technology to extend family engagement and
         support.                       University                           of                          Minnesota.
         https://drive.google.com/file/d/1D_ee7Jp8_Y70tvqXeHYVKGeUFVnRfeuD/view?usp=sharing
Walker, S. (2018b). I think it's made everyone a little closer: A virtual platform extending parent learning as
         Community    of Practice. Poster  presented   at the 2018  International Society   for Learning   Sciences
         conference, London, June 29.
Walker, S. (2017). Creating Parentopia: Design-based Research to Develop an Interface for Parent Learning
         Communities   and   Networks.  Computer     Supported   Collaborative   Learning    bi-annual   conference.
         Philadelphia, PA
Wenger, E., White, N. and Smith, J.D. (2009). Digital habitats: Digital habitats: Stewarding technology for
         communities. Portland, OR: CPSquare.
Zero to Three (2016). Tuning In: Parents of Young Children Speak Up About What They Think, Know and Need
         Washington, DC.     https://www.zerotothree.org/resources/

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   399                                                   © ISLS
