   Exploring Disciplinary Boundaries in Early Elementary Students'
                                      Developing Practices

                       Kylie Peppler, University of California Irvine, kpeppler@uci.edu
                           Joshua Danish, Indiana University, jdanish@indiana.edu
                         Naomi Thompson, Indiana University, naothomp@indiana.edu

         Abstract:  In CSCL   we     often refer  to  knowledge   in terms of   "practices" to  highlight how
         knowledge is performed in context rather than abstracted from it (e.g., Greeno, 1998). One
         aspect of context is the    notion   of disciplines such  as  science, math, and   the language  arts
         (Sawyer, 2006). To date, however, research that explores the relationship between knowledge
         and disciplinary context has typically focused within a single disciplinary frame, such as science
         (e.g., Banks et al., 2007). This paper aims to explore the influence of disciplinary boundaries
         between science and language arts on students' developing practices. We present data from a
         mixed-age first and second grade classroom where students collaboratively engaged with a book
         about honeybees from either a science or a language arts frame. Analyses of students' individual
         written critiques reveal how they consistently adapted their criteria for what makes a good
         representation based upon the disciplinary framing.

Introduction
Core to CSCL and the Learning Sciences is the belief that context matters (Sawyer, 2006) and that the social,
cultural, and physical environment in which students learn new content fundamentally shapes what they have
learned (Greeno, 2006). For this reason, sociocultural theorists often refer to knowledge in terms of the "practices"
that students know how to engage in, to highlight the situated and interactive nature of knowledge, and how
knowledge is performed in context rather than abstracted from context (Greeno, 1998, 2011; Lobato, 2012).
         In an effort to understand the relationship between learning and context, researchers have focused on
many aspects of learning environments including whether students are working individually or in groups (e.g.,
Webb et al., 2009) and whether students are learning in or out of school (Kafai, Peppler, & Chapman, 2009) to
name a few. However, one aspect of context, which cuts across all of these other variables and remains crucial
for supporting learning, is the notion of disciplines such as science, math, and the language arts (Sawyer, 2006).
To date, however,   research  that   explores    the relationship between  knowledge   and   disciplinary  context  has
typically focused within a single disciplinary frame, such as science, even when it explores students' developing
practices within disparate social contexts such as the school and home (Banks et al., 2007). Furthermore, while
there is an abundance of work examining STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) disciplines, other
disciplinary contexts such as the language arts are largely overlooked. The question then emerges, how do these
disciplinary contexts influence students' practices?
         Therefore, this  paper aims  to   explore   the influence  of disciplinary boundaries   between   science  and
language arts on students' developing practices. We selected students early in their academic career, in first and
second grade, to highlight and test whether students' awareness of disciplinary boundaries develops early in the
process of schooling. Students in elementary school classrooms typically remain in the same room and work with
the same teacher as they transition between disciplines, contrasted with middle and high school students who
frequently move to a new classroom and work with a different teacher for each discipline. One might then assume
that disciplinary boundaries are less salient at this stage of schooling, although our experiences suggest that this
is not the case. Further, educators typically assume that students can learn discipline-specific practices in a variety
of disciplinary contexts, and   that this  is likely  to promote   more robust   understanding   of the   links between
disciplines. For example, many of our collaborating teachers have asked students to read about the current science
topic during their literacy time, assuming that the students will learn the science content and the reading practices
simultaneously.  However,   researchers    have   rarely  studied  whether  this  assumption    is true.  By  exploring
disciplinary boundaries at this stage of schooling, and within a context where disciplinary boundaries might be
more subtle, we aim to demonstrate how salient these boundaries actually are for students, and how they impact
student learning and knowing. Our core research question is: To what extent does explicit disciplinary framing of
an activity as science or language arts affect young children's classroom practices?
         We present  data  from  a   mixed-age    first and  second  grade classroom  where    students  were   asked to
evaluate a short book about honeybees before and after extensive language arts and science instruction. This
activity was chosen because it required students to make their disciplinary values explicit, allowing us to contrast
the influence of the two disciplinary contexts and the practices that students engage in within those contexts.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      408                                                    © ISLS
Students were randomly assigned to one of two conditions where the honeybee book was framed as either a
"science" representation or as a "language arts" representation. Students then completed several activities to give
them a range of opportunities to reveal their perspective on what makes a "good" or accurate representation within
the specific disciplinary context. The     students in each   group  then  completed   an  identical 10-week   science
curriculum where they learned about how honeybees collect nectar (Danish, Peppler, Phelps, & Washington,
2011)  as  well   as   standard  language   arts   instruction  on   grammar,   spelling,  and   strategies for  good
writing/storytelling before again critiquing storybooks about bees. Close analyses of students' written critiques
reveal how   they  consistently  adapted   their criteria for  what  makes   a good   representation  based   upon the
disciplinary framing, often overlooking errors in one disciplinary condition that were treated as crucial in the
other.

Contrasting disciplinary practices using student representations
Our work is grounded in sociocultural theories of learning (Cole, 1996; Greeno, 2006, 2011). These theoretical
frameworks share a common ancestry in Vygotsky (1978) and highlight the role of the social environment in
learning and development. From this perspective, disciplinary knowledge includes not only specific facts but
practices of engaging   with  content,  people,   and  materials  (Greeno,   2011), and   even   disciplinary ways  of
perceiving the world around us (Goodwin, 1994; Stevens & Hall, 1998). As such, the notion of "discipline" has
emerged as crucial to structuring how we think about learning environments, and how we evaluate students'
knowledge (Sawyer, 2006).
          Thus, our goal in the current study is to examine students' participation within disciplinary activities in
order  to begin identifying  the relationship    between  their shared   and individual   understandings of   what the
disciplinary context means, while also teasing out the role of the environment in shaping those perspectives. To
ground our contrast we identified a common practice of both science and language arts--the critique, or evaluation
of quality, of visual representations.

Representations as a site for disciplinary comparison
Representations, such as drawings and narrative storylines, play a role across disciplines and contexts (diSessa,
2004;  Lehrer &   Schauble,  2000; Schwartz      &  Heiser,  2006)  and  yet serve  a  different purpose within  each
discipline. For example, a drawing of a flower might be used as an anatomical reference in a science classroom,
and need to be accurate. In contrast, a drawing of a flower in language arts might instead be a starting point for a
new story. Representations are also commonplace in early elementary classrooms because they make it easy to
capture, share, and relate information in powerful ways (Schwartz & Heiser, 2006; Willats, 2005). Students are
frequently asked to create or work with representations as part of their daily activities.
          Much  of the research  into  students'  engagement    with representations,  including  their critiques, has
focused on either the cognitive benefits or abilities of individual students (Schwartz & Heiser, 2006), or a specific
disciplinary context such as science or math (Lehrer & Schauble, 2005). However, an increasing body of research
has drawn    upon  sociocultural theories   of   learning to  move   beyond    individual cognition  and explore   the
relationship between representations and the activities in which they are created, modified, and used (Hall, 1996;
Roth, 1997; Roth & McGinn, 1998). These sociocultural studies accomplish this by examining observable patterns
in student behavior (practices) as they develop over time, or the immediate influence of a specific activity upon
students' actions. We blend these two approaches by comparing students' practices not only across two distinct
contexts, but also as they change over time. Furthermore, despite an interest in context, prior sociocultural studies
continue to focus largely on representations in math and science. Our present study aims to extend this pattern by
contrasting students' creation of representations in a science context with a language arts context. Language arts
was chosen because because we hypothesized that it would be a distinct enough setting from science to make
students' awareness of disciplinary contexts visible.

Representational critique in science and language arts
Representations   play an important    and unique   role  in science as  a discipline, allowing  researchers  to share
theories, experiments, and evidence across vast distances and different time periods (Latour, 1987, 1988; Roth &
McGinn, 1998). When working with representations, one important practice shared by multiple disciplines is the
ability to critique and evaluate representations, both those that others have produced as well as one's own, in an
effort to improve and refine it (diSessa, 2002). This practice of critique is also instrumental in providing students
with an opportunity to develop and explore their own identity with respect to the representation and the discipline
(Greeno,   2011).  Effective critique   of a   representation   requires an  understanding   of  the  purpose   of the
representation and the context of its use. Fortunately, research shows that young children (i.e., kindergarten
through second grade) are capable of critiquing representations along a number of dimensions, including the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     409                                                   © ISLS
accuracy of their content (Danish & Enyedy, 2007; Danish & Phelps, 2010a). Critique can be particularly powerful
as students create their own representations, allowing them to explore both the representational form and the
science content referred to by the representation (Danish & Phelps, 2010b; Parnafes, 2010).
         While there is significantly less existing research investigating the nature of representations within the
context of language arts, we do know that language arts representations, especially storybooks, videos, and other
media, play a critical role in the development of language arts skills. We looked to the Common Core standards
for our initial criteria. To further identify language arts practices which are likely present when engaging with
science content, we also focus on informational and technical writing skills which are relevant to all STEM fields
and critical 21st century skills (Duke, 2010; Purcell-Gates, Duke, & Martineau, 2007). Building on the idea of
informational writing,   we  then generated  a  grounded   list of criteria that resulted  in a coding  scheme  that
emphasized technical writing, grammar (such as correct capitalization, verb form, etc.) and the construction of a
clear story-arc (with a beginning, middle and end to the story), among other criteria further explored in the
methods section below.

Methodology

Participants
The present study took place in a public Midwestern elementary school with 20 first and 20 second grade students
(ages 6-9; 40 total) in a mixed-age classroom, with 37 of the students being present at the two time points in which
data was collected and included in the present study.   The majority of children were White (90%) with 17 % of
the students receiving free or reduced lunch. Students were randomly divided into two conditions: science (N =
19) and language arts (N = 18).

Procedure
The activities in the two conditions (and at both time points) were identical except that the activities in one were
framed by the teacher as "science" and in the other as "language arts." The mixed-age classroom is co-taught by
two teachers. One of these teachers led the science condition, and the other led the language arts condition. Steps
were taken to ensure that as much as possible, the sequence and the methods of the two conditions were the same
by scripting  the directions and  questions in advance  of  the  conversation.   Within each  condition, the teacher
followed a predetermined sequence for the 50 minute session: 1) generate definitions for what makes a good
representation in the assigned disciplinary context (i.e., science or language arts); 2) record the groups' thoughts
on good representations on a whiteboard; 3) introduce a short storybook about a honeybee finding and collecting
nectar; 4) ask students to write or draw on a copy of the book about what made it a good or bad representation 5)
follow-up whole group discussion of individual observations and thoughts about what made the book either good
or bad; 6) discuss a revised version of the book with many intentional errors removed to see if students felt it was
"better" or not.
         The  research   team   created two  storybooks  for    these activities (one for   use at each  time-point)
representing a honeybee collecting nectar, one for use at each time point. In both cases, we intentionally violated
the same number of scientific principles (e.g., the number of anatomically incorrect bees) and language arts
principles (e.g., counts of missing or inaccurate punctuation) in an effort to provide approximately equivalent
opportunities for  students  to engage  in the practice of discipline-specific   critique. We  provided  hand-drawn
images and hand-written text for the students to feel more comfortable in the critique process (to appear more like
a peer seeking feedback on an early draft rather than a published text). Data were collected as part of the larger
BeeSign study which indicated that students in both conditions learned extensive and high-level science content
over the course   of the study  Danish,  Peppler, Phelps,  &    Washington,  2011;  Peppler   & Danish,  2012). The
knowledge and understanding built during the classroom activities were largely group-based and collaborative.
Here, we analyze individual measures to better understand the impact of the group and the environment on
individual learning.

Analysis
To summarize and contrast students' critical practices in the different conditions, student utterances in whole-
group discussion and their writings (including the drawings, text, or other marks on the photocopied storybook)
were collected, transcribed, and coded to reflect the content of their critique as relating to science (e.g., accuracy,
parsimony), language arts (e.g., grammar, storyline), or being non-domain-specific (e.g., aesthetic preference for
color over black and white drawings). This paper reflects findings from students' written critiques. Additionally,
an average percent of time spent engaging science, language arts, and other was calculated per child to account
for the wide variability in writing ability at early ages. One researcher coded all of students' written comments,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   410                                                    © ISLS
with a second researcher coding a randomly selected 30% of all data to establish inter-rater reliability, resulting
in high agreement (language arts kappa =.691, science  =.898).
       To explore the relationship between time and condition upon the mention of science or language arts
content in the written critiques, a split-plot analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed. Our hypothesis was
that regardless of the disciplinary context framing students would pull from their science repertoire to create and
talk about their storyboards due to their participation in the extensive science unit that targeted the same content
represented in the honeybee books. A chi-square analysis was also completed to determine whether there was a
significant difference in the proportion of each topic being mentioned across conditions and time-points.

Results
Across both conditions, students generally provided more discipline-specific critiques in the post-condition than
the pre. This is unsurprising and likely attributable to the time spent learning the respective disciplinary practices
in the intervening weeks. Below we describe the shifts in written critique practices across conditions.

Written critiques
Across both conditions, students' written critiques reflected an impact of both time point and disciplinary framing.
Students were less likely than hypothesized to bring their practices of science critique into the language arts
condition and vice-versa (see figure 1 and table 1). These results are discussed in further detail below.

  Figure 1. Percentage of written representational critique elements coded as language arts (left) and science
              (right). Remaining percentage refers to items coded as non-specialized or other.

Table 1: Mean number of written critique elements coded as language arts and science

                           Language Arts Codes                        Science Codes
                           Pre                  Post                  Pre                 Post
   Condition       N       M      %   SD        M      %    SD        M    %     SD       M      %   SD
                           (count)              (count)               (count)             (count)
   Language Arts   18      21.89%      16.82    47.98%      23.45%    9.41%      10.55%   8.08%       10.08%
                           (3.83)      %        (6.06)                (1.05)              (0.79)
   Science         19      9.49%       8.76%    17.09%      14.66%    23.79%     18.75%   57.36%      19.81%
                           (1.83)               (2.72)                (3.05)              (6.11)

Language arts elements
Within the language arts group, there was an overall increase in the use of language arts elements in students'
written critiques, from about 22% to about 48% of the students' written critiques. In the science group, there was
also a (much smaller) increase in written critique of language arts elements, from about 9% to about 17%. (see
both figure 1 and table 1). Although both groups saw their scores increase, the increase in the language arts group
was proportionally more than three times the increase in the science group. This was a statistically significant
interaction between time of measurement and context framing, F(1, 35) = 21.03, p < .001. The strength of this
relationship, as assessed by partial 2, was strong, with the interaction factor accounting for 37.5% of the variance
in language arts elements.
       Results also suggest that there was a main effect for both condition and time point such that the frequency
of language arts elements including both pre and post was higher in the language arts condition compared to the
science condition (32% vs. 13%) and that more language arts elements were present in the post-test than in the
pre-test across both conditions (30% vs. 15%).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   411                                                  © ISLS
       Taken together, these results suggest two key trends in students' practices for written language arts
critique. First, the disciplinary framing of the activity had a dramatic impact upon students' practices, leading
students to engage far more consistently on the language arts critiques during the language arts condition. Second,
this effect appears to have been magnified over time. Thus the students in the science condition provided only
marginally more critiques during the post-activity whereas the students in the language arts condition increased
dramatically in the number of written language arts critiques they included. This increase can be attributed to
continued engagement   in the language arts curriculum      during the intervention. Because  all of the students
experienced an identical classroom language arts curriculum over the 10-week period, we do not believe that these
differences were  due to chance but rather to the   disciplinary   framing of the activity. This highlights      a key
interaction between students' developing practices and disciplinary framing given that students' shift in practices
related to language arts were much more evident in the language arts context.
       As we turn to what this looked like for individual students in each of these conditions, Figure 2 illustrates
the increase in language arts elements from the pre to post intervention written critiques. These examples are
representative of the kinds of critiques the students generally provided and highlight the marked changes that
occurred between the pre and post intervention in the language arts condition.

   Figure 2. Sample language arts pre-intervention critique from Student 1 (left), sample language arts post-
                                intervention critique from Student 1 (right).

       In Figure 2 (left), the participant in the Language Art pre-intervention focused on general features of the
image. When prompted, "what makes this a good language arts representation?" the student gave a summary
response about the bee leaving the hive and being excited to get nectar, stating that "the bee is leaving the hive
and he is Excited [sic] to get nectar". This was coded as "other." When prompted, "what makes this a bad language
arts representation?" the student focused largely on the picture rather than the words, and used both the written
and visual edits to identify some of the intentional errors in the structural details of the drawing of the bee. In this
example, Student 1 drew on the booklet, adding the missing legs to the bee and adding details to the wings which
was coded as "science" as it added greater scientific fidelity to the bee. Notably, the student has ignored other
intentional grammar violations on the page, such as the uppercase `B' in bee and `L' in leaves as well as other
intentional science and language arts violations that were included in the storyboard, including other inaccurate
body parts (such as the missing thorax of the bee).
       When comparing Student 1's critique in the post-test condition after the 10-week curriculum (see Figure
2, right), several changes are apparent. There are still some general or science critiques found in the storyboard,
such as reference to the fact that, "almost all of the body parts are [shown]," (coded as structure detail important
to science), For example, the student critiques the story arc of the drawing because there is, "nothing before the
bee returns to the hive." The student also makes clear reference to the punctuation on the page, noting that there
is, "no punctuation mark where bee is talking." The student did not, however, pick up on the intentional violation
of grammar in the text on the page with an upper case `R' in the word returns.

Science elements
There was also a significant interaction between time of measurement and context framing in the prevalence of
students' written science critiques, F(1, 35) = 13.60, p < .001. The strength of the relationship, as assessed by
partial 2, was strong, with the interaction factor accounting for 27.9% of the variance in written science elements.
There was a slight decrease in the mean percentage of science elements that each student included in their written
critiques, from 9% to 8%, in the language arts context, and a significant increase in science elements in the science
context, from an initial 23% to 57% of the written student critiques focusing on the critique of science elements
(see table 1).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   412                                                      © ISLS
       The frequency of science elements was also higher in the science context compared to the language arts
condition (40% vs. 8% of the writings) and that more science elements were present in the post-test than in the
pre-test (32% vs. 16%). This suggests that the context framing again had an impact in the type of criteria children
picked to critique the storyboards, with students increasingly referring to science criteria as they learn them,
particularly in the science context.Thus, the findings for students' practices of critiquing the science content of
the representations appear to generally parallel those for language arts, reflecting an impact of both context and
learning over time.
       The case shown in figure 3 illustrates the findings from the science group before and after the 10-week
curriculum. As with the language arts critique, this example was representative of the critiques of the classroom
as a whole and particularly highlights the marked changes in the critique from the science condition from pre to
post intervention.

Figure 3. Sample science pre-intervention critique for Student 2 (left), sample science post-intervention critique
                                             from Student 2 (right).

       In figure 3 (left), when the Student 2 was asked, "what makes this a good science representation?" the
student response was simply a statement of personal interest ("Winter is my birthday") and thus was coded for
"other." In response to, "what makes this a bad science representation?" the student makes reference to the fact
that, "bees [die] in winter." While this is not an entirely accurate understanding of how bees survive in the winter
(as many survive within the hive), it demonstrated the value that the student placed on' science fidelity that was
an example of a science code.
       In the post-intervention critique from the same Student 2, the student noted that this is good because it is
a representation of the `waggle dance.' This was coded as a science exemplar as the waggle dance was a central
theme of the curriculum of how bees communicate. The student also showed marked improvement on recognizing
missing science elements such as, "the bees do not have legs and one [does] not have [antennae]", which were
both coded as structure details important to science (see figure 3, right).

Discussion
Our analyses suggest that students as young as first grade are well attuned to the particular disciplinary frame in
which they work as they critique representations. In fact, they are quite likely to ignore major flaws in sample
representations when evaluating it in a content domain in which those flaws are not central (e.g., students ignored
grammatical errors when evaluating a representation framed as "scientific"). In short, our results indicate that
disciplinary context plays a major role in shaping students' engagement with representational products, and that
students' engagement in disciplinary content may at times be seen across the curriculum. While this paper focused
on the students' written critiques, separate analyses of the verbal discussions suggested this trend continues when
the whole group is in conversation. Given the increasing interest in cross-curricular activities designed to help
students make connections throughout their learning activities, this suggests important opportunities for reflecting
upon the quality and consistency of students' representational materials and activities. As the current piece does
not dive into the interactional processes of learning, these findings also suggest the necessity of future research to
more explicitly explore the impact of disciplinary framing upon student learning, particularly in these cross-
curricular contexts. These collaborative micro-processes will continue to be of interest and importance to the
CSCL community.
       While     these findings  generally support the situative or  sociocultural  view that context  matters  in
exploring cognition and learning, the details of our study offer several additional suggestions for researchers and
practitioners. First, they point to some   very real challenges   inherent    in cross-curricular activity designs.
Increasingly, there is a push in early elementary education to enact interdisciplinary activities designed to help

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   413                                                   © ISLS
students see the connections across domains. In our work, we have found, for example, that as soon as the teachers
know we are interested in teaching bees during "science time", they identify books about bees for reading time,
and have even worked with the art teacher to have students draw bees in art class. And yet, our findings suggest
that these bridges are even harder to build than most educators likely anticipate. Given that the students in our
experiment focused so intently upon language arts criteria as they critiqued science books within the language-
arts-framed condition, it raises a question regarding what students might learn when reading about science topics
in a time that is clearly designated as language arts? An important next-step in this line of research will be to
examine how disciplinary framing of this nature influences student learning and other kinds of practices (e.g.,
creating representations rather than just critiquing them) to help address this question and effective practices to
help bridge these disciplinary boundaries that seem to be so salient at even young ages.
         A second and related result of this work is that there is clearly value in attending much more closely to
how teachers frame activities as linked to a specific discipline, and what impact this has upon students. This is
particularly relevant in early elementary classrooms where students typically work with the same teacher across
content areas, as opposed to moving to new rooms and teachers as they frequently do in secondary school, and
thus the shift between disciplines is marked most clearly by the teacher. In our experiment the teacher clearly
framed the storybook activity as science or language arts, and then maintained this frame in follow-up questions.
What is less clear is which features of the teachers' prompts the students found salient in determining which
practices to perform within the context. Future work which teases this out will be an important first step in
understanding how to help students recognize the disciplinary context in which they are operation in order to
promote discipline-specific practices.

References
Banks, J. A., Au, K. H., Ball, A. F., Bell, P., Gordon, E. W., Gutiérrez, K. D., . . . Mahiri, J. (2007). Learning in
         and out of school in diverse environments: Life-long, life-wide, life-deep: LIFE Center, University of
         Washington, Stanford University, and SRI International.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: a once and future discipline. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard
         University Press.
Danish, J. A., & Enyedy, N. (2007). Negotiated Representational Mediators: How Young Children Decide What
         to Include in Their Science Representations. Science Education, 91(1), 1-35.
Danish,  J. A., Peppler, K., Phelps,  D., & Washington,   D.  (2011). Life in the Hive:  Supporting  Inquiry  into
         Complexity Within the Zone of Proximal Development. Journal of Science Education and Technology,
         20(5), 454-467. doi: 10.1007/s10956-011-9313-4.
Danish, J. A., & Phelps, D. (2010a). Kindergarten and First-Grade Students' Representational Practices While
         Creating Storyboards of Honeybees Collecting Nectar. In K. Gomez, L. Lyons & J. Radinsky (Eds.),
         Learning in the Disciplines: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences
         (ICLS 2010) - Volume 1, Full Papers (pp. 420-427). Chicago IL: International Society of the Learning
         Sciences.
Danish, J. A., & Phelps, D. (2010b). Representational Practices by The Numbers: How Kindergarten and First-
         Grade Students Create, Evaluate, and Modify Their Science Representations. International Journal of
         Science Education. doi: 10.1080/09500693.2010.525798.
diSessa, A. A. (2002). Students' criteria for representational adequacy. In K. P. Gravemeijer, R. Lehrer, B. V.
         Oers & L. Verschaffel (Eds.), Symbolizing, Modeling and Tool Use in Mathematics Education (pp. 105-
         130).
diSessa, A.  A. (2004).  Meta-Representation:  Native  Competence     and Targets for Instruction. Cognition  and
         Instruction, 22(3), 293-331.
Duke, K. (2010, July 19-24). Teaching Reading and Writing of Procedural or How-to Text. Paper presented at the
         US Department of Education Reading Institute, Anaheim, CA. .
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606-633.
Greeno, J. G. (1998). The Situativity of Knowing, Learning, and Research. American Psychologist.
Greeno, J. G. (2006). Learning in Activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning
         sciences (pp. 79-96). New York: Cambridge Univ Press.
Greeno, J. G. (2011). A situative perspective on cognition and learning in interaction Theories of learning and
         studies of instructional practice (pp. 41-71): Springer.
Hall, R. (1996). Representation as Shared Activity: Situated Cognition and Dewey's Cartography of Experience.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(3), 209-238.
         Kafai,  Y.B., Peppler, K.,  &  Chapman,  R.   (Eds.) (2009).  The computer   clubhouse:   Creativity and
         constructionism in youth communities. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   414                                                  © ISLS
Latour, B. (1987). Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (1988). Drawing Things Together. In M. Lynch & S. Woolgar (Eds.), Representation in Scientific
        Practice (pp. 19-68). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2000). Developing Model-Based Reasoning in Mathematics and Science. Journal of
        Applied Developmental Psychology, 21(1), 39-48.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2005). Developing Modeling and Argument in the Elementary Grades. In T. A.
        Romberg, Carpenter, T. P., & Dremock, F. (Ed.), Understanding mathemat:cs and science matters (pp.
        29-53). New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lobato, J. (2012). The Actor-Oriented Transfer Perspective and Its Contributions to Educational Research and
        Practice. Educational Psychologist, 47(3), 232-247. doi: 10.1080/00461520.2012.693353
Parnafes, O. (2010). Representational practices in the activity of student-generated representations (SGR) for
        promoting conceptual understanding. In K. Gomez, L. Lyons & J. Radinsky (Eds.), Learning in the
        Disciplines: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2010) -
        Volume 1, Full Papers (pp. 301-308). Chicago IL: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Peppler, K., & Danish, J. A. (2012). E-Textiles for Educators: Participatory Simulations With E-Puppetry. Paper
        presented at the The Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Vancouver,
        British Colombia.
Purcell-Gates, V., Duke, K., & Martineau, J. A. (2007). Learning to read and write genre-specific text: Roles of
        authentic experience and explicit teaching. Reading Research Quarterly(42), 8-45.
Roth, W.-M. (1997). Graphing: Cognitive Ability or Practice? Science Education(81), 91-106.
Roth, W.-M., & McGinn, M. K. (1998). Inscriptions: Toward a Theory of Representing as Social Practice. Review
        of Educational Research, 68(1), 35-59.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. New York: Cambridge Univ Press.
Schwartz, D. L., & Heiser, J. (2006). Spatial representations and imagery in learning. The Cambridge handbook
        of the learning sciences, 283-298.
Stevens, R., & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In M. Lampert & M. L.
        Blunk (Eds.), Talking mathematics in school: Studies of teaching and learning (pp. 107-149). Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: the development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge: Harvard
        University Press.
Webb, N. M., Franke, M. L., De, T., Chan, A. G., Freund, D., Shein, P., & Melkonian, D. K. (2009). `Explain to
        your partner': teachers' instructional practices and students' dialogue in small groups. Cambridge Journal
        of Education, 39(1), 49-70.
Willats, J. (2005). Making sense of children's drawings. Mahwah, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.

Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work    supported by the National Science Foundation  under   Grant  No. 1324047
awarded to Kylie  Peppler, Joshua   Danish, and  Armin Moczek.  Any   opinions, findings, and   conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Science Foundation. Thank you to Janis Watson, David Phelps, Justin Whiting, Alejandro Andrade,
the teachers who worked with us on this project, and the students who made this work possible.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 415                                                 © ISLS
