 Metaphorical Reasoning Together: Embodied Conceptualization
                      in a Community of Philosophical Inquiry
  Sandra Lagrange-Lanaspre, LiDiLEM, Université Grenoble Alpes, sandra.lagrange-lanaspre@laposte.net

         Abstract: In this paper, we show that taking an embodied stance at cognitive moves as not
         limited to speech acts but including concrete sensori-motor actions, either isolated or coverbal
         gestures, enriches our understanding of collaborative reasoning. More specifically, we follow
         the bimodal co-construction and circulation of metaphors in a Community of Philosophical
         Inquiry  (Lipman,  2003).  We   show how    the participants used  many   source  concepts in the
         exploration  of   the abstract concept   of `thinking',  and  were able   to build a   conceptual
         synthetizing metaphor.     Our   results support  a  bimodal    metaphors    salience hypothesis:
         metaphorical gestures play a great role in making reasoning visible to others and therefore
         fostering collaborative learning.

Introduction
According to Lipman, the founder of Philosophy for Children, a Community of Philosophical Inquiry (CPI), as a
pedagogical practice, is supposed to favor deep collective reasoning and better cognitive understanding of a
complex issue addressed through critical, creative, and caring thinking (Lipman, 2003). Its aims at teaching
students how to build on opinion and to reason collectively about a philosophical question. In a CPI, students are
encouraged to listen to each other with respect, to elaborate on each others' ideas, to assist each other in justifying
opinions and drawing conclusions. In Lipman's words, it consists in "attempt[ing] to follow the inquiry where it
leads rather than be[ing] penned in by the boundary lines of existing disciplines" (2003, p. 20).
         But, even if the face-to-face interactions in a CPI involve multimodal communication, studies have so
far mostly focused on students' individual speech developed in such setting or on the role of the moderator
described through series of verbal actions, as if learning would only take place in the brain (e. g. Simon & Tozzi,
2017). Clearly stepping away from traditional individualistic cognitivism (Menary, 2010a), adopting an embodied
view on cognition offers avenues for renewing research on collective reasoning and collaborative learning. Such
theoretical approach has methodological implications that guided our empirical work on a videotaped CPI among
eleven 12-to-14-year-old students who are discussing about "thinking". This study shows that taking cognitive
moves as not limited to speech acts but including concrete sensori-motor actions enriches our understanding of
conceptualization. More specifically, we follow the bimodal co-construction and circulation of metaphors in the
CPI as activating concrete sensori-motor experience to apprehend abstract concepts collaboratively.

Theoretical background
Our approach to metaphor is based on a strong embodied view on cognition. As it occurs in a CPI, metaphor also
takes part  to a more global   cognitive  dynamic  of  collective reasoning instantiating  how  learning is socially
grounded.

4E cognition and the embodied approach to metaphor
Following   the  cognitive approach  to   metaphor,  we  consider  the   metaphorical process   as the fundamental
embodied basis of the conceptual system that makes it possible to think-and-act in our environment (Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980). In this perspective, metaphor consists in building and apprehending complex abstract concepts
(here after named  `target  concepts')  by comparison    with familiar   concrete concepts  bodily experienced and
transmitted (here after named `source concepts'). Metaphor expression exploits several modes of communication,
including gesture (McNeill, 1992). In particular, Müller considers that the bimodal combination of speech and
gesture is one of the key contextual resources available to catch attention and focus it on the dynamic process of
metaphor activation (Müller, 2008).
         More precisely, metaphorical gestures belong to the category of representational gestures, which can be
defined as gestures playing a referential function by directly "exploit[ing] imagery" (Goldin-Meadow, 2004,
p.314). A   metaphorical   gesture bodily  refers to a concrete   source concept  either by drawing  its shape and
dimension, or by locating parts of it or tracing its trajectory or miming its actions (Colletta et al., 2010, McNeill,
1992). Such gestures are representational: they help express ideas by providing concrete images to refer to abstract
concepts (e.g. the gripping and trenching gestures to express respectively founding and dividing) (Müller, 2008,
McNeill, 1992).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    424                                                  © ISLS
4E learning and reasoning together in a CPI

Collaborative learning as part of the social dimension of cognition
The very idea of following how metaphor are co-constructed in a CPI through a combination of speech and gesture
supposes the students to deal with typical issues related to the Semin and Cacioppo's grounding Social Cognition
model  (2008), such  as monitoring and   goal-mediated synchronization.   According   to  this model, monitoring
synchronization is based on neurophysiological processes by which a perceiver mirrors actions produced by
another. When subjects are engaged in a collective task, goal-mediated synchronization plays a complementary
role by helping not only to mirror actions but to select adaptative and complementary responses.
         Considering metaphor as an instance of collective reasoning is also consistent with studies on group
cognition, which showed that taking the group as a cognitive agent helps make sense of learning processes that
overcome the sum of students' individual progress (Stahl, 2006). Following an extended cognition perspective,
we do not address metaphorical reasoning together as a cognitive process taking place `in' a specific group agent,
separated from its environment. We rather try to figure out how collective thinking occurs through interactions
among individuals who are themselves interacting with their environment, exploiting the contextual resources
available to apprehend the concepts at stake. If the group as a whole might build ownership of (part of) the
metaphorical process, it is always through the environment shared among the participants. For instance, everybody
might align in gesturally conferring the same specific metaphorical meaning to the same place in the room.

Reasoning in a CPI
CPI is based on a pragmatic approach to philosophy: reasoning about abstract concepts is made possible through
a confrontation of concrete individual experiences within a community. In that sense, we claim that it can be
linked to embedded   cognition  since actions with environment    are viewed as  a  basis  for conceptualization.
According to Tozzi (2009), reasoning in Philosophy for Children can be specified into three distinct reflective
tasks: problematization, conceptualization and argumentation. Problematization consists in questioning our own
points of view and   those of others, as well as the assumptions    they imply, their origin   and  consequences.
Conceptualization aims at defining concepts, developing conceptual networks and distinctions. Argumentation,
here used in a very restrictive way, consists in basing statements on rational arguments.
            The more extensive view on argumentation supported by the research community on argumentation
studies also offers fruitful insights about how metaphors generally contribute to reasoning. Metaphorical process
is actually at the crossroads of two fundamental practices of reasoning: arguing by categorization and arguing by
analogy (Plantin, 2018). In Grize's natural logic, reasoning is based essentially on the argumentative exploitation
of images working as cognitive models:

         Natural logic can be defined as the study of logico-discursive operations used to construct and
         reconstruct a schematization. The double adjective is here to highlight the fact that they are
         thinking operations, but only as long as they are expressed in discourse. (Grize, 1997, p. 65).

Visibility' as a condition for reasoning together
Research on collaborative learning showed that just having the students work in groups is not necessarily enough
to foster true sociocognitive conflict (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995) and even less unlikely to automatically results
in a cognitive resolution of such conflict (e. g. Polo et al., 2016). A usual way to analyze how fruitful student-
student or teacher-student interactions are in terms of learning outcomes is to specify the type of talk that they
should develop (Dyke et al., 2012, Mercer, 1996). Even if most of these approaches only focus in speech, one of
them   draw interesting perspectives  for addressing   collective reasoning  more   globally:   exploratory      talk.
Exploratory talk is considered as the most cognitively productive form of talk in small groups:

         First it is talk in which partners present ideas as clearly and as explicitly as necessary for them
         to become shared and jointly evaluated. Second, it is talk in which partners reason together ­
         problems are jointly analyzed, possible explanations are compared, joint decisions are reached.
         From an observer's point of view, their reasoning is visible in the talk. (Mercer, op. cit., p. 363)

Interestingly, a key property of exploratory talk is to make ideas and arguments visible to others. It seems that
real-time `visibility' of thinking-in-action is an essential condition for student-student interactions to actually
foster collective reasoning. We assume   that such `visibility' can be reached  and studied    with a multimodal
approach, notably through metaphorical gesture.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  425                                                      © ISLS
Methodological approach to an empirical study of CPI
Our approach   is deeply empirical.   We provide a qualitative multi-level   case   study describing how bimodal
metaphorical reasoning takes part to collaborative learning in a session of CPI. After specifying the pedagogical
situation studied and the data collection, we  present our  research     questions  and working  hypotheses. This
methodological section ends with an explanation of each of our analytical steps.

Pedagogical situation and data collection
The analyzed situation occurred in the particular context of a CPI demonstration. The session was moderated by
M. Sasseville, one of the leading expert in the field, and observed by teachers, researchers, CPI practitioners and
parents. It took place in November 2015, in an urban lower-class French secondary school, and involved a group
of eleven students familiar with Philosophy for Children, aged 12 to 14 years, who volunteered to come on a
Wednesday afternoon, a time when the school is usually closed. Participants sat in an arc facing observers who
were placed on bleachers. The philosophical issue discussed was the definition of thinking. M. Sasseville started
the CPI with the prompting question: "Where do thoughts come from?". The whole CPI was videotaped using a
360° camera situated in the center of the participants' arc. Speech was fully transcribed using Elan® software.
Gestures where only annotated in selected episodes especially relevant for analysis.

Research questions and working hypotheses
We explored the role of bimodal metaphors in collective reasoning in the context of this CPI. This global purpose
consisted of four research questions:
    1.    How do the final analogies used by the students apprehend the target concept of thinking?
    2.    Does the metaphorical process trajectory evidence collective elaboration of metaphors?
    3.    Is metaphorical thinking together associated with advancement in reasoning?
    4.    More specifically, how do metaphorical gestures take part to conceptual complexification?
          We based our work on the two following fundamental hypotheses:
    1.    Metaphors emerge and evolve through social interaction and interaction with the environment, during a
          CPI, describing conceptual trajectories that we can retrace a posteriori.
    2.    The salience of co-verbal metaphorical gesture make the associated cognitive process more visible and
          therefore foster the collective appropriation of the metaphor.

Analytical steps: Following conceptual co-construction through bimodal metaphors
Our analytical strategy was to follow how conceptual co-construction occurred through metaphors using both
verbal and gestural thinking and communicative resources. We proceeded in two main analytical steps. First, we
coded the whole CPI discussion using Elan software, in two different ways, in order to identify episodes of special
interest. We then undertook a multi-level qualitative case study based on some of these episodes.

Systematic coding with Elan® software: coupling two complementary approaches
Two complementary coding schemes were held separately to identify episodes of special interest in Elan®, the
first focusing on source concepts and the second on cognitive models.
          The source  concept coding   scheme, applied to  all the discussion   preceding   the closing sequence,
consisted in 5 main annotating lines. The first line was used to identify and chronologically number episodes in
which source concepts were used. Lines 2 and 3 were used to systematically annotate respectively verbal and
gestural source concepts. For each of these lines, two dependent lines were added to relate each expressed source
concept to a target concept and to a speaker. This systematic coding allowed us to hightlight source concepts
flowing and to calculate the frequency of each source concept.
          The cognitive model grid was based on an exploratory coding of the closing sequence, which was later
on applied to the rest of the discussion. The analysis of the final round table empirically grounded the construction
of this second coding scheme (Charmaz, 2006). The analytical grain used was larger, corresponding to the level
of the analogies made by the students to describe the main target concept: each code related to a metaphorical
cognitive model helping them define `thinking'. Such comparisons are explicit analogies in the closing sequence,
but they may be referred to in ways that are more implicit at different stages of the metaphorical trajectory retraced
during the preceding discussion. Actually, our aim was to go back in time in order to figure out how the cognitive
model underlying each final explicit analogy was gradually constructed through the CPI. In the second coding
step, we applied the code of a cognitive model whenever at least one key defining feature of the model was referred
to, either gesturally or verbally, during the discussion. Obviously, such previous occurrences of the models were

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  426                                                   © ISLS
generally less complex than the final analogies, which is consistent with our hypothesis 1 stating that the metaphor
gradually shapes through a specific cognitive trajectory.

From the whole discussion to the conceptualization phases: multi-level deep qualitative case study
Crossing the results from the two independent coding of source concepts and cognitive models, we were able to
identify that one  particular cognitive model, `using a   file', was emblematic  of the process of metaphorical
collective thinking that we were interested in. We decided to focus on this case to conduct a multi-level deep
qualitative study instantiating bimodal metaphorical reasoning together. We first specified how it helped the
students apprehend the target concept of thinking in comparison with the other cognitive models that they used.
Such analysis, coupled with a visualization of the chronological occurrences of the different cognitive models
along the discussion, then allowed us to characterize how it related to the other models. After addressing the
macroscopic level of reasoning progress through alternation and co-enrichment of multiple metaphors, and the
mesoscopic level of the cognitive features composing this specific cognitive model, we zoom in to the micro-
analysis of the bimodal complexification of such model through three conceptualization phases.

Results: bimodal construction of metaphor as a ground for reasoning together
In this section, we present the results of this deep qualitative case study. First, the macro-level and meso-level
analyses show how a specific cognitive model plays the role of a conceptual synthetizing metaphor (CSM). We
then specify the micro-level bimodal collective complexification of such CSM.

Metaphorical thinking together: macroscopic and mesoscopic analyses

Final analogies as cognitive models of `thinking'
During the closing sequence, when the students are asked by the moderator to conclude by making an analogy for
`thinking', they explicitly mention 9 cognitive models of this target concept, which were identified through an
exploratory   coding (here after mentioned  in the  chronological    order of emergence  in the conversation, in
students'own words): to dream, a milky way, to use files, cogwheels, to reflect, to remember, a cloud, a blurred
picture, to imagine. We used all the verbal and gestural information provided by the participants to characterize
these analogies as cognitive models, in order to address our first research question about how they allowed the
students to apprehend the abstract concept of `thinking'. At most, this bimodal semantic analysis allowed for
characterizing the   5 following aspects: nature of the   fundamental  units  composing  the system; whether  it
corresponds to a dynamic process or a static state; internal structure; localization; size (Polo, in press). In this
closing  sequence,   some  cognitive models    are only   mentioned    without  being described  along these   5
characteristics, for other models, only 2 or 3 of these aspects are specified. Sometimes, the information is only
conveyed in gesture, as, for instance, the localization of dreaming "in the head", or the dynamic processual
dimension of cogwheels.
         Such characterization of the 9 cognitive models reveals that all the students, at the end of the CPI, share
a few common features in their apprehension of was `thinking' is. First, it is a system consisting of fundamental
units, the thoughts, which can be compared to pictures. Second, it involves chronological or causal relations that
allow switching from one thought to another. Third, thinking is presented as an internal process localized within
the cognizer. It is nothing but surprising that the students share some conceptual features about thinking at this
moment of the CPI, since they have been discussing about this concept for more than 40 minutes.

                Figure 1. Emergence and reuse of 5 cognitive models of thinking along the CPI.

         Nevertheless, coding of the cognitive models along the preceding discussion revealed that only 5 of them
were used in the CPI before the closing sequence: to remember, a blurred picture, to imagine, cogwheels and to

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   427                                                  © ISLS
use files. Still, none of them was used neither only once nor by only one person. Such result both confirms our
first hypothesis and evidence collective elaboration of metaphors (research question 2). As figure 1 shows, during
the whole discussion preceding the closing sequence, the students experienced 21 episodes of focus on one single
model (9 on to remember, 2 on a blurred picture, 3 on to imagine, 3 on cogwheels, and 3 on to use files). The co-
construction of metaphors supporting these cognitive models was not linear: the students did not fully elaborate
one model before considering another one, but rather tended to switch from one model to another in a heuristic
way. Contrasting different metaphorical views and their ability to apprehend the target concept, such alternation
may be a pattern necessary to foster the deepening of each cognitive model.

Metaphorical dialectical opposition between two models: to remember versus to imagine
Such heuristic process is  made  visible through a bimodal   analysis  of each of   these episodes. We  created  5
collections of episodes focusing on the same cognitive model and paid a special attention to the corresponding
metaphorical gestures. Such analysis revealed strong specificities associated to each model:
    1.  To remember: pictures from the outside are coming up to the head (44 s collection)
    2.  A blurred picture: thinking is a flow of blurred pictures (10 s collection)
    3.  To imagine: pictures from the inside are coming out of the head (15 s collection)
    4.  Cogwheels: each thought is a cogwheel which move causes another cogwheel's move (17 s collection)
    5.  To use files: we can create files, open them, modify them, delete them, retrieve them (53 s collection).
        This gestural description of the models reveals that a strong binary opposition was co-constructed along
the discussion between  to think as to remember    or as to  imagine. The  expert   moderator  himself makes   this
opposition explicit and gesturally expresses it three times during the discussion, by the 15th, 18th and 28th minute.
Our interpretation is that confronting these to metaphors worked as a dialectical tool to gradually sophisticate
students' understanding   of the target  concept.  Such    advancement    in reasoning    also proceeded through
metaphorical thinking, by elaborating what we called a `conceptual synthetizing metaphor' (CSM) that overcame
such opposition and conciliated the strength of several cognitive models to better apprehend the target concept.

To use files emerging as a conceptual synthetizing metaphor (CSM)
The cognitive model to use files is the latest to emerge (from episode 15th onwards), and is co-elaborated by
Nourra and Jean-Luc. Finally, Jean-Luc reuses it as a full complex analogy during the closing sequence. For its
late emergence in the discussion and its ability to conciliate several key features previously introduced in other
metaphors, this cognitive model plays the role of a conceptual synthetizing metaphor (CSM). With respects to our
third research question, a CSM is defined as a metaphor associated to advancement in reasoning by encompassing
several aspects of the target concept that could so far only be apprehended by multiple metaphors. In this case, to
use files is clearly a CSM allowing the participants to overcome the opposition to remember vs to imagine.

Table 1: Features of the three cognitive models `to remember', `to imagine', and `to use files' (final round table)

                 Fundamental unit          Dynamic process ?     Internal structure        Location    Size
 To remember     Evan   sometimes at thinking one is uh: like remembering
                 Nourra    take an object, a place and:: recording uh: this place this object in our head and:
                 remembering it but uh: [...] not as clear as in the real world
                 Pictures                  Registering           Blurred aspect            Head
                 - of objects              Reminding
                 - of places
 To imagine      Sofia    thinking is like [...] imagining something
                 Pictures                  Active cognizer
                                           creating pictures
 To use files    Jean-Luc    [...] it's a movement in a huge archive where some files are created sometimes
                 by chance mixing some up [...] thinking is [...] moving uh: // using the files that we have in
                 our head
                 Files created             Creation              Chronology                Head        Big
                 - randomly                Displacing
                 - from previous ones      Intentional use

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  428                                                   © ISLS
        Table 1 summarizes key characteristics of the latter three cognitive models that appeared during the
closing sequence. Both to remember and to imagine are described verbally and gesturally as dynamic processes
based on pictures. Remembering is depicted as a double process taking place in the head, consisting in a first step
in registration of pictures from the outside, and in a second step in reminding them, which is to say accessing
these pictures within brain memory. Imagining, in contrast, depict a more active subject, constructing and sharing
mental pictures created in his head. The CSM to use files is the only final analogy fully described into all the 5
parameters of size, localization, structure, degree of dynamism, nature of fundamental units. In this model, the
fundamental units of thoughts are depicted as files, which can either be created `by chance' or from a `preexisting
file'. As a whole, the archive room located in our head is big and well chronologically structured. It hosts either
intentional or random processes of file creation, displacing and deletion. We understand the idea of random
processes encompassed by this CSM as an integration of the idea that thoughts can come from pictures from the
outside randomly registered and reminded ­ a key aspect of the cognitive model to remember. Nevertheless, such
CSM also includes the idea of intentionality that was brought from the model to imagine. The image that one file
might be created from a previous one is a way to conciliate the idea of subject agency with the consideration that
a thought is not created from scratch; such causal link can also be understood as integrating the cogwheels model.

Conceptualization: bimodal collective complexification of the CSM at the micro level
Applying a micro-analysis based on the source concept coding scheme presented above, we then show that the
CSM to use files first emerged through an extended bimodal metaphor about forgetting and remembering. This
metaphor  was  collectively built through three main  phases        of complexification: "metaphor introduction",
"metaphor specification" and "metaphor exploitation", corresponding to three distinct stages of conceptualization.

Metaphor introduction: forgetting is like a file that "we don't open"
Figure 2 below corresponds to the verbal transcript and the key gesture of the metaphor introduction phase.

        367 : Nourra : (...) about forgetting it's quite like a file that (...) we keep except that:::: /// [1] {Ulrick:
        we don't open it} / yes that's it we'll open it later (...)

                 Figure 2. Metaphor introduction phase transcript and illustration of gesture 1.

During this phase, Nourra first formulated a verbal comparison for defining the target concept of forgetting. Then
Nourra added a gesture to her speech (see illustration), which expressed the source concept `to open a file'. While
this gesture was synchronous  with  the words "except that::::      ", which conveyed Nourra's hesitation,    Ulrick
immediately suggested a verbal formulation for it: "we do not open it". A bimodal metaphor was co-constructed
about the notion of forgetting, and our view is that the process of monitoring synchronization described by Semin
and Cacioppo (2008) allowed Ulrick experience the gestural source concept represented by Nourra and helped
him access to the associated verbal concept. In addition, we note that the moderator illustrated the child's speech
with one gesture that expressed the source concept `to put a file aside'. We also note that the child imitated this
gesture, immediately and many other times, which can also be explained as a monitoring synchronization process.
On the reflective plane, Nourra was defining the concept of forgetting, exemplifying Tozzi's conceptualization.

Metaphor specification and conceptual distinction: remembering is like "opening the file"

Figure 2 presents the verbal transcript and illustration of four key gestures of the metaphor specification phase.

        379 : Nourra: Well, remembering it's:: it/ what I was talking about // here it's opening the file //
        [2a, moderator gesture]
        380: moderator: rather than putting it aside [2b] it's {Nourra : yeah} to open it
        381: Nourra: it was [2c] put aside and [2d] now we open it

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  429                                                     © ISLS
                                       2a            2b                2c           2d
       Figure 3. Metaphor specification phase verbal transcript and illustration of gestures 2a, 2b, 2c et 2d.

During this phase, Nourra created an extended the metaphor previously introduced. She used the same verbal
source concept (`to open a file') as for defining the notion of forgetting, but this time for specifying the opposite
concept of remembering. Even though the reflexive task was still conceptualization, it was now more specifically
a task of distinguishing concepts. Subsequently, our coding scheme allowed us to reveal a collective synthesis.
The moderator synthesized and rephrased the conceptual distinction between forgetting and remembering through
a sequence including two bimodal metaphors. In the first bimodal metaphor, he repeated his gesture done during
the metaphor introduction (see illustration of gesture 2b above) but adding the words "rather than putting it aside".
This first bimodal metaphor was opposed to a second one, in which he created a palm up gesture representing the
source concept of openness to the words "we open it". Again illustrating the monitoring synchronization process
mentioned above, Nourra immediately validated this bimodal synthesis of conceptual distinction made by the
moderator. She said: "it (the file) was put aside but now we're opening it", while doing gestures similar to those
of the moderator, conveying the source concepts `to put a file aside' and `to integrate something'. Hence, during
this phase, the student and the facilitator through verbal and gestural modalities were gradually and collectively
constructing a bimodal metaphor.

Metaphor exploitation and conceptual network elaboration: moving files in a big archive
Finally, in speech turn 391, another child used the file extended metaphor for creating a complex conceptual
network. Figure 4 below shows the verbal transcript and two key gestures of this metaphor exploitation phase.

           391: Jean-Luc: (...) actually according to me remembering well I'm going to cite this example again
           it's like // memories are like a huge archive and when you think you move from one file [3a] to another
           and therefore // heum sometimes when you try to think about something // you can't open this file and
           / and this   is when you  forget  something and   sometimes // uh   when you  succeed  in remembering
           something you succeed in opening the file and this is because you have moved from one file [3b] to
           another

         Figure 4. Metaphor exploitation phase verbal transcript and illustration of gestures 3a and 3b.

During this third phase, Ulrick created a new bimodal synthesis of the conceptual distinction between forgetting
and remembering by taking up speech and gestures of his classmate. He added two similar bimodal metaphors
through which thought was apprehended in the terms of the source concept `moving from one file to another'. In
addition, he also expressed the target concept of memory successively through the gestural source concept of
`cycle' and  the verbal    one of `archive'. Jean-Luc  created a conceptual   network  connecting the concepts    of
forgetting, remembering, memory and thought by taking up Nourra's relevant speech and gestures, and adding
complementary bimodal elements in order to contribute to the collective advancement in conceptualization of the
notion  of   forgetting and    remembering.   This result could   illustrate the complementarity   of  monitoring
synchronization and goal-mediated synchronization implied in the Semin and Cacioppo's Social Cognition model.

Discussion and concluding remarks
Studying the bimodal co-construction of metaphors along a CPI reveals how strongly embodied metaphorical
reasoning plays a role in collaborative learning and conceptual change. Using the resources of their environment

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    430                                                   © ISLS
and the interactions with each other, the participants used many source concepts in their exploration of the abstract
concept of  `thinking', and were   able   to build  heuristically a  conceptual   synthetizing metaphor through  the
cognitive model `to use   files'. The  feature   of the  model   that they   used the  most throughout  the  bimodal
construction of this metaphor was `to open a file', which corresponds to the only feature that was expressed both
verbally, gesturally and collectively from its introduction phase onwards. This result supports and complete the
bimodal metaphors salience hypothesis: metaphorical gestures, especially if produced by a hearer and not the
speaker, plays a great role in making reasoning visible and therefore fostering collaborative learning. Further
research might include multi-level studies of bimodal metaphorical reasoning in other collaborative learning
contexts. Gathering more data with, when relevant, statistical treatment on the frequency and re-use of some
metaphorical features may result in a theoretical generic modelisation of metaphorical reasoning together. For
now, practical implications of this exploratory study still need to be addressed: how can the CSCL community
seriously take into account the strongly embodied nature of metaphorical reasoning together at designing online
educational interactions? A  key    might    be  to paid   attention  to the contextual  resources offered   by such
environments for embodied metaphorical thinking.

References
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide through qualitative analysis. London:
        Thousand Oaks, Calif.
Colletta, J.-M., Capirci, O., Cristilli, C., Goldin-Meadow, S., Guidetti, M. & Levine, S. (2010). Multimodal Data
        Transcription and Annotation with ELAN. Coding Manual, ANR-05-BLANC-0178-01 & -02, Lidilem,
        University of Grenoble Alpes.
Dyke, G., Adamson, D., Howley, I., & Rosé, P. C. (2012). Towards Academically Productive Talk Supported by
        Conversational Agents. In S. Cerri, W. Clancey, G. Papadourakis, & K. Panourgia (Eds.), Intelligent
        tutoring systems, 7315 (pp. 531-540). Springer.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2004). Hearing gesture: How our hands help us think. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Grize, J. B. (1997 [1990]). Logique et langage. Ophrys.
Lakoff, G., Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. University of Chicago Press.
Lipman, M. (2003). Thinking in Education. Cambridge University Press (2nd Edition).
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind: What Gestures Reveal about Thought. University of Chicago Press.
Menary, R., (2010). Introduction to the special issue on 4E cognition. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences,
        9, 459-463.
Mercer, N.  (1996). The   quality  of talk   in children's  collaborative  activity in the Classroom. Learning   and
        instruction, 6(4), 359­377.
Müller, C. (2008). What gestures reveal about the nature of metaphor. In A. Cienki & C. Müller (Eds.), Metaphor
        and Gesture (pp. 219-247). Amsterdam/ Philadelphia : John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Plantin, C. (2018). Dictionary of Argumentation. London: College Publications.
Polo, C. (in press). La participation des gestes métaphoriques à la construction collective d'analogies cognitives
        en CRP. In E. Auriac-Slusarczyk (Ed.) Les ateliers de philosophie. Une pensée collective en marche.
        Sphères Educatives.
Polo, C., Lund, K., Plantin, C., Niccolai, G. P. (2016). Group Emotions: The Social and Cognitive Functions of
        Emotions in Argumentation. International Journal of CSCL 11(2), 123-156.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving.
        Proceedings   of CSCL     (Bloomington,     IN). In C.  O'Malley   (Ed.)  Computer-Supported  Collaborative
        Learning (pp. 69­97). Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Semin,  G.R. &  Cacioppo,   J.    (2008). Grounding      social cognition:  Synchronization,   coordination, and co-
        regulation. In Semin, G.R. & Smith E.R. (Eds.), Embodied grounding: Social, cognitive, affective, and
        neuroscientific approaches (pp. 119-148). Cambridge University Press.
Simon, J.-P. & Tozzi, M. (Eds.) (2017). Paroles de philosophes en herbe. Grenoble: UGA Editions.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Tozzi, M. (2009). Apprendre à penser ensemble. Diotime, 42.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     431                                                  © ISLS
