Tracing Teacher Collaborative Learning and Innovation Adoption:
                   A Case Study in an Inquiry Learning Platform
María Jesús Rodríguez-Triana, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne and Tallinn University, mjrt@tlu.ee
                                Luis P. Prieto, Tallinn University, lprisan@tlu.ee
                                    Tobias Ley, Tallinn University, tley@tlu.ee
                          Ton de Jong, University of Twente, a.j.m.dejong@utwente.nl
                  Denis Gillet, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, denis.gillet@epfl.ch

        Abstract: Social processes play an important role in teachers' ongoing professional learning:
        through interactions with peers and experts to solve problems or co-create materials, teachers
        internalize knowledge developed in their communities. However, these social processes and
        their influence  on  teachers' learning   (i.e., adopting    new   practices)  are notoriously   hard  to
        study,  given their  implicit  and   informal    nature. In   this paper,    we apply  the  Knowledge
        Appropriation    Model   (KAM)       to trace  how      different  social   processes  relate  with   the
        implementation    of pedagogical     innovations    in  the classroom    (as a  marker  of  professional
        learning), through   the  analysis   of  more    than   20,000    artifacts  from  Go-Lab,    an  online
        community to support inquiry-based learning. Our results not only show how different social
        processes   like  sharing   or  co-creation      seem    to   be   related   to   increased   classroom
        implementation. Also, they provide insights on how we can use traces from digital co-creation
        platforms, to better understand the social dimension of professional learning.

Introduction
Despite the benefits that educational innovations may entail, they require the adoption of new teaching practices
(i.e., a form of professional learning), which is known to be challenging (Webb & Cox, 2004). The adoption of
innovations among   professionals   builds on   processes   of  knowledge   creation    that span  individual, group  and
collective levels (Nonaka, von Krogh, & Voelpel, 2006): interacting with peers, seeking help from more expert
colleagues, etc. Indeed, communities of practice (Wenger, 1999) have a crucial role on workplace learning, as
professionals get access, adapt  and   internalize knowledge     that  has  been    developed  in the  community   (often
reified as documents, materials, lesson plans and other artifacts).
        From a research standpoint, however, a challenge in studying this kind of professional learning is that
many of these processes and knowledge are informal, implicit, and hard to trace (often happening face-to-face,
across multiple spaces and timeframes). One opportunity to do so is the use of digital platforms to embody and
facilitate many of these social processes. In the concrete case of teacher professional development, the use of
co-creation platforms to develop materials has a long history (e.g., Vuorikari et al., 2011). However, the fact
that professional development   actions (e.g.,   training   workshops)     still remain quite  separate  from  classroom
implementation  of  the  target innovations     (which   is the  hallmark   of   teachers  actually learning   to use the
innovation professionally), makes tracing this kind of complex ongoing professional learning rather elusive.
        Recent  advancements     in research    about professional    and  workplace    learning   aim at clarifying  this
complex system of social processes and practices. For instance, the Knowledge Appropriation Model (KAM)
(1) identifies different kinds of knowledge maturation, scaffolding and appropriation practices at different social
levels, as crucial in such learning process.
        In this paper, we explore how the relationship between such knowledge appropriation practices (which
happen at the individual, group and community levels) and the adoption of educational innovations (as a marker
of professional learning) can be traced, through the study of Go-Lab, an online community aimed at supporting
teaching and inquiry-based learning. Our ultimate goal is to better understand which social processes seem to be
more strongly related with actual classroom implementation, to design interventions and further develop such
platforms to encourage teacher adoption and learning.
        An important aspect that enables this kind of study is the fact that Go-Lab's ecosystem supports not
only the co-creation (with peers or experts) and sharing of materials and plans reifying the inquiry learning
pedagogy (called Inquiry Learning Spaces, or ILSs). It also supports the implementation of these lessons with
students in the classroom (hence making innovation adoption somewhat traceable). Hence, in this paper we
trace the social practices defined in KAM as these ILSs are co-created, shared, etc. Our analysis of 24,485 such
learning artifacts, created between November 2015 and November 2018, through descriptive and exploratory
analyses, try to answer the following research question: How are the knowledge appropriation collaborative
practices related with the teacher adoption of inquiry-based pedagogy in the Go-Lab community?

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       432                                                     © ISLS
          The    rest of  the paper   is structured   as follows:  the    next section    summarizes    related research  on
knowledge appropriation and professional learning theories. Then, we describe the methodology we followed in
our study and, later on, the context (including how we operationalized the KAM in Go-Lab) and the results of
our study. We end the paper with implications and future work.

The role of social learning and knowledge appropriation in innovation
adoption
In learning technologies research and many adjacent fields (like CSCL), the adoption of educational innovations
is often studied in terms of acceptance models, such as TAM (technology acceptance model - see, e.g., Teo,
2009).  This  kind    of models   assume    that the  adoption of  innovations    in teaching   is influenced   by  teacher's
competence, self-efficacy and perceived ease of use and usefulness of the innovation. However, these models
treat "technology" (or whatever other innovation) as an object that either is -or is not- appropriated. As such,
they do not take into account processes of co-creation in which new practices emerge. In contrast, sociocultural
learning theories look at innovation adoption as a form of social learning that is connecting individual learning
to the  emergence      of common     practices    and  the development     of  knowledge     in groups   and   communities.
Examples of this view include Trialogical Learning (Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2014) or Knowledge Maturation
(Maier & Schmidt, 2015) models.
          Indeed, among the many factors for the adoption of pedagogical innovations, social learning has been
shown to have an important, positive impact: the more teachers are involved in professional networking and
collaboration,   the  more    likely they   are  to apply  such   pedagogies   (e.g.,   OECD,   2014).   Similarly,  teacher
collaboration and efficacy are correlated, and seem to predict student achievement (e.g., Lee, Dedrick, & Smith,
1991). Moreover, different kinds of collaboration have also been shown as important: understanding develops
and new classroom practices emerge in the context of teachers' collaboration with peers (Blumenfeld, Krajcik,
Marx, & Soloway, 1994), but also with experts (e.g., Schenke, van Driel, Geijsel, Sligte, & Volman, 2016).
          It is however an open question "how such collaborative processes can best occur, what makes them
effective and    what  are the   limits  of their efficacy"   (Billett &  Choy,   2013,   p. 268).  The  recently   proposed
Knowledge Appropriation Model (KAM) (1) describes those collaborative practices that are important in the
context   of  adopting     innovations.     The   model    identifies  informal   learning    practices  (in organizations,
communities, groups and individuals) that can be observed in the context of innovation adoption. The model is
based on existing sociocultural models of learning (knowledge maturation and scaffolding) and explains how
these processes are interconnected in workplace learning.
          In  the  context    of KAM,    knowledge     maturation     is understood   as  a  social   learning  process  that
transforms knowledge (often embodied as artifacts) from the individual level into communities of interaction
(by participating in activities of social groups or communities) (Maier & Schmidt, 2015). Scaffolding describes
a related social learning process whereby individuals develop expertise through guided experience with experts
or more advanced peers who help them to internalize knowledge that has been developed.
          In previous research on workplace learning, 12 collaborative learning practices have been derived, and
are assumed responsible for the successful adoption of an innovation. In the context of teacher professional
learning, they would be:
          Knowledge maturation practices lead to the transformation and maturation of knowledge (Figure 1,
          left). Starting  from    a  teacher    who  takes   up  materials   for  new    teaching  and  learning   methods
          (appropriating an idea), this knowledge is made accessible to a group of people (sharing) and further
          transformed     (co-creation)  into more    mature  knowledge    so  that  they  are  reusable for other  teachers
          outside the narrower community that has created it (formalization). Eventually, knowledge might reach
          a status in which it becomes a standard, e.g., in terms of national curricula or entering into widely
          accepted training material for beginning teachers (standardization).
          Knowledge scaffolding practices explain how this knowledge is applied in concrete working situations
          (Figure 1, right). A teacher may request help regarding a certain problem, and peers or experts provide
          guidance towards a solution. Then, as the teacher acquires competence, peers and experts fade support.
          Knowledge      appropriation   practices    (Figure 1,  center)  ensure    that the  adoption  of  innovations   is
          successful,    sustained   and  scaled.   These  practices     describe how     individuals are made      aware of
          knowledge about typical problems in the domain and possible solutions (create awareness), and how
          the community       maintains  maintains   a shared  understanding      about these   problems  and   the solution.
          Later, teachers can adapt those solutions to new situations according to the local circumstances, and
          establish some form of validation (e.g., gathering experiences or formal evidence about the success and
          impact of the solution). Knowledge appropriation practices are assumed to underlie both maturation

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         433                                                     © ISLS
         and   scaffolding,  and   these and   related practices    have widely   been   discussed   in the collaborative
         learning literature to be conducive to social learning.
         As collaborative online platforms are increasingly being used in the collaborative design of innovative
teaching and learning scenarios, it is possible to find evidence of these practices in those online platforms, and
to gain an understanding of their role in the process to adopting an innovation. These insights may also help us
suggest ways to improve such collaborative platforms.
         In   this paper, we   use  KAM    as  an  analytical  framework    to guide   the analysis  of  how   knowledge
appropriation practices and adoption of an educational innovation (as a marker of collaborative professional
learning) can be traced in a (large-scale) collaborative online platform. The following section shows how the
KAM helped us describe the case of the Go-Lab online community (to support IBL) and identify indicators to
follow these practices and the adoption of IBL.

Context: The Go-Lab ecosystem to support Inquiry-Based Learning
Inquiry-based learning (IBL) has long been associated with positive student outcomes like an improved ability
to apply   scientific thinking,  or increased    retention rates    (Seymour,  Hunter,   Laursen,    &  DeAntoni,   2004).
However,    it has  proven  a  major   challenge  to get   large numbers    of teachers  to use   it (Fairweather,   2008;
Henderson & Dancy, 2011): since effective support needs to be offered to students in the process of inquiry (de
Jong, Linn, & Zacharia, 2013; Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark, 2006), it is a notoriously demanding practice for
teachers. In that sense, the support to the design, or creation, of IBL activities is one of the most-often cited (e.g.
Slotta, Tissenbaum, & Lui, 2013).
         The Go-Lab initiative aims to support teachers in the adoption of IBL pedagogies and on-line labs, by
offering a  technological    ecosystem     around the  notion    of Inquiry Learning     Spaces  (ILSs):    pedagogically-
structured  learning  environments   that  can   contain labs,   apps and  resources   (Rodríguez-Triana    et al., 2014).
Typically, an ILS is visualized as a web space with a set of folders (or tabs, in the student view) for each of the
phases of   an  inquiry   (from hypothesis     formulation  to   data interpretation). These   sub-spaces    then   contain
different apps, online labs or other learning resources for students to perform the inquiry.
         The Go-Lab ecosystem is composed of two platforms: a) Golabz (2), a repository where teachers can
find ready-to-use apps, labs, ILSs, and support materials; and b) Graasp (3), a platform for ILS authoring and
monitoring, and community gathering. Additionally, there is a help desk where teachers can request support,
and specific face-to-face training events that are organized at the regional, national and international level.
         To    understand  how  the  Go-Lab    ecosystem   mediates     teachers' social learning    of the inquiry-based
pedagogy, let us look at a typical example of usage. After a teacher has become acquainted with inquiry-based
learning (e.g., in an online or face-to-face training event, or on her own), the teacher may decide to put it in
practice in her classroom. She can, for instance, browse, find and reuse one of the ILSs available in the Golabz
repository. If she decides to create the lesson from scratch, or needs to adapt the original ILS, she is directed to
Graasp, where the ILS can be modified. At any point in this process, the teacher can share her work-in-progress
lesson with    other  teachers or  experts  in the domain,    who    can co-create  the  ILS   through   Graasp   as well.
Communication during this co-creation can happen face-to-face, or through Graasp's built-in chat (associated to
each ILS). When the teacher is satisfied with the ILS and deems it ready for use in the classroom, she can direct
her students to the student-view of the ILS: a simpler interface following the structure designed by the teacher,
where students can follow the activities, input their hypotheses, data, conclusions, etc. Later on, the teacher(s)
can create further copies of the ILS (e.g., for use with other student groups of hers). Eventually, if the teacher
thinks the lesson design may be useful for other teachers as well, she can submit her ILS for publication in the
Golabz repository, for use by the larger teacher community. During this publication process, experts will curate
the ILSs, collaborating with the teacher, suggesting further enhancements or modifications.
         Go-Lab has been the object of several EU projects, and as of November 2018, it has reached more than
26,000 teachers and 73,000 students all over the world, receiving on average more than 300 visits per day.
While teachers can use isolated apps or labs, 63.11% have been involved in the (co)creation of more 37,000
ILSs.  However,     according   to the   number   of "student-views",    only  5.51%    of  these  ILS   may   have  been
implemented in the classroom.
         It would    thus be   interesting to understand   what   social processes  seem    to be most    associated with
classroom implementation as a signal for the effectiveness of the collaborative professional learning of teachers
involved   in  the platform.   Or,  said differently:  what   are   the social practices   most   followed  by  Go-Lab's
classroom   adopters?   In  the study    section below,  we   detail  how   we  have   applied  the  KAM    to guide   the
identification of metrics about teacher's collaborative learning practices in Go-Lab, and explore how teachers'
ILSs created in different (collaborative) ways are associated with their classroom implementation ­ as a marker
of the teachers actually learning the IBL pedagogy they represent.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      434                                                      © ISLS
Research questions, hypotheses, and methodology
Against  the aforementioned   research background   and   context,  this paper  tries thus  to answer   the  following
research question: To what extent are collaborative professional learning practices (as defined by KAM) related
to teacher adoption of IBL pedagogy in Go-Lab? According to KAM, two hypotheses can be derived from it:
         Hypothesis 1: the ratio of adopted ILSs will increase across the categories of maturation
         Hypothesis 2: the ratio of adopted ILSs will be higher for ILSs that had been reused than for those that
         had not been reused
         In order to validate these hypotheses, we have looked at the data available in the Graasp database and
logs. In our study below, we use the ILS as the main unit of analysis, as it is the smallest entity in the system
that has a pedagogical meaning, and on which knowledge appropriation actions (like sharing or co-creation) can
be performed. More concretely, we have analyzed the data about the ILSs created from November 2015 (when
authoring and implementation actions started to be tracked in the platform) to November 2018. Since we are
interested in tracing the collaborative practices of teachers, only teacher-created spaces have been considered in
the analysis (i.e., ILSs created by experts or other project members have been discarded).
         Several assumptions have been made to interpret the data available in the logs. For the purposes of the
description of results and discussion that follow, we considered as experts those registered users that are tagged
as Go-Lab and Next-Lab project members (as they are assumed to be more knowledgeable about IBL than other
teachers that may have entered the platform through trainings and other means). The rest of the users registered
in the authoring platform are considered potential teachers. Also, an ILS has been considered implemented in
the classroom (i.e., adopted) when more than 10 "student-mode users" are registered to it (this empirical rule of
thumb stems from conversations with teachers using the platform, as their classes have on average around 20
students, and teachers often report their students using the platform in groups of 2 or more people).
         Regarding data analysis, basic descriptive and exploratory statistics have been used. First, indicators
have been drawn for each ILS as markers for the presence of different KAM social practices (see the following
section). Then, counts of ILSs (and proportions of their being implemented in classrooms) have been calculated,
for different levels of maturation and social involvement. Furthermore, Chi-squared tests of independence and
logistic regression modelling have been performed to ascertain the potential association between these KAM-
related practice indicators and ILS implementation (and their relative strength).

Study

Knowledge appropriation and adoption in Go-Lab
In order  to better understand  how KAM      practices are  materialized    in Go-Lab,  this   section describes  how
teachers deal with knowledge maturation, scaffolding and appropriation, reflecting on where these practices take
place (inside or outside of the technical ecosystem), as well as whether and how they can be monitored. Figure 1
provides a graphical overview of this, and more concrete metrics are listed in Table 1.
         Knowledge maturation practices. With the help of the technical ecosystem, teachers can appropriate
existing IBL templates when creating their ILSs from scratch. Teachers can invite other peers into their ILSs
either for sharing or for co-creation purposes. Once an ILS is ready, teachers can publish it to make it available
for other teachers. This process also involves an expert review that provides feedback via email about how to
formalize the ILS. Standardization happens when ILSs are widely uptaken by other teachers at the national or
international level to address specific parts of the curriculum.
         Knowledge    scaffolding practices.    Teachers  may    request help   from  experts  using   the  help  desk
available in  the ecosystem,  where a   set  of experts  is available    to answer   doubts  and   provide   guidance.
Additionally,  teachers often  address their trainers  or   national coordinators    face-to-face, via   email,  video
conference, social media, or inviting them into their ILSs, so that they can have a look, comment or even edit
the ILS. In addition, there are many cases where experts accompany teachers while implementing ILSs for the
first time. Then, to encourage teachers to solve their own problems and be autonomous, expert support fades
progressively reducing the face-to-face support and then interventions in the ILSs.
         Knowledge    appropriation    practices. Teacher   awareness    comes    from  four   different sources: the
teachers  themselves, searching and browsing    through   the repository    and the  support  material;  the technical
ecosystem, which provides with recommendations about relevant apps, labs, resources, etc.); peers, who share
their knowledge or experience using communication channels outside the ecosystem (e.g., face-to-face or in the
social media); and,  experts, who keep  teachers  updated   about   the  new   apps,  labs, ILSs, functionalities and
events through the newsletter, the online community and, especially, through training events. Once aware of the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  435                                                      © ISLS
available support, teachers can adapt existing ILSs to their own educational contexts. Thus, we consider the ILS
reuse as a general proxy for the fact that knowledge appropriation has taken place.
         Although the ecosystem supports communication between users, most of the discussions between peers
to reach a common understanding about the learning context and the ILS take place outside of the platform. The
review process before the ILS publication triggers a conversation between experts and teachers that not only
leads to ILS refinements, but also improves the experts' understanding about teacher needs, usability issues,
misconceptions and challenges for ILS adoption in the real classroom.
         Regarding the ILS validation, this practice usually takes place during the training events (out of the
technological ecosystem) where practitioners are invited to share their experiences implementing ILSs in the
classroom. Also, through iterative refinements due to the reuse, the validation of the content of an ILS increases
copies (and copies-of-copies) of it are used and implemented.
         Innovation adoption in Go-Lab. While there are different degrees of adoption (e.g., teachers can use
IBL practices,   labs, or apps independently),   in this paper we  focus  on   the potential usage  of ILSs  in  the
classroom since they represent the overall Go-Lab proposal: the IBL pedagogical approach combined with apps,
labs, and multimedia resources that contribute to scaffold the students in the learning process.

    Figure 1. Knowledge Appropriation Model (in italics) and the corresponding practices in Go-Lab. Those
           practices that cannot be mapped with monitorable metrics in Graasp appear in lighter color.

         While   these  knowledge  appropriation    practices involve  both face-to-face  and  computer-mediated
interventions, in  this paper  we  focus on  those  supported   (and   traceable) through Go-Lab's    technological
ecosystem. For instance, since the Go-Lab repository does not require logging in, no evidence can be obtained
about  the "create awareness"   actions  carried out  by  specific teachers there.  Therefore,   only  the practices
mediated by the authoring platform, i.e., Graasp, will be taken into consideration in the analysis.

Results and discussion

Hypothesis 1: The ratio of adoption increases across knowledge maturation categories
First, we  explored    whether the adoption  of  an  ILS   was  dependent   on    knowledge  maturation    practices.
Specifically, we checked whether the fact that an ILS was assumed to be in higher stage of maturity had an
effect on its eventual adoption in the classroom. In order to test the first hypothesis, the ratio of adopted ILSs
would   increase  across  the categories of maturation    (individual, shared, co-created,   formalized),  each ILS
created by a teacher was assigned to one exclusive knowledge maturation category according to the indicators
scheme shown in Table 1. Then, for each maturation category, the rate of adoption was calculated.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    436                                                  © ISLS
Table 1: Monitorable knowledge maturation levels versus adoption (ILS implementations) in Go-Lab

Maturation level  Indicator                                                     Adopted   Not adopted    % Adopt.
Individual        ILS was created and neither shared nor published                    651          21631      2.92%
Shared            ILS shared with peers but not co-created nor published               85            560     13.18%
Co-created        ILSs co-created with peers, but not published                       293            745     28.23%
Formalized        ILS was published for the community                                 188            332     36.15%

Our results show that knowledge maturation is strongly related to later adoption of the ILS in the classroom.
While it is true that the accessibility is restricted, i.e., the individual spaces are not widely accessible in Graasp,
we still find it remarkable that collaboration seems to be strongly related to adoption. Especially outstanding is
the difference between sharing and co-editing. In this case, the accessibility would be typically the same, i.e.,
the same amount of users would have access, but the adoption more than doubled between sharing and co-
editing. Aside from  these descriptive  results, a Chi-squared   test  of independence   also indicates such  strong
association between both traits of an ILS (2=2549.2, p<0.001).

Hypothesis 2: The ratio of adoption increases when knowledge is appropriated
Since the KAM assumes knowledge appropriation to be a prerequisite for knowledge maturation and eventually
adoption, we hence hypothesized that knowledge appropriation (in this case the reuse of an ILS) should be one
of the determinants of maturation. In the current setup of the system, it was not feasible to gather data about
individual practices of appropriation (creating awareness, shared understanding, adapting and validating), and
thus for this analysis we considered whether a particular ILS was reused (copied and adapted from another ILS),
as a proxy for whether knowledge appropriation had taken place. Then, as shown in Table 2, we compared the
rates of adoption for reused versus non-reused ILSs.
          We found that knowledge appropriation in Go-Lab also is strongly associated with later adoption. In
this case, we assumed that the reuse of an ILS would be indicative of several appropriation practices: to reuse
existing material, there should be first awareness of its existence; then, to implement the ILS in the classroom, it
is necessary to refine and adapt it to the contextual needs, contributing to build sharing understanding; and the
adoption  shows  not only  the interest of the   community  but   also validates the  feasibility to apply it in real
scenarios. A Chi-square test of independence also rejects strongly the null hypothesis (i.e., appropriation and
adoption being independent): 2=2035.9, p<0.001.

Table 2: Monitorable knowledge appropriation levels versus adoption (ILS implementations) in Go-Lab

Appropriation level   Indicator                                              Adopted    Not adopted     % Adopted
Not reused            ILSs of which no copies have been made                     868            22642         3.69%
Reused                ILSs of which copies have been made                        349              626        35.79%

Relative associations between knowledge maturation and appropriation
In order to perform a first exploration of the relative strength of the two variables targeted by our hypotheses
(i.e., knowledge maturation  and  appropriation    practices), we built   a logistic regression model   that predicts
whether an ILS will be adopted or not, as a function of its levels of maturation (from individual to formalized)
and appropriation (i.e., whether it is a re-use of a previous one). The results are summarized in Table 3. The
results seem to indicate that both maturation and appropriation have a significant positive effect (as indicated by
the analysis of the hypotheses above): each level of maturation or appropriation increases the odds of an ILS
being implemented by a factor of 3.7 and 3, respectively. Moreover, the fact that the quadratic coefficient of the
knowledge maturation is negative (i.e., the positive association decreases in higher levels of maturation) may
point to the fact that maturation is especially important in the early phases of the process, where the artifacts still
need a lot of collaborative effort in order to be understood and usable for others.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   437                                                    © ISLS
Table 3: Coefficients of a logistic regression model of adoption as function of appropriation and maturation

Coefficients                                      Estimate          Std. Error              z value           p-value
Intercept (Individual, Not reused)                   -1.463               0.045             -32.23           <0.0001
Maturation (linear)                                  1.298                0.097             13.32            <0.0001
Maturation (quadratic)                               -0.978               0.089             -10.92           <0.0001
Appropriation (linear)                               1.097                0.076             14.36            <0.0001

Conclusion and future work
While social processes have been considered crucial in teachers' ongoing professional learning, their implicit
and informal nature make their study challenging. In this paper, the Knowledge Appropriation Model (KAM)
helped us to define traceable social practices that could then be related with the adoption of IBL practices in the
classroom   through  Go-Lab.     This focus    on social  practices at  work   makes  our   study closely related  to the
computer-supported collaborative work domain. However, we should not forget that the main focus is on the
teachers learning  to  integrate  IBL    in their practice,   and  how  informal   (computer-supported)   collaborations
around shared    artifacts (in our  case    ILS)  facilitate this learning. Then,   the usage  of these artifacts  in the
classroom should be looked at as one of the few reliable markers to assess whether teachers have learned to
integrate such pedagogy in their practice.
         Based on the ILSs created between November 2015 and November 2018, out of 24,485 ILSs created
by  teachers, 1270   (4.99%)   were   potentially  implemented.     The   descriptive and   exploratory analyses  of  the
dataset support our initial hypotheses about how collaborative professional learning practices (as defined by
KAM) relate to teacher adoption of IBL pedagogy in Go-Lab: the higher the maturation and the appropriation,
the higher  the adoption   ­  as a marker    of  teachers learning  the   pedagogy.  This positive   association between
knowledge   maturation,    appropriation    and  IBL  adoption,   could   help to enrich existing strategies for  teacher
professional development in IBL (Maaß & Doorman, 2013). For example, mentoring and collaborative practices
among teachers could be promoted in trainings, and be facilitated even further in IBL digital platforms.
         While these findings are encouraging, other factors may well be playing a role in the adoption (e.g.,
participation in trainings,   previous   IBL   teacher experience,   experts'  interventions, etc.). Indeed, the  present
study focuses on social processes mediated by an on-line platform, whereas additional collaboration may have
taken place through other face-to-face or digital channels. Thus, further research (e.g., in the form of follow-up
qualitative studies) is   needed to   examine    the assumptions    and   conclusions of  our present  analysis, and  the
influence that other factors may have had on the adoption of Go-Lab.
         It should be also noted that the filter applied to detect ILS adoption was purely superficial (based on the
average number of students expected per classroom implementation) and did not take into consideration the
qualitative characteristics of the ILS. Therefore, future studies should analyze more thoroughly the work done
by the students as well as the ILS structure and content. This includes not only content/structure analyses of the
ILSs, but also time-based models of the knowledge maturation and appropriation processes (e.g., using process
mining techniques on the different stakeholders' actions in the platform).
         Another feature of this initial work towards disentangling the different social processes that play a role
in the adoption of IBL, is our present focus on the professional learning artifacts (i.e., the ILSs), rather than
focusing on the teachers themselves as the unit of analysis. In future work we expect to find models that help us
understand not only artifacts but also skill adoption among practitioners, so that we can identify and promote
efficient learning paths for teachers.
         While the overall results described in this paper (i.e., the fact that more mature artifacts/lessons are
implemented more often in the classroom) may seem somewhat self-evident, our main contribution is rather the
operationalization  of  this  hypothesis    in terms   of concrete,  traceable  metrics  in a digital  platform.  This is
especially  valuable   in the  realm  of (collaborative)     professional learning, where   empirical evidence   of such
learning and surrounding collaborative processes tends to be scarce. The first steps presented here open thus the
door to further investigations of how collaboration around shared, "implementable in practice" artifacts mediate
informal professional learning.

Endnotes
(1)  Knowledge Appropriation Model: http://results.learning-layers.eu/scenarios/knowledge-appropriation
(2)  Go-Lab initiative: www.golabz.eu
(3)  Graasp: graasp.eu

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        438                                                   © ISLS
References
Billett, S., & Choy, S. (2013). Learning through work: emerging perspectives and new challenges. Journal of
       Workplace Learning, 25(4), 264­276.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Krajcik, J. S., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (1994). Lessons Learned: How Collaboration
       Helped      Middle   Grade    Science Teachers   Learn  Project-Based   Instruction. The  Elementary   School
       Journal, 94(5), 539­551.
de Jong, T., Linn, M. C., & Zacharia, Z. C. (2013). Physical and virtual laboratories in science and engineering
       education. Science, 340(6130), 305­308.
Fairweather,   J. (2008). Linking    evidence  and  promising  practices  in  science, technology, engineering,  and
       mathematics (STEM) undergraduate education. The National Academies National Research Council
       Board of Science Education. Retrieved from
Henderson, C., & Dancy, M. H. (2011). Increasing the impact and diffusion of STEM education innovations.
       Presented     at the   White   Paper  commissioned   for  the   Characterizing  the Impact  and  Diffusion of
       Engineering Education Innovations Forum,. Retrieved from https://www.nae.edu/File.aspx?id=36304
Kirschner, P.  A.,  Sweller,  J., &  Clark,  R. E. (2006). Why    Minimal  Guidance    During  Instruction Does  Not
       Work:      An Analysis     of the Failure  of  Constructivist, Discovery, Problem-Based,    Experiential, and
       Inquiry-Based Teaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75­86.
Lee, V. E., Dedrick, R. F., & Smith, J. B. (1991). The Effect of the Social Organization of Schools on Teachers'
       Efficacy and Satisfaction. Sociology of Education, 64(3), 190­208.
Maaß, K., & Doorman, M. (2013). A model for a widespread implementation of inquiry-based learning. ZDM:
       The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45(6), 887­899.
Maier, R., & Schmidt, A. (2015). Explaining organizational knowledge creation with a knowledge maturing
       model. Knowledge Management Research & Practice, 13(4), 361­381.
Nonaka, I., von Krogh, G., & Voelpel, S. (2006). Organizational Knowledge Creation Theory: Evolutionary
       Paths and Future Advances. Organization Studies, 27(8), 1179­1208.
OECD.  (2014).     TALIS    A Teachers'   Guide    to TALIS 2013   Teaching   and  Learning   International  Survey:
       Teaching and Learning International Survey. OECD Publishing.
Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2014). Trialogical Approach for Knowledge Creation. In S. C. Tan, H. J. So, &
       J. Yeo (Eds.), Knowledge Creation in Education (pp. 53­73). Singapore: Springer Singapore.
Rodríguez-Triana, M. J., Govaerts, S., Halimi, W., Holzer, A., Salzmann, C., Vozniuk, A., ... Gillet, D. (2014).
       Rich open educational resources for personal and inquiry learning: Agile creation, sharing and reuse in
       educational    social  media   platforms.   In 2014 International Conference    on  Web  and   Open Access to
       Learning (ICWOAL) (pp. 1­6). IEEE.
Schenke, W., van Driel, J. H., Geijsel, F. P., Sligte, H. W., & Volman, M. L. L. (2016). Characterizing cross-
       professional collaboration in research and development projects in secondary education. Teachers and
       Teaching, 22(5), 553­569.
Seymour,   E., Hunter,  A.-B.,    Laursen,  S. L., &   DeAntoni,  T.  (2004). Establishing  the benefits of  research
       experiences      for undergraduates     in the  sciences: First findings  from   a  three-year study. Science
       Education, 88(4), 493­534.
Slotta, J. D., Tissenbaum, M., & Lui, M. (2013). Orchestrating of Complex Inquiry: Three Roles for Learning
       Analytics in a Smart Classroom Infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
       Learning Analytics and Knowledge (pp. 270­274). Leuven, Belgium.
Teo, T. (2009). Modelling technology acceptance in education: A study of pre-service teachers. Computers &
       Education, 52(2), 302­312.
Vuorikari, R., Berlanga, A., Cachia, R., Cao, Y., Fetter, S., Gilleran, A., ... Others. (2011). ICT-based school
       collaboration, teachers' networks and their opportunities for teachers' professional development-a case
       study on eTwinning. In International Conference on Web-Based Learning (pp. 112­121). Springer.
Webb, M., & Cox, M. (2004). A review of pedagogy related to information and communications technology.
       Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 13(3), 235­286.
Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgments
This research has been partially funded by the European Union in the context of Go-Lab, Next-Lab, CEITER
(FP7 grant agreement no. 317601, and Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme, grant agreements
no. 731685 and 669074).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      439                                                 © ISLS
