    A Scaled Analysis of How Minecraft Gamers Leverage YouTube
                 Comment Boxes to Participate and Collaborate

                              Justice T. Walker, Stefan Slater, and Yasmin B. Kafai
                      justicew@upenn.edu, slater.research@gmail.com, kafai@upenn.edu
                            University of Pennsylvania Graduate School of Education

         Abstract: Minecraft--a commercially successful and popular sandbox game--is increasingly
         used in formal educational spaces. While there is significant research on how online gaming
         can support positive outcomes when used as a pedagogical tool, little research has investigated
         how gamers collaborate to learn in informal spaces. We conducted an analysis of a curated
         subset of more than 540,000 comments of Youtube videos to explore how users participate
         and practice in discussions about Minecraft where comment boxes are the primary method
         used to  communicate    about   video  content.  Our    findings reveal that gamers    use   online
         comment sections for multiple reasons, from participating in shared social experiences unique
         to Youtube as a community to giving myriad forms of feedback to learn and further content
         development.   In our discussion, we address the ways other online game platforms can better
         support learners seeking out information and collaborating in ways that are constructive and
         inclusive.

         Keywords: Gaming, Metagaming, Feedback, Participation, Minecraft

Introduction
Much research has focused on learning and collaboration while playing (Connolly et al., 2012; Clark et al.,
2016) and making digital games (De Freitas, 2006; Basawapatna et al., 2010), which has collectively pointed to
the influence games   have  in supporting    positive outcomes   in academic    content  areas (e.g., language  arts,
computer science, mathematics) and skills (e.g., literacy, problem solving and argumentation). These outcomes
have been especially promising for education efforts designed to support broader access to science fields where
social and intellectual participation disparities exist. Alongside these efforts is research that attends to learning
and collaboration in massive multiplayer games where game elements and social interactions are complex and
more difficult to ascertain (Paraskeva et al., 2010). Examples include commercially successful games like the
role playing-based World of Warcraft (Clark et al., 2009), the simulation-based SimCity (Tanes and Cemalcilar,
2010), and the open narrative-based Minecraft (Nebel et al., 2016) where gamers can interact on massive server
networks that are globally distributed.
         With more than 100 million registered users, Minecraft is an example of a game where users are able
to collaborate to make and play games (Makuch, 2014). In Minecraft, players use tools and materials to build
complex  structures that can  be automatized    or programmed,    especially through  the use  of third-party  game
modifications (mods). YouTube has become a popular metagaming environment for Minecraft by providing an
online open access video platform where content creators have posted more than 70 million Minecraft tutorials
videos publicly. In fact, Minecraft-related searches on Youtube represent the second most commonly searched
term on the video platform (Thompson, 2016). Prior research of this environment examined a small number of
Minecraft player Youtube video producers to understand the nature of user interactions (Niemeyer and Gerber,
2015).  Findings suggested  that this   online video  platformed  represented--in  broad  terms--a    "collaborative
learning community"    that supported    constructive  engagement     among  players. While    these  findings offer
important justifications for further research on how collaboration takes place in this metagaming space, few
research (Niemeyer   and Gerber,  2015;   Anderson    et al., 2017) studies  have focused  on   learning outside   of
gaming environments and in digital spaces that develop around games-- the so-called metagaming spaces (Gee,
2008).  Gee and  others  have  argued   that more  learning   happens in  these contexts and   communities    than in
traditional learning spaces. However, research of these spaces is difficult: metagaming environments generally
operate  on private web  servers (e.g., personal   networks   or in-game   chat systems)  or are  distributed across
physical environments (e.g., conferences, camps, festivals, etc) that represent only a small fraction of the total
number of community members that participate in a given game. As a result, it has been difficult to research
these contexts at scale. In this study, we use natural language processing (NLP) approaches to characterize and
make sense of the complex ways Minecraft gamers participate and provide feedback when using video tutorials
and comment sections.    We ask: (1) what modes of participation are used by Minecraft players in the comments
section of Youtube? (2) what forms of feedback do Minecraft users provide when using Youtube? and (3) what

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    440                                                   © ISLS
are the affordances and constraints of using online video platforms to participate in feedback? In the discussion,
we   address   the    ways  online  game   platforms     can  better  support    accessible    and  equitable  learning    and
collaboration in game environments that are self-directed as well as directions for future research.

Background

Collaboration in gaming
In learning, collaboration has been described as moments when learners and/or experts come together to share
ideas, feedback,     and  attention toward  a  shared   understanding   or   goal  (Davis   et al., 2018).  The  relationship
between  collaboration      and learning   has  been  conceptualized    using   constructivist    perspectives that describe
learning as a social interaction where so-called novices and experts come together to learn from one another. In
this theoretical trajectory, digital games can be understood as communities of practice as players of different
mastery levels convene around a common interest (Lave and Wenger, 1991). It is within these communities
where collaborations guide interactions and support learning. There are a number of collaborative arrangements
in  digital game      environments   that  positively   support   these outcomes     and    that  have   been  shown    to  be
instrumental in important cognitive processes including reflection.
         One collaborative arrangement that has been shown to be especially effective involves situations where
learners provide each other feedback (Butler and Winne, 1995; Plass et al., 2015). This has been effective in
traditional learning research in literature, mathematics, and computer science. Feedback has also been examined
in digital game platforms. Research in this area has shown that collaborative feedback has supported (civic)
engagement, knowledge building, and skill building and across a range of subject areas. While most studies
examine collaborative feedback while playing games, this research explores a new genre of game platform that
combines    game     play and   construction.  In  this form, gamers    not   only   engage    in play,  but they also  have
opportunities to build and modify game environments, characters and objectives.
         Minecraft is an example of this type of game and is the frame within which this research examines
collaboration     and  feedback. Platforms    like  Minecraft   have   previously    been  described    as among    the most
promising game-based approaches to support learning (Gee, 2008; Plass, 2015). However, education research
that explores     the  ways Minecraft   can support     learning  is scant  (Nebel   et al., 2015).   Existing  research   has
described   ways    the  ways   Minecraft  can   be  utilized in   K-12  learning    environments     to teach  mathematics
concepts    (Short,   2012),  in-game   collaboration     tactics (Marklund     et al., 2013)     and   collaborative  design
(Cipollone     et al., 2014;    French  et al.,   2016).  Research    has   also   assessed    collaboration   differences  in
underrepresented minority groups (Ames & Burrell, 2017), and small-scale analysis of collaboration techniques
for learning (Wernholm & Vigmo, 2015; Davis et al., 2018) among young players.

Collaboration in metagaming
While these studies provide important insights into the nature of collaborations among diverse players, much
less is known about how gamers collaborate in spaces outside the actual game platform--Minecraft's metagame
environments. Because these environments play a significant role in supporting learning outside of Minecraft
(Bebbington, 2014), understanding the ways gamers collaborate in these spaces provides perspectives that are
not always apparent in the game environment. Although research has shown that feedback benefits collaborative
learning arrangements, adverse outcomes have also been identified. Some of these outcomes include inequitable
participation   where    only a  few   learners   benefit from    learning   outcomes   associated    with   feedback-driven
collaboration (Ames and Burrell, 2017). Other adverse outcomes occur when feedback is not constructive or is
not used to drive reflection.    Because of challenges related to access and scale, little research investigates the
myriad   ways     in   which  learners  engage    in  feedback    in  digital  games    or   their  associated   metagaming
environments.
         Videos on Youtube can provide an important insight into the nature of collaboration in the metagaming
space. Minecraft players post millions of videos on YouTube showcasing their play experience or explaining
particular concepts. Minecraft related topics on Youtube include instructions for making and applying `skins'
(changes    to the  physical  appearance   of  a  Minecraft   avatar),  strategies  for mining     and  obtaining resources,
redstone    networks   based  on    computational   circuits  and    logic, and  `modding'     (third-party  code that  adds
additional game functionality).
         Previous research that examined thousands of comments in the online youth programming community
Scratch (Fields et al., 2015) found that players were able to provide constructive feedback. However, within the
Scratch  online    community,    the  commenting     feature  is  integrated   within   the  environment     and  thus  not a
traditional metagaming location. Youtube videos are a traditional metagaming location, but the traffic served by
the  website   is  multiple  orders  of magnitude     larger. To     overcome   this challenge,     we  use  a bag-of-words

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        441                                                       © ISLS
approach--specifically keyword spotting (Cambria and White, 2014)--to curate, collect and analyze moments
of user collaboration in order to provide a scaled insight into collaborations that occur in these comment spaces,
the collaboration affordances  and   constraints that exist  using online   video platforms,   and ways  to support
constructive collaborations in similar online video-based meta game environments.

Methods
Data were collected in September 2018, from the comment sections of a sample of videos posted to Youtube. In
order to generate our sample of videos, we first developed a list of search terms related to different actions and
behaviors within  Minecraft  that users   might  want  to engage    with. We  used    Youtube's  public application
program interface (API) to write a Python script that returned the top 50 video results for each of our search
terms, detailed in the next section. We used the video identification (IDs) obtained from this process to collect
every comment left on each of the sampled videos. This process yielded more than 540,000 unique comments.
From this sample we performed qualitative coding using an inductive approach (Ravitch and Carl, 2015) in
order to identify a subset of terms relevant to learning and social engagement. This yielded a sample of more
than 27,000 unique comments. Of this sample, we randomly selected a subset of about 100 and developed a
ground-up codebook to describe how Youtube users participate and collaborate with one another when using the
comments section to learn.  We then applied these codes to a random set of 518 unique comments drawn from
the 27,000 comment     sample. In    the following section,  we detail  our  specific video  sampling   criteria and
subsampling techniques.

Video selection
We   searched  Minecraft-related  videos   based   on nine   search   terms encompassing     a number   of  popular
approaches to playing. For each search, the top 50 video results according to Youtube's relevance algorithm
were selected. From   these videos,  every  comment   was    recorded along  with the author,  the date posted,  the
content of the comment, and the number of likes/replies the comment received. To collect comments related to
`skins,' we searched for videos using the search terms `minecraft how to skins' and `minecraft skins tutorial.'
For mining, we used search terms `minecraft how to mine' and `minecraft mining tutorial'. For `Redstone,' we
used the search terms `minecraft how to redstone' and `minecraft redstone tutorial.' Finally, we used the search
terms `minecraft best mods', `minecraft how to mod', and `minecraft mod tutorial' to search for videos related
to the modding process in Minecraft.

Subsampling the dataset
Including several videos collected during our code testing, our dataset included 433 unique videos and 546,034
unique comments. Due to the size of this dataset, we generated several smaller datasets to make qualitative
coding approaches feasible. We performed this dataset reduction in two steps.      We first selected all comments
from the  dataset that were  either  liked or replied to  at least once.  These   criteria allowed us to select   for
comments that showed some level of social engagement. This yielded two datasets--52,775 `liked' comments
and 37,930 replied comments, respectively. In the first dataset, 21,441 comments were liked more than once,
and the maximum number of likes received by any comment was 9,228. In the reply dataset, 18,334 comments
were replied to more than once, and the maximum number of replies received by any comment was 7,460.
        We used these two datasets to perform preliminary inductive coding, in order to identify how Youtube
users engage with Minecraft, and how collaboration and learning within the comments might be operationalized.
From this preliminary coding, we identified a set of 11 key words and phrases that appeared to be associated
with a deeper level of engagement in the content. These keywords included `figure out' (433 comments), `turn
out'/`turns out' (55), `I found'/`I have found' (1,849), `because' (8,440), `I think' (4,381), `I can' (6,791), `how
do' (4,371), `how can' (656), and `learn to'/`learn how'/`learn about' (176).
        Finally, we performed both inductive and deductive coding on each of these keyword datasets. For
datasets containing more than ~100 comments, we selected random samples of 100 comments from within them
to code. We used an inductive coding approach to identify both common themes of discussion on Youtube, as
well as social norms and platform-specific memes that users engage in. Deductive coding was used to identify
the degree to which a comment was emblematic of involving feedback or social participation.

Findings
We report finding about the forms of participation Minecraft gamers use when using the comments section on
Youtube tutorial videos. We also report on the various ways Minecraft gamers use feedback to collaborate and
participate. Unless otherwise stated, these codes were not mutually exclusive and could co-occur.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    442                                                  © ISLS
Finding 1: Minecraft gamers mostly: use comments to participate, reference in-game
activities, and engage Youtube video producers
Of 518 Youtube comments assessed, 346 involved some form of social participation with other people. This
could involve either sharing personal experiences from playing Minecraft, or it could involve conversations with
video authors or other users on Youtube.
          101 of these participation comments were coded as involving ways that Minecraft gamers participated.
These results are summarized in figure 1a. Unsurprisingly, in-game references (88%) represented the largest
form  of   participation.  These  were   moments   when   gamers     made  reference   to   experiences   either playing
Minecraft or engaging with Minecraft. For example, one commenter explained, "So aswome because I don't
mine at night any more.but when I go in the day, it turns out night when I get out an have to sprint to get to my
house." Here the user is using the comment box to describe their strategy during play after viewing a related
tutorial. References   to  personal  experiences   (12%)  also   occurred  and  represented   instances   when   gamers
mentioned personal life experiences that were not directly related to Minecraft. For example, a video reminded a
commenter of sleepovers with a friend, "I first heard this 4 years ago when my friend came over and introduced
me to minecraft. 4 years later and I have found the song.    OMG so much nostalgia. Plus also nostalgic because it
reminds me of all the sleepovers I had with the friend." In this example, it can be seen that personal stories often
overlapped   with   nostalgia (11%),  which   was    represented  in moments    when     gamers made    reference  to or
recollected a time in the past. Finally, the smallest set of comments represented instances when gamers used
comment boxes to reference to other games (2%).
          201 comments were addressed to a particular audience, and explicitly social in nature. The majority of
these comments were directed toward Youtube video producers (53%). For instance, as one commenter used the
comments to solicit help from the video author directly, saying "I really wanted a mod but it turns out ur tutorial
doesn't work for me when I Vick ur link it takes me to a different forge pls answer me."           Other commenters
(13%) and Minecraft game players broadly (2%) were also focal points of engagement in comment boxes as
commenters     would   ask others to describe their  own  experiences   or refer to   other gamers on     Youtube  about
Minecraft experiences.     Finally, we coded for unclear or ambiguous participatory comments, instances where it
was not possible to determine to whom the engagement was directed. For instance, the comment "you know
what do you have a server ? because there is a cool game its called egg wars:D" could be directed either at a
video author or another commenter.
          96 comments referenced Youtube as a platform and its various design affordances. Comment codes
(85%)   included   references to  using  Youtube's   comments     section as a  site  of shared participation,   such as
requests  to "start a  comment    chain" around  a particular  idea  or behavior   in the video. This   represented   the
largest percentage   of participation forms  gamers   used on    Youtube.  References    to comment   or   video  "likes"
(7%) are instances where the commenter refers to the number of likes a video has or encourages other users to
like/dislike a particular video. Technical references (6%) were also observed and were instances when gamers
referenced   a technical   aspect of Youtube   such   as lag   on a  video or  a missed     notification. References  to
subscribing (5%) to a video were also observed and involved mention of the subscribe feature of a Youtube
video channel. These comments were often solicited by the author (e.g., "SUBSCRIBE!!!") in order to grow a
viewer audience base. Notifications (1%) were infrequently observed and represented instances when a gamer
refers to being notified (or not) about video content on Youtube. Similar to subscribe references, these typically
represented moments when commenters signaled wanting to be a part of or being a part of a viewer audience
and stay up to date on new content.
          Finally,  80 comments    included  digital artifacts of participation  beyond   simply leaving    a comment:
poems (68%), hashtags (14%), stories (10%), emojis (4%), memes (4%), and links to external resources (3%).
These results are summarized in figure 1b. These represent instances when gamers used atypical representations
to participate, such   as  collaboratively posting lyrics to   a song parody,   or telling  elaborate and   embellished
stories about a particular behavior.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     443                                                      © ISLS
     (a) Various Ways Youtube Comment                           (b) Digital Artifacts Used by Youtube
         Metagame Environment Users Participate                     Comment Metagame Environment
                                                                    Commenters
                          Figure 1. Participation Forms (a) and Digital Artifacts (b) Used.

Finding 2: Minecraft gamers mostly use affective and neutral feedback and primarily
to assess Youtube video usefulness and functionality
261 of the 518 coded comments involved some form of feedback, with users sharing their thoughts and opinions
on video content, video authors, or other commenters, among other topics
         Of this   sample, 134  involved  comments    that   referenced specific in-game  game  features   including
`mods' (41%), redstone (37%), mining (19%), building (18%), general play (16%), and `skins' (7%).
         Also, from this sample, 168 comments reflected instances when gamers used the Youtube comment
section to provide either affective or social feedback. Feedback that was evaluative (49%) included judgements
that included   affective features like  sarcasm,   insults, compliments,  or encouragement.   Feedback    that was
suggestive  (41%)   included  moments    when   commenters     suggested ideas for future   Minecraft-related tasks,
strategies, and/or video content. An illustrative example of this occurred when a commenter remarked, "can you
do a customstom command seiries were you learn to make a command block machine and make minecraft a
better place to play in :)." Here the commenter is suggesting through request that the Youtube video producer
make  a   specific series  of tutorial content. Neutral  feedback    (29%) reflected  moments  when    commenters
provided feedback that did not have an affective quality. This was illustrated when a commenter remarked about
the audio being played during a tutorial "shoulve been learn to fight at night," which is a critique about the audio
that best represents the tutorial and yet does not explicitly connote any affective judgement. Feedback that was
appreciative (21%) reflected moments when commenters asserted thanks because of something related to video
tutorial content or the video producer.  This type of feedback was evident when a commenter noted, "Thanks for
this series seth it is really clear and instructive and i'm really looking up to learn to code turtles makes FTB way
easier." The commenter's feedback also goes further to explain the reasons why they appreciated the tutorial.
Feedback   that was  collaborative  (3%)   in nature  demonstrated    moments    when  video tutorials prompted   a
commenter   to  solicit video  producers  or  other commenters    to collaborate on  a common   Minecraft     related
endeavor. Findings are summarized in figure 2a.
         Content   focused    feedback  occurred  in  112    feedback-related comments.   Of  these,   the majority
emphasized video tutorial usefulness (72%) in helping viewers achieve some in-game outcome as illustrated
when a commenter remarked, "Hey Mumbo I love your vids and watch them every day! Your redstone tutorials
have helped me sooo much and I have actually have been able to build some complicated redstone contraptions
because of you! [emojis]" In this case the commenter is underscoring the idea that the video producer's tutorial
helped the content viewer achieve a goal - in this case learning to use redstone in complicated ways. These
observations are summarized in figure 2b. In addition, 172 involved comments that reflected feedback that was
directed toward: content (88%), Youtube producers (11%) and technical video features (3%).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    444                                                  © ISLS
    (a)  Forms of Feedback Provided on Youtube                   (b) Feedback Content Provided on Youtube
         Metagame Environment Comment Boxes                          Metagame Environment Comment Boxes
                                      Figure 2. Feedback Focus (a) and Forms (b).

         There   were   also  instances  when   commenters   provided   feedback  about  the strategy (30%),  solution
(26%),  and    efficiency (15%)   of  proposed  game  play.  An  illustrative  example   of these  occurred  when one
commenter asserted, "Dude searching all this stuff is slow as hell and less reliable, sure mining sometimes turns
out slow   but trust me   after  like 40 minutes  I have  stacks of  materiel  and sometimes      enough for Diamond
Armour." Here, the commenter is providing feedback about the efficiency of a mining strategy and the benefits
of using   the approach   in  reference. Feedback   related to functionality  (15%) reflected  moments    when   video
commenters made reference to the function of an approach such as the ability to produce a functional redstone-
based product.    Aesthetics (11%) related feedback were moments when commenters referred to the aesthetic
quality of a video or Minecraft artifact such as--for example--the sound of a song or look of a building as
exampled when one commenter noted "I like the song, but i think the vid would be better with the default
textures...." The commenter      is pointing out the mod    used to  alter the game environment     would   have  been
visually better if the the game's default settings were maintained.

Discussion and conclusion
Here  we   advance   a  mixed-methodological     approach   that uses   NLP   and qualitative  methods   to  overcome
challenges associated with analyzing qualitative data from metagaming platforms at scale.          By doing so, we're
able to assess the myriad ways Minecraft users participate and collaborate in tutorial-based video content on
Youtube. Our analyses show several trends involving the types of feedback and collaboration that occur on this
platform.
         First, we observed that Minecraft gamers use Youtube to participate in multiple forms of discourse.
While comment section discourse represented the most frequent form of engagement in our sample, we also
observed song remixing and parodying.        This suggests that online platforms support unique cultural norms and
practices.    We also  observed     moments  where  Youtube    supported   just-in-time, on-demand    access to  quasi-
experts--video content producers that have specialized domain knowledge of a set of Minecraft related features
(e.g., redstone, mods, skins, etc.).   This underpins important implications for learning at scale in environments
where access to domain experts is limited.      Here, we observe that metagame communities provide an important
space for  learners  to   not only  engage  with experts  in  order  to achieve  learner-centered  goals in  the game
environment, but also to provide feedback on content which these experts should cover.
         We also observed that Minecraft gamers frequently use forms of feedback to assess Youtube content.
Notably,   feedback  about    Youtube    videos primarily   focused  on  game-related    content, suggesting that this
metagame      environment     is  an  important   space   for  (Minecraft)    learning--harkening     back   to  Gee's
characterization  of the  ways   these  spaces  support meaningful   engagement.    Furthermore, commenters most
often provided feedback that was evaluative and suggestive.       This underpins the prevalence of affective social
engagement on Youtube.        It suggests that Youtube acts as a place for learners to advance not only their own
learning repertoires, but also that of others. Learners very often made unprompted suggestions (both to video
authors and other commenters) to advance tutorial content.
         Importantly, this research provides important first attempts to elucidate insights into the myriad ways
gamers use a metagaming environment experience to participate and productively collaborate while learning.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     445                                                    © ISLS
While Youtube    affords  opportunities   for diverse participation  and engagement,    important    constraints exist.
These constraints include the ability for users to participate in discourse beyond those afforded by Youtube's
technical features. We observed, for instance, users participating and collaborating in ways that were marginal
compared to prominent comment-based and evaluative forms. These instances represent an important need to
create space for participants to engage in more broad forms of engagement.       In addition, our research uncovers
an important risk that exists when social engagement takes on a predominantly affective orientation.          This risk
could create adverse outcomes if, for instance, dominant voices or practices unintentionally place groups at risk
of marginalization in this space, an outcome that could exacerbate education disparities. Nevertheless, we report
on methodological approaches and perspectives that support research on metagame environments at scale.
        In conclusion, we argue that metagaming environments are spaces where important learning processes
take place. The    affordances of   these environments   can  be   used by  educators  as well as    learning systems
designers in order to produce more effective and fulfilling collaborative learning practices.

References
Ames, M.G. & Burrell, J. (2017). Connected Learning and the Equity Agenda: A Microsociology of Minecraft
        Play.   In Proceedings   of the  20th ACM    Conference    on Computer-Supported    Cooperative    Work   and
        Social Computing. ACM, New York, NY, 446-457. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998318
Anderson,   E., Walker,  J., Kafai, Y.  B., &  Lui, D.  (2017). The   gender and  race of pixels: an  exploration   of
        intersectional   identity  representation   and  construction   within minecraft   and   its community.     In
        Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games (p. 17). ACM.
Basawapatna,    A.  R., Koh,  K.  H.,  &  Repenning,  A. (2010).   Using scalable  game   design  to teach computer
        science from middle school to graduate school. In Proceedings of the fifteenth annual conference on
        Innovation and technology in computer science education (pp. 224-228). ACM.
Bluemink, J., Hamalainen, R., Manninen, R., & Jarvela, S. (2010). Group-level analysis on multiplayer game
        collaboration: How do the individuals shape the group interaction? Interactive Learning Environments,
        18(4), 365­383. doi:10.1080/10494820802602444
Butler, D. L., & Winne, P. H. (1995). Feedback and self-regulated learning: A theoretical synthesis. Review of
        educational research, 65(3), 245-281.
Callaghan,  N.  (2016).  Investigating  the role of Minecraft   in educational learning   environments. Educational
        Media International 53, 4 (2016), 244- 260. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09523987.2016.1254877
Cambria, E., & White, B. (2014). Jumping NLP curves: A review of natural language processing research. IEEE
        Computational intelligence magazine, 9(2), 48-57.
Cipollone, M., Schifter, C. C., & Moffat, R. A. (2014). Minecraft as a creative tool: A case study. International
        Journal of Game-Based Learning (IJGBL), 4(2), 1-14.
Clark, D., Nelson, B., Sengupta, P., & D'Angelo, C. (2009). Rethinking science learning through digital games
        and simulations: Genres, examples, and evidence. Paper presented at the Learning science: Computer
        games, simulations, and education workshop sponsored by the NAS, Washington, DC.
Clark, D., Tanner-Smith, E. E., & Killingsworth, S. S. (2016). Digital games, design, and learning: A systematic
        review and meta-analysis. Review of educational research, 86(1), 79-122.
Connolly, T. M., Boyle, E. A., MacArthur, E., Hainey, T., & Boyle, J. M. (2012). A systematic literature review
        of empirical evidence on computer games and serious games. Computers & Education, 59(2), 661-686.
Crook, C. (1994). Computers and the collaborative experience of learning. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Davis, K., Boss, J. A., & Meas, P. (2018). Playing in the Virtual Sandbox: Students' Collaborative Practices in
        Minecraft. International Journal of Game-Based Learning (IJGBL), 8(3), 56-76.
De Freitas, S. (2006). Learning in immersive worlds: A review of game-based learning.
Dezuanni, M., O'Mara, J., Beavis, C., Potter, J., & Gilje, Ø. (2015). `Redstone is like electricity': Children's
        performative representations in and around Minecraft. E-Learning and Digital Media, 12(2), 147­163.
        doi:10.1177/2042753014568176
Dieterle, E., & Clarke, J. (2006). Multi-user virtual environments for teaching and learning. In M. Pagani (Ed.),
        Encyclopedia of multimedia technology and networking (2nd ed.). Hershey, PA: Idea Group, Inc.
Evans, A. C., Wobbrock, J. O., & Davis, K. (2016). Modeling collaboration patterns on an interactive tabletop
        in  a   classroom setting.  In ACM    Conference   on Computer-Supported    Cooperative   Work   and     Social
        Computing (CSCW '16) (pp. 860-871). New York: ACM Press. doi:10.1145/2818048.2819972
Fields, D. A., Pantic, K., & Kafai, Y. B. (2015). "I have a tutorial for this": The language of online peer support
        in  the  Scratch  programming     community.    In Proceedings   of  the 14th  International  Conference   on
        Interaction Design and Children (pp. 229-238). ACM.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    446                                                     © ISLS
French, D. J., Stone, B., Nysetvold, T. T., Hepworth, A., & Red, W. E. (2016). Collaborative Design Principles
         From Minecraft With Applications to Multi-User Computer-Aided Design. Journal of Computing and
         Information Science in Engineering, 16(2).
Gee, J. P. (2008). Learning and games. In K. Salen (Ed.), The ecology of games: Connecting youth, games, and
         learning (pp. 21­40). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Hickey, D.T., Ingram-Goble, A.A., & Jameson, E.M. (2009). Designing assessments and assessing designs in
         virtual educational environments. J Sci Educ Technol 18(2):187­20
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge.
Lenhart, A., Kahne, J., Middaugh, E., Macgill, E. R., Evans, C., & Vitak, J. (2008). Teens, video games, and
         civics. Washington, DC: Pew Internet & American Life Project.
Li, M.  C., &    Tsai, C. C.   (2013). Game-based   learning   in science education: A  review   of relevant research.
         Journal of Science Education and Technology, 22(6), 877-898.
Makuch,    E. 2014.    Minecraft  passes  100  million registered  users, 14.3 million sales  on PC.   Retrieved  from
         www.gamespot.com.
Marklund,     B. B.,   Backlund,  P.,   &  Johannesson,  M.    (2013). Children's  collaboration  in emergent    game
         environments. In FDG (pp. 306-313).
Nebel, S., Schneider, S., & Rey, G. D. (2016). Mining learning and crafting scientific experiments: a literature
         review on the use of minecraft in education and research. J.Ed.Tech & Soc., 19(2), 355.
Niemeyer,   D.J.,   &  Gerber,   H.  R. (2015).   Maker  Culture  and  "Minecraft":  Implications   for the  Future of
         Learning. Educational Media International, 52(3), 216­226. doi:10.1080/09523987.2015.1075103
Paraskeva, F., Mysirlaki, S., & Papagianni, A. (2010). Multiplayer online games as educational tools: Facing
         new challenges in learning. Computers & Education, 54(2), 498-505.
Plass, J., Homer,    B.,  & Kinzer,    C. (2015).  Foundations  of game-based    learning. Educational   Psychologist,
         50(4), 258­283. doi:10.1080/00461520.2015.1122533
Ravitch,   S. M.,   &    Carl, N.   M.  (2015).   Qualitative research:   Bridging the  conceptual,  theoretical,  and
         methodological. Sage Publications.
Repenning, A., Webb, D. C., Brand, C., Gluck, F., Grover, R., Miller, S., & Song, M. (2014). Beyond minecraft:
         Facilitating    computational    thinking through    modeling  and  programming     in 3d.  IEEE    Computer
         Graphics and Applications, 34(3), 68-71.
Rogat, T., & Linnenbrink-Garcia, L. (2011). Socially shared regulation in collaborative groups: An analysis of
         the  interplay   between   quality of  social regulation  and  group  processes.  Cognition and   Instruction,
         29(4), 375­415. doi:10.1080/07370008.2011.607930
Short, D. (2012). Teaching Scientific Concepts Using a Virtual World: Minecraft. Teach.Sci. 58(3), 55­58.
Shute, VJ. (2008). Focus on formative feedback. Rev Educ Res 78:153­ 189. doi:10.3102/0034654307313795
Steinkuehler,    C. A.   (2004). Learning   in  massively  multiplayer    online games.   In Proceedings    of the  6th
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS '04) (pp. 521-528). New York: ACM Press.
Tanes, Z., & Cemalcilar, Z. (2010). Learning from SimCity: An Empirical study of Turkish adolescents. Journal
         of adolescence, 33(5), 731-739. doi:10.1016/j.adolescence.2009.10.007
Thompson, C. 2016. The Minecraft Generation. Retrieved from www.nytimes.com.
Wernholm,     M.,   &   Vigmo,    S.   (2015). Capturing  children's   knowledge-making      dialogues  in  Minecraft.
         International journal of research & method in education, 38(3), 230-246.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      447                                                   © ISLS
