        How Teachers Implement Active Learning: Typologies of
                                        Orchestrational Flow
                    Elizabeth S. Charles, Dawson College, echarles@dawsoncollege.qc.ca
                    James D. Slotta, University of Toronto (OISE), jim.slotta@utoronto.ca
                      Robert Cassidy, Concordia University, rob.cassidy@concordia.ca
                 Michael Dugdale, John Abbott College, michael.dugdale@johnabbott.qc.ca
                          Kevin Lenton, Vanier College, lentonk@vaniercollege.qc.ca
                          Chao Zhang, McGill University, chao.zhang2@mail.mcgill.ca

        Abstract: The term, Active Learning (AL) is commonly used in describing pedagogical
        approaches that engages learners actively in classrooms, with an emphasis on problem
        solving, inquiry   and   reflection.    While   a growing   body   of evidence     supports the
        effectiveness of such an approach, there is great variation in defining the specific strategies
        and  approaches,   making    it difficult to   advance  the field. We  examined     19  college
        instructors for   over 220 hours  using   AL   methods.  We   coded   the observed  classroom
        activities according to teacher- and student-centered behaviours. On average, these teachers
        allocated over 50% of class time to group work. A cluster analysis revealed four distinct
        patterns of student-centred activity: (1) frequent, short duration; (2) longer duration; (3)
        less frequent, short duration; and, (4) mixed. Two approaches to workflow were identified:
        1) tightly orchestrated and 2) front-loaded with less structured periods of work. Results
        suggest  typologies of  instructional   patterns, growth trajectories and  new directions   for
        examining AL.

Introduction
Most educators  now   recognize  the need    to foster "21st  century knowledge   skills", such as  critical thinking,
collaborative problem solving, and evidence-based reasoning (Hargreaves, 2003; Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012).
Science educators have responded to this challenge, exploring new modes of learning and instruction, such as
peer instruction (PI), where students in large lecture courses respond to multiple choice conceptual problems using
"clickers", with the tallied results introduced as a powerful mediator of whole class discussions (Crouch & Mazur,
2001). While PI methods hold promise for improving large lecture courses, a movement is now underway to
reduce large lectures, emphasizing smaller, recitation-sized sections, led by TAs or instructors. In the "flipped
classroom" approach, students spend time at home preparing for class by watching video lectures and reading
texts, and class time engaging in active forms of problem solving, small group work, tutorial and recitation
(Brookfield, 2012).
        Referred to broadly as "Active Learning" (Bishop & Verleger, 2013; DeLozier & Rhodes, 2017), this
approach has now engaged many STEM educators, resulting in professional societies (e.g., SALTISE.ca) and
university-based centers to support the design of active learning courses. Pioneered by Beichner and his colleagues
(e.g., Beichner, Saul, Abbott, Morse, Deardorff, Allain & Risley, 2007), the Student-centered Activities for Large
Enrolment Undergraduate Physics, or SCALE-UP method, emphasizes small group tables for student engagement
with hands-on activities, physical or digital manipulatives, structured and conceptual problems). SCALE-UP was
adapted by MIT for its introductory physics curriculum, known as Technology Enhanced Active Learning (TEAL;
Dori et al, 2003), which has provided an important referent for many new initiatives in undergraduate science
education.  Ruiz-Primo,    Briggs, Iverson,     Talbot and   Shepard  (2011)  summarize    active   learning (AL) as
comprising four dimensions: conceptually oriented tasks, collaboration, technology, and inquiry based projects.
Several studies have measured the benefits of AL (e.g., Dori & Belcher, 2005; Linton, Pangle, Wyatt, Powell &
Sherwood, 2014).  A large meta-analysis of AL in STEM, shows that exams scores improved by 6% and students
were 1.5 times less likely to fail compared with traditional lecture approaches (Freeman, Eddy, McDonough,
Smith, Okoroafor,   Jordt & Wenderoth,    2014).   Moreover, AL has been shown to improve critical thinking,
motivation and communication skills (e.g., Kim, Sharma, Land & Furlong, 2013), and increase students' use of
metacognitive processes such as decision making and questioning (Lin, Hmelo, Kinzer & Secules, 1999).
        Despite this evidence of success, however, AL remains largely ill-specified and difficult to study with
any control (Ruiz-Primo et al., 2011; Brownell, Price & Steinman, 2013). For example, while specific group
strategies are often invoked (e.g., group work, gallery walks, collaborative projects, or problem solving) very little
definition is provided about the learning processes within those groups, the materials or assessments, or the
instructor's role during the activities (Henderson & Dancy, 2007). Simply naming collaborative strategies fails to

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     448                                                   © ISLS
provide sufficient detail about the content, structure or sequencing of activities, nor how they must be configured
to ensure efficacy. What makes a hands-on lab activity effective? When should it be used within the AL sequence?
How will students collaborate, and to what end? How should design projects be structured, and how should they
be assessed? Additionally, AL instruction places new demands on teachers' management and responsibilities for
learning, referred to by Dillenbourg (2013) as classroom orchestration. Practitioners and researchers require more
detail about AL designs, in order to develop a deeper understanding of how to create or adapt them for their own
learning designs.
         The recent interest in building innovative "Active Learning classrooms" (ALCs) offer an opportunity to
gain insight into the instructional patterns used by instructors who purport to engage in AL. Instruction that takes
place in these classrooms relies heavily on collaborative learning and student projects, providing opportunities to
observe the corresponding teaching practices in a "natural habitat". By examining the nature of teaching and
learning in such environments, we can gain an understanding of what instructors are doing and how they integrate
AL strategies into their courses. Are there meaningful patterns and/or trends? Are they intentionally designed to
produce specific learning and/or instructional outcomes?
         We conducted a study of AL "in the wild" to inform our understanding of active learning, and to improve
our own approaches to AL design. Our observations and survey of 19 instructors, reported in this paper, can serve
as an important referent, informing how we make sense of AL in terms of its patterns of activity structure,
discourse  and  interactions. In many   ways,   examination    of these  authentic  implementations    are akin    to what
Bereiter (2014)  calls  for when   he described   principled   practical knowledge,    "a type   of knowledge    that  has
characteristics of  both practical know-how      and scientific   theory" (p.  5).  This research   thus aims   to inform
theoretical perspectives on AL, as well as instructional design and principled instructional practices (authors,
2010).

Methods

Design and data collected
This research used a case study design (Yin, 2013), involving mixed methods and ethnographic approach (Denzin
& Lincoln, 2000), and    part of a larger study involving student group practices and artifact production. The data
used included classroom observations consisting of field notes, video recordings, teacher interviews and the
pedagogical  commitment       self-reporting survey  -   i.e., Post-secondary     Instructional Survey   (PIPS;    Walter,
Henderson, Beach & Williams, 2016). PIPS consist of 24 items categorized into student-centred and teacher-
centred statements, that indicate a score describing a teacher's practice along the two factors. Two indices were
generated from PIPS scores: A student-centred index (SCI) was created from the ratio of the instructor's student-
centred score and teacher-centred score; and classification of SC (student-centeredness) based on the SCI such
that Level 1 included SCI less than 2, Level 2    included SCI from 2 to 3.5, and Level 3 included SCI greater than
3.5.

Participants and setting
The  study used   a purposeful   sampling    to recruit a total of 19   instructors from  three  colleges, situated   in a
metropolitan city   in eastern  Canada.  This   sample  was    selected from  a total population    of approximately    70
teachers across the three colleges, who voluntarily select to teach their one or more of their courses in active
learning classrooms. Their data corpus represents 33 course sections, from 13 courses, and eight disciplines -
Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Mathematics, Psychology, History, Humanities and English.                 Class sizes ranged
from 15 to 47 students. All 19 participants had taught in these types of classrooms multiple times, ranging from 5
- 12 semesters (Mean = 9 semesters). Additionally, each institution has some level of support and expectation that
teachers using these classrooms will use a student-centred approach and engage with an appropriate professional
learning community.

Procedure and analysis
Observations were conducted by members of the research team, carefully following a common protocol that
included  field notes and video recordings using GoPro cameras to document the teacher's activity. Multiple class
sessions  were  observed    for  each   teacher,  based   on   an  established  schedule   that  set   conditions  -  e.g.,
accommodation of the teacher preferences, minimum number of classes to observe, timing between observations.
In all instances, efforts were made to schedule observations to ensure obtaining a representative sampling of the
teacher's practices and their instructional implementations (avg.# of observations = 8.3).
         Quantitative   data   analysis was     performed  using   R    (v3.4.1),  an open  source     analytic software
environment. Analysis of the classroom observations was performed using StudioCode and a protocol similar to

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      449                                                      © ISLS
the COPUS   approach  (Classroom  Observation   Protocol   for Undergraduate   STEM;    Smith,   Jones, Gilbert &
Wieman, 2013). However, our coding sought to elaborate on the types of classroom behaviours during the class
session, as well as to document the amount of time spent in each kind of activity. Capturing the distinct kinds of
instructional interaction -- including various forms of lecture, small group, and individual learning activities --
was a primary goal, with the aim of providing a clear account of the frequency, duration, sequence and mix of
interactions that occur.  Each class session was coded for presence of the following categories: (1) teacher-
centered (lecture/demo); (2) student-centered (group/individual/whole class/student presentation); and, (3) other
(administrative work). Actual time spent in each activity was then calculated and recorded for each teacher. We
also recorded the type of classroom as being either high-tech "active learning space" (e.g., interactive writable
surfaces) versus low-tech "active learning space" (e.g., traditional whiteboards and writing surfaces), in order to
investigate whether this variable influenced the nature of classroom interactions.

Results
Entering into this effort, we recognized that instructors would vary appreciably in how they put the ideas of AL
into practice, and for purposes of this paper, we include any student-centred instruction occurring within these
classrooms as a form of active learning. A total of 157 observations were obtained, with average class times of
85 minutes, and an average of 8.3 observations per teacher.
         We found that instructors spent 59% of their time in student-centred activities (ranging from a low of
24% to a high of 76%), and 40.8% in teacher-centred activities (see Figure 1). A box-plot of these observational
data (Figure 2) reveals that student-centred approaches were the primary instructional mode for 15 of the 19
teachers observed. This is in clear contrast to other studies such as Lund et al. (2015) whose sample of 73 teachers
spent less than 20% of class time in student-centred activity, with lecture as the primary instructional mode. Even
in cases when professional development (PD) training was provided (e.g., Stains, Pilarz & Chakraverty, 2015),
lectures remained above 60%, and returned to 80% within two years of the PD intervention. Thus, it is encouraging
that AL-oriented instructors exhibit such a clear pattern of student-centred learning designs.

           Figure 1. Average proportion of class time spent on different activities by the 19 teachers.

Figure 2. Box plot comparisons of the 19 instructors, ranking by time spent in student centered activities within
               their observed classes. Horizontal lines are grand means for each activity type.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  450                                                   © ISLS
What factors impact instructional patterns?
To determine whether the observed patterns of instruction depended on particular characteristics of the teacher or
classroom, a MANOVA       was  performed  with   activity type (lecture, group    work, individual   work,   student
presentation, whole-class discussion) as the dependent variable. Independent variables were teacher, classroom
type (high-tech ALC or low-tech ALC), course section, course content and semester (fall or winter session). There
were no main effects of classroom type (low-tech or high-tech), course section, or semester, nor significant
interaction effects, however there was a significant main effect of teacher, with Pillai's Trace = 1.23 (F(18, 131) =
2.37, p < 0.05). This is unsurprising, as different teachers would likely have characteristic instructional patterns,
which would give rise to such a significant effect. To further test whether teachers' instructional patterns are stable
across contexts, we examined the 7 teachers who were observed multiple times in different contexts.      For each of
these teachers, a MANOVA was performed to examine whether or not the different contexts led to different
instructional patterns. In all but one teacher, no statistically significant difference was found, suggesting that
teachers within our cohort use similar instructional patterns regardless of the course context. Post-hoc analysis of
the one exception indicated that the difference is attributable to a small dependence of "student presentation"
activities in the observed course. This overall lack of variation across contexts suggests that it is safe to aggregate
our observations across context for the remaining analyses.
        We sought to further understand the characteristics of these active learning designs by focusing on the
most commonly occurring form of student-centered activity: group work. One question that could be addressed
from our observation data was concerned with the average duration of groupwork.     We performed a partitioning
around medoids cluster analysis (Reynolds, Richards, de la Iglesia & Rayward-Smith, 1992). Findings show that
18 of the 19 teachers fall into one of four clusters (Figure 3). Cluster 1 indicates very frequent but short activity
sessions; cluster 2, moderately frequent but long activity sessions; and Cluster 3 shows moderately frequent but
shorter activity sessions; finally the two teachers in Cluster 4 employed moderately frequent and moderately long
activity sessions.

   Figure 3. Cluster analysis revealing four clusters of student-centred pedagogy organized by % of class time
            devoted to group work and average length of group work assigned within class session.

        Looking within clusters, we found different orchestrational flows. In Cluster 1 teachers were generally
observed as designers of many short duration activities engaging students in collaborative tasks that included
group problem  solving,  peer  review and editing, peer   instruction (reciprocal teaching),    orchestrated by task
termination (or interruption) after 10-15 minutes to provide feedback at the class-level. Observations of teachers
in Cluster 2 revealed   longer group  activities with orchestration   involving the teacher     circling around  the
classroom, providing feedback to individual groups. Generally, such activities engaged students in project work,
sometimes with a distribution of labour and sometimes working jointly to build and/or add to a shared artifact.
Cluster 3 teachers orchestrated with shorter activities and fewer of them, appearing to have less experience with

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   451                                                   © ISLS
student-centred instruction or teaching in disciplines with lots of content to learn (e.g., biology, history). Much
like the earlier cluster, these tasks engaged students in problem solving and peer instruction. Cluster 4 is more
difficult to describe because the two teachers appear to engage in different orchestrational flows or styles, teacher
8 being more aware of using group work but hampered because of the student under preparedness (described in
interviews).

What characteristics are shared by teachers within the clusters?
To understand the factors that might account for these clusters, we examined characteristics of the 19 teachers
(see Table 1).  We found that Cluster 1 teachers were predominantly from a common discipline (physics), as
compared with the other clusters, which were more heterogenous. Cluster 1 teachers also generally shared a high
commitment to student-centred interactions like small group work, with 4 out of the 6 cluster members            at Level
3 on the SCI classification. We examined other factors, such as years of teaching or experience in AL classrooms,
but those did do not vary systematically (i.e., in any way that could offer explanation for the clusters). Still, in
Cluster 3 we recognized that two of the disciplines found there (biology and chemistry) have a strong tradition of
focusing on content at the undergraduate levels, particularly as these were introductory courses with multiple
sections, where teachers expressed feeling external pressures to prepare students for the common final. This could
may explain why their SC index scores are high compared to their actual implementation patterns ­ i.e., cluster
allocation.

Table 1: Breakdown of individual teachers information organized by their association to the cluster analysis

 cluster  TeacherID*   TeachingexperienceAL experience         SCI            SCI Level                       Discipline
   1         9            11                3                  6.1                3                            physics
   1         10           9                 2                  3.5                3                            physics
   1         11          9.5                2                  4.5                3                            physics
   1         12           17                3                  10.4               3                            physics
   1         15           11                2                  3.4                2                            physics
   1         18          n/a               n/a                 n/a               n/a                            math
   2         13           15                1                  4.6                3                            english
   2         14          7.5                2                  2.5                2                           sociology
   2         16           13                3                  2.8                2                            physics
   3         2           7.8                2                  1.8                1                           chemistry
   3         3            6                 1                  1.6                1                          psychology
   3         4           9.5                2                  2.0                1                            physics
   3         6            16                2                  10.6               3                            biology
   3         7            23                2                  3.1                2                           sociology
   3         17           9                 1                  n/a               n/a                           history
   3         19           11                2                  n/a               n/a                           biology
   4         5            15                2                  1.8                1                           chemistry
   4         8            10                2                  5.4                3                            physics
Notes: Teaching experience, numbers of years teaching; AL experience (proxy used: request to teach in AL classrooms) 1 =
low (>2 yrs), 2 = medium (3-5 yrs), 3 = high (> 5 yrs); SCI, student-centred index, see Methods section for details; SCI Level,
see Methods section for details. *Teacher 1 not presented here, b/c not part of cluster analysis.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  452                                                             © ISLS
Characterizing orchestrational flows
Several   studies have focused   on teachers' pedagogical   implementation, which is sometimes   referred to    as
"pedagogical  flow"    (Schmidt, 2007), and   more recently  subsumed within  the broader notion of  classroom
orchestration (Dillenbourg, 2013). Inspired by these notions, we explored the implementation patterns of our
cohort of teachers, selecting one teacher from the three main clusters (i.e., Clusters 1, 2 and 3). In an effort to
minimize differences in implementation that might be associated with content, we selected the three teachers who
teach the same discipline (physics) and specific course (Mechanics), but who fell into different clusters. Because
we conducted multiple observations for each of these teachers, and the timeline descriptions for each observation
were somewhat distinct (i.e., based on topic of the day and what the students were asked to do), we had to develop
some measure      of a teacher's "characteristic implementation,"  which we   obtained by  selecting the  most
representative of their respective implementations. This is captured through a pair of graphs ­ a pie chart to show
total proportions of time spent in different forms of interaction (i.e., small group, lecture, or demonstration),
combined with a timeline showing the distribution of those interactions over a representative class period. Figure
4 shows the three sample teachers, whose respective pedagogical flow can be seen reflecting the three distinct
clusters.

                                                 Phy_9_cluster 1

                                                 Phy_16_cluster 2

                                                 Phy_4_cluster 3

Figure 4. The orchestration of AL by three teachers, each representing one of the three main clusters identified.
  Teacher Phy_9, is representative of cluster 1, teacher Phy_16, of cluster 2, and teacher Phy_4, of cluster 3.
          Colors, blue=group work; red=lecture; red stripe=demonstration; black=administrative work.

          Interestingly, while teachers Phy_9 and Phy_16 allocate over 60% of their class time to group work there
is a stark difference in their implementations. Phy_9 has a "stop and go" pattern that is a heterogeneous mix of
lecture and student group work ­ creating a rhythm almost like an up-tempo musical piece. Meanwhile, Phy_16
shows a two-stage pattern that is "front-loaded" with the teacher lecture and demo followed by a prolonged period
of group work. Teacher Phy_4 illustrates the near inverse of the Cluster 1 teacher. This pattern too is "stop and
go" but substantially less time is allocated to group work.
          Interviews with these teachers also revealed differences in their instructional objectives and pedagogical
commitments. Teacher Phy_9 stated that he had a pair of aims: (1) to guide students through a series of activities
that engage them in exploring the concepts, but also (2) to maintain control over the student's interaction with the
content as a means of giving them an opportunity to apply their knowledge but then moving them along. Teacher

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   453                                                 © ISLS
Phy_16 stated that his aim was to allow students to explore the content, and preferred to work with the groups
themselves to better understand the individuals and their concerns. The interview with teacher Phy_4 revealed
that while he was also interested in having students try out what they were learning, he was more concerned with
moving things along and controlling "the chaos that comes with group work" in active learning classrooms.

Discussion
Under the assumption  that this cohort of 19 college    teachers is adequately representative of student-centred
teachers, we set out to examine their practice and implementation of AL strategies. Examining the allocations of
time to different instructional activity revealed four patterns: high group work with frequent interruptions (Cluster
1), high group work with few interruptions (Cluster 2), moderate group work with interruptions (Cluster 3), mixed
(Cluster 4). The Cluster 2 pattern suggested a front-loading of lecture before handing over longer durations of
time for students to work on activities. Such implementations appear similar to inquiry-based approaches. On the
other hand, Cluster 1 and 3 patterns revealed types of "stop and go" tempos, or what might be considered a
heterogeneous mix of lecture and group work ­ though clearly Cluster 1 is more student-centred.
        These identified patterns offer new  opportunities  to   extend  the CSCL  research on   orchestration in
empirical ways. For instance, the two types of AL patterns call for very different management of resources and
learning ­ group level versus class level. Additionally, the patterns of Clusters 1 and 3 offer opportunities to
explore how and what   teachers  do in interweaving  the  lecture   and group work and how    they integrate AL
strategies. The limits of this paper do not allow for the expansion of this investigation but interviews with these
teachers reveal clearly different intentions behind these designed implementations. Lastly, the inverse of patterns
identified between Cluster 1 and 3 raises the question of whether or not these might not be representative of growth
trajectories along the continuum of AL adoption. As such, we might further ask whether or not teachers adoption
of this new approach takes on such trajectories and could provide insights on professional development. This
study has begun the process of shaping what is to be explored as CSCL and the Learning Sciences begins to
consider AL as an instructional practice. We argue that by examining authentic implementations we gain a better
understanding of how collaborative learning is orchestrated to meet the needs of integrating group work and
lecture, and more importantly, how our findings might be adopted by everyday practitioners. Such investigations
also bring us closer to understanding how we might follow up on Bereiter's challenge of designing with principled
practical knowledge (Bereiter, 2014).

References
Bereiter, C. (2014). Principled practical knowledge: Not a bridge but a ladder. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
        23(1), 4-17.
Beichner, R. J., Saul, J. M., Abbott, D. S., Morse, J. J., Deardorff, D., Allain, R. J., & Risley, J. S. (2007). The
        student-centered activities for large enrollment undergraduate programs (SCALE-UP) project. Research-
        based reform of university physics, 1(1), 2-39.
Bishop, J. L., & Verleger, M. A. (2013, June). The flipped classroom: A survey of the research. In ASEE National
        Conference Proceedings, Atlanta, GA (Vol. 30, No. 9, pp. 1-18).
Brookfield, S. D., & Preskill, S. (2012). Discussion as a way of teaching: Tools and techniques for democratic
        classrooms. John Wiley & Sons.
Brownell, S. E., Price, J. V., & Steinman, L. (2013). Science communication to the general public: why we need
        to teach undergraduate and graduate students this skill as part of their formal scientific training. Journal
        of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education, 12(1), E6.
Coburn, C. E., & Penuel, W. R. (2016). Research­practice partnerships in education: Outcomes, dynamics, and
        open questions. Educational Researcher, 45(1), 48-54.
Crouch, C. H., & Mazur, E. (2001). Peer instruction: Ten years of experience and results. American journal of
        physics, 69(9), 970-977.
DeLozier, S. J., & Rhodes, M. G. (2017). Flipped classrooms: a review of key ideas and recommendations for
        practice. Educational psychology review, 29(1), 141-151.
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. (Eds.). (2000). Handbook of qualitative research    (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
        Sage Publications.
Dillenbourg, P. (2013). Design for classroom orchestration. Computers & Education, 69, 485-492.
Dori, Y. J., & Belcher, J. (2005). How does technology-enabled active learning affect undergraduate students'
        understanding of electromagnetism concepts?. The journal of the learning sciences, 14(2), 243-279.
Dori, Y. J., Belcher, J., Bessette, M., Danziger, M., McKinney, A., & Hult, E. (2003). Technology for active
        learning. Materials Today, 6(12), 44-49.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 454                                                  © ISLS
Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning through
         technology and curriculum design. Journal of the learning sciences, 8(3-4), 391-450.
Freeman, S., Eddy, S. L., McDonough, M., Smith, M. K., Okoroafor, N., Jordt, H., & Wenderoth, M. P. (2014).
         Active learning increases student performance in science, engineering, and mathematics. Proceedings of
         the National Academy of Sciences, 111(23), 8410-8415.
Hargreaves, A. (2003). Teaching in the knowledge society: Education in the age of insecurity. Teachers College
         Press.
Henderson, C., & Dancy, M. H. (2007). Barriers to the use of research-based instructional strategies: The influence
         of both individual and situational characteristics. Physical Review Special Topics-Physics Education
         Research, 3(2), 020102.
Kim, K., Sharma, P., Land, S. M., & Furlong, K. P. (2013). Effects of active learning on enhancing student critical
         thinking in an undergraduate general science course. Innovative Higher Education, 38(3), 223-235.
Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: An
         analysis of the failure of  constructivist, discovery, problem-based,  experiential, and inquiry-based
         teaching. Educational psychologist, 41(2), 75-86.
Lin, X., Hmelo, C., Kinzer, C. K., & Secules, T. J. (1999). Designing technology to support reflection. Educational
         Technology Research and Development, 47(3), 43-62.
Linton, D. L., Pangle, W. M., Wyatt, K. H., Powell, K. N., & Sherwood, R. E. (2014). Identifying key features of
         effective active learning: the effects of writing and peer discussion. CBE-Life Sciences Education, 13(3),
         469-477.
Lund, T. J., Pilarz, M., Velasco, J. B., Chakraverty, D., Rosploch, K., Undersander, M., & Stains, M. (2015). The
         best of both worlds: building on the COPUS and RTOP observation protocols to easily and reliably
         measure various levels of reformed instructional practice. CBE-Life Sciences Education, 14(2), ar18.
Pellegrino, J. W., & Hilton, M. L. (2012). Committee on Defining Deeper Learning and 21st Century Skills.
         Center for Education.
Reynolds, A., Richards, G., de la Iglesia, B. and Rayward-Smith, V. (1992) Clustering rules: A comparison of
         partitioning and hierarchical clustering algorithms; Journal of Mathematical Modelling and Algorithms
         5, 475­504 (http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10852-005-9022-1).
Ruiz-Primo, M. A., Briggs, D., Iverson, H., Talbot, R., & Shepard, L. A. (2011). Impact of undergraduate science
         course innovations on learning. Science, 331(6022), 1269-1270.
Schmidt, W. H. (Ed.). (2007). Characterizing pedagogical flow: An investigation of mathematics and science
         teaching in six countries. Springer Science & Business Media.
Smith, M. K., Jones, F. H., Gilbert, S. L., & Wieman, C. E. (2013). The Classroom Observation Protocol for
         Undergraduate STEM (COPUS): a new instrument to characterize university STEM classroom practices.
         CBE-Life Sciences Education, 12(4), 618-627.
Stains, M., Pilarz,  M., &  Chakraverty,    D. (2015).  Short and  long-term impacts  of the   Cottrell scholars
         collaborative new faculty workshop. Journal of Chemical Education, 92(9), 1466-1476.
Walter, E.  M., Henderson,  C.   R., Beach, A.  L.,  & Williams,  C. T. (2016). Introducing   the Postsecondary
         Instructional Practices Survey (PIPS): a concise, interdisciplinary, and easy-to-score survey. CBE-Life
         Sciences Education, 15(4), ar53.
Wieman, C. E., Adams, W. K., & Perkins, K. K. (2008). PhET: Simulations that enhance learning. Science,
         322(5902), 682-683.
Yin, R. K. (2017). Case study research and applications: Design and methods (6th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
         Sage Publications.

Acknowledgments
This research   was  supported by a   grant from  le  Ministère de l'éducation et de l'enseignement   supérieur,
Programme d'aide à la recherche sur l'enseignement et l'apprentissage (PAREA), Quebec, Canada (grant number
PA2014-013). And, in collaboration with our colleagues from the SALTISE network <https://www.saltise.ca/>.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   455                                                © ISLS
