 Cross-Boundary Interaction for Sustaining Idea Development and
                    Knowledge Building with Idea Thread Mapper
                                  Guangji Yuan, Jianwei Zhang, and Mei-Hwa Chen
                           gyuan@albany.edu, jzhang1@albany.edu, mhc@cs.albany.edu
                                  University at Albany, State University of New York

          Abstract: This study investigated the cross-classroom interaction in four grade 5 knowledge
          building  communities     as the  third  iteration  of  design-based   research.   The    four classrooms
          studied human body systems with the support of the Idea Thread Mapper platform. As the
          students conducted focused inquiry and discourse within their own community, they posted
          reflective syntheses of their "Journey of Thinking" to a cross-community space accessible to
          the  broader  peers    from   other     classrooms.   Students    from  the     four  classrooms   further
          participated in   a  live  "Super   Talk"     to collaboratively     address    a challenging     question.
          Qualitative analyses of classroom videos, online discourse, and classroom observation notes
          provide a rich description of how the students interacted within and across communities to
          develop scientific understandings.

Introduction
Educational   researchers   have  made   substantial  advances    to develop    collaborative    learning  environments   and
support collaborative   knowledge      building   among    students (Engle   &   Conant,    2002;   Scardamalia   &    Bereiter,
2006;  Slotta, Suthers, &   Roschelle,   2014).    Further   research  is needed    to extend   collaborative    interaction to
higher  social levels  and  scales  (Stahl, 2013),    so students   can build  on   the   knowledge   of   other communities
across  school  years  for  sustained  knowledge      building   (Zhang, Bogouslavsky       &   Yuan,   2017).   This  requires
designs for cross-boundary interaction and collaboration, which has gained interests in the broader fields (Star
& Griesemer,    1989;  Start   2013)   but  still lacks  systematic  investigation     in the  field of  computer-supported
collaborative learning. The purpose of this design-based research is to test and refine designs of cross-classroom
interaction for knowledge      building  with   the support   of  a  new  collaborative     platform: Idea   Thread    Mapper
(Zhang et al., 2015, Zhang et al., 2018).
          Existing explorations of cross-community interactions for knowledge building adopted a single layer
interaction design. Each classroom gave other classrooms access to their online discourse space so they could
read their notes, respond, and supplement with periodic video conferences (Lai & Law 2006; Laferrière et al.,
2012).  The   findings  suggest   productive      classroom   changes.  Meanwhile,      difficulties  arose  for  students   to
understand other communities' ideas and discourses without a clear sense of the contexts. New strategies of
boundary-crossing support are needed to make knowledge progress accessible across communities.
          This research designs cross-community interaction using a multi-level emergent interaction approach,
focusing  on   interactions mediated    through    boundary   objects.  "Boundary      objects"  are  artifacts  (e.g. reports,
tools, models)   used   to  bridge   the   boundaries    (discontinuities)  between       different  social  worlds    (Star &
Griesemer, 1989). Objects from a community often have contextual meanings that are not accessible to other
communities. What makes boundary objects effective for bridging different communities of practice is their
interpretative flexibility  as a  "means   of translation"    (Star &  Griesemer,    1989):    they  have  a structure  that is
common enough to make them recognizable across the different social worlds and allow different communities
to interact and work together.       Through      interacting with  shared  boundary      objects,  members    from    different
communities     can   identify,   understand,     and   reflect  on   their  different    practices,  leading    to    enriched
understandings within each community and potentially the creation of new, in-between practices (Akkerman &
Bakker, 2011).
          As noted above, raw distributed online discourse records are hard to use as boundary objects to bridge
different knowledge     building    communities.     Therefore,     we  developed    a    multi-level emergent     interaction
approach (Zhang et al., 2017). Students in each community engage in focused inquiry and interactive discourse
within their own community's space. As progress is made, students selectively synthesize fruitful threads of
inquiry emerged    from their    discourse. The    reflective   reviews and    syntheses    can facilitate peer  learning and
build-on within each classroom (Zhang et al., 2018); they may further be shared as boundary objects to enable
cross-community interaction. Students from other partner classrooms (or a subsequent student cohort) can use
the syntheses of idea threads to view into the progress of inquiry and build connections.
          We   have conducted     a multi-year    design-based   research   to test and   refine this multi-level,  emergent
interaction design  (Zhang     et al., 2017,  Yuan,      Zhang   &  Luo,    2018).     The  earlier  iterations/designs  were
supported by purposeful uses of existing tools offered by Knowledge Forum (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         456                                                       © ISLS
On the basis of the findings, we created and upgraded a new collaboration platform: Idea Thread Mapper (ITM)
(Zhang et al., 2018), which interoperates with Knowledge Forum. ITM supports knowledge building interaction
in a network of "buddy classrooms." Students in each classroom co-organize "juicy" wondering areas (shared
inquiry  foci) as they  pursue  interactive discourse  to deepen    their understandings     in a domain      area. They
compose   Journey  of Thinking  (JoT)   syntheses  to  review  progress  in each  area,  focusing   on (a)   overarching
topics and  problems,  (b) we   used to think...now    we understand...   and   (c)  deeper  research   is needed.   The
wondering areas and syntheses are shared in a cross-classroom space that has an easy search tool. By viewing
other classrooms' JoT syntheses, students can get a sense of their inquiry directions and learn from their "big
ideas" and deepening questions. As a newly designed feature, ITM allows different classrooms to initiate and
participate in live "Super Talk" threads to collaboratively address challenging problems.
         This paper reports on a new iteration of this design-based research to refine cross-classroom interaction
in a set of four  grade  5 classrooms   supported  by  ITM.    Our  research    questions ask:  (a) How      did students
generate  JoT  syntheses for  cross-classroom   sharing?   (b)   How did    the four classrooms     initiate  and pursue
"Super Talk" to address challenging problems? And (c) in what ways did the within-classroom discourse and
cross-classroom "Super Talk" interact to support deep inquiry and understandings?

Method
Classroom design and contexts
This study was conducted in four grade 5 classrooms (with a total of 89 students who were 10-to-11 years old)
that studied human body systems over a six-month period using ITM. The four classrooms, labeled as Class 1-4,
were taught by two teachers each teaching two classes. Students in each classroom generated interest-driven
questions, co-organized  wondering   areas  focusing   on various  human    body    systems, and  conducted      research
using various resources.   They conducted reflective knowledge-building conversation (called "metacognitive
meetings") in their classroom to build on one another's questions and ideas while reviewing their progress. The
conversation   continued   on ITM  in   their online   discourse  space   organized   as  various   idea   threads  each
addressing an overarching problem/theme. As progress is made in each idea thread, students co-created and
edited JoT to reflect on their knowledge (Figure 1). The JoT was then shared with all the other classrooms.
Drawing upon their knowledge built about the various body systems, students in Class 3 proposed a challenging
problem for "Super Talk" across the classrooms: How do people grow? (Figure 3). The proposal was supported
by the   other classrooms.  Students  from    the four classrooms   worked      together to  discuss this    overarching
question. Near the end of the unit, each class had a metacognitive meeting to review knowledge gained from the
"Super Talk" and build connections with the different human body systems.

Data sources and analyses
The  data  sources  included   classroom    observation  notes,  video    records   and  transcriptions    of classroom
conversations, and students' online discourse on ITM and JoT shared in the cross-classroom space. Guided by
each of the three research questions, we conducted detailed qualitative analysis of student inquiry process in
their home class in connection with student interaction across classrooms. To analyze the quality of students'
JoT syntheses, we conducted content analysis (Chi,1997) based on the scientific levels (from pre-scientific to
scientific) and complexity of ideas (from unelaborated facts to elaborated explanations) (see coding scheme in
Zhang et al., 2007). To understand how the Super Talk took place, we read/re-read our detailed field notes and
examined the classroom videos to understand the classroom processes. To understand how the within-classroom
discourse  and  cross-classroom   Super    Talk   interacted to  support    further inquiry,  researchers     selectively
transcribed two metacognitive meeting videos from each class, one from the 5th month, and the other from the
sixth/last month of the inquiry in which students discussed what they had learned from the Super Talk. We
analyzed the classroom discussion to trace the formation of cross-topic connections based on the betweenness
centrality measure (Oshima, Oshima & Matsuzawa, 2012).

Results
How did students generate syntheses of Journey of Thinking for cross-classroom
sharing?
Students  engaged  in  kick-off activities that elicited their interests  about  the human   body    in  January    2018.
Students in each room generated various interests and questions and formulated overarching "wondering areas."
These   areas  became  the focus  of the   subsequent    inquiry by  individuals    and  groups   using  books,     online
resources, and models. With inquiry progress made in the next two months, students were introduced to the JoT

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    457                                                        © ISLS
function in ITM. Focusing on each area of inquiry, students added reflections on their research individually, and
then compiled the reflection entries into whole group JoT (Figure 1). The syntheses of JoT were then shared
with all the other classrooms in the cross-classroom sharing space.

Figure 1. The                                                                                Journey of Thinking
                        synthesis written for the area of bones and muscles from Class 1.

        To examine the quality of students' reflections in their JoT, researchers coded the ideas summarized
under "We used to think" and "We now understand" based on scientific sophistication and epistemic complexity
(Zhang et al., 2007) (see Table 1).

Table 1: Coding of ideas in the JoT summarized under "We used to think" and "Now we understand" based on
data from the current (2018) and the previous iteration (2017) of this research

                                              2018                                         2017
                            We used to think     Now we Understand       We used to think           Now we
                                                                                                   Understand
       Scientific
     Sophistication
     Pre-scientific             33%                      0%                     38%                   0%
        Hybrid                  50%                      0%                     48%                   0%
        Basic                   16.7%                    0%                     14%                  18%
       Scientific                0%                     100%                     0%                  82%

 Epistemic Complexity
  Unelaborated Facts            83%                       %                     95%                   9%
   Elaborated Facts              0%                     16.7%                    0%                  32%
     Unelaborated
     Explanations               16.7%                    0%                      5%                   9%
      Elaborated
     Explanations                0%                    83.33%                    0%                  48%

        As Table 1 shows, ideas summarized under "Now we understand" show a higher level of scientific
quality and complexity than those summarized under "We used to think." Compared against the data from the
previous (2017) iteration of this design-based research in which we tested a similar design without ITM, the
ideas summarized under "Now we understand" in the current iteration showed higher levels of scientific and
complex quality. A more detailed analysis revealed that the JoT syntheses in 2018 had more words on average
than those in 2017   (362.3 versus  170.8 words).   These changes   suggest the  potential improvement made    by
students in their reflective inquiry with the support of ITM.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   458                                                 © ISLS
How did the four classrooms initiate Super Talk to address challenging problems?
In the beginning of May, at a metacognitive meeting, students in class 3 noticed the new ITM feature of "Super
Talk." The teacher explained that this function was for all the classrooms to explore big challenging questions
and put their knowledge together. Then Class 3 started to discuss possible challenging questions for Super Talk.
Three questions were  proposed in total: How   are all the systems  connected?    Which two     systems   are most
connected? And why do people grow? A few students reflected on what they knew about how muscles grow,
and several other students showed interests in the growth topic as they had grown a lot during the school year.
Then they agreed to focus on one topic for the Super Talk, and decided to have to vote for the one that they felt
was most challenging and exciting. The topic of "How do people grow?" was selected. This Super Talk topic
was proposed and added in ITM and made visible to other classrooms (Figure 2).

        Figure 2. Students' collective wondering areas about human body systems and the Super Talk area.

        In the following week, students from Class 3 first started to contribute knowledge about how the brain,
bones and muscles grow   drawing  upon   what they had  learned about these   body  systems.    The teachers  then
advertised the "Super Talk" question to the other classrooms. In each case, the teacher read the notes already
posted by Class 3, and discussed what might count as a good note for the Super Talk.    In the following week,
students from the other classrooms started to build on the ideas in the Super Talk (Figure 3).

          Figure 3. The cross-classroom Super Talk about how people grow. Each dot shows a note, and a line
          between two dots shows a build-on connection. Each note is positioned based on the date of creation
                                              (x-axis) and author (y-axis).

        Student A from   Class 4, studying the  digestive  system and energy,   found  the     connection between
growth and muscles, so he added more detailed information to the Super Talk. He mentioned that muscles use
energy from ATP (Adenosine Triphosphate) for muscle placement. And then Student B from Class 2 built on
this idea, saying "Muscles grow by when you stress muscle fibers by lifting heavy weights or doing motions
you're not used to, they rip which lets out a chemical called cytokines which activates your immune system
which repairs it bigger than it was earlier which makes your muscles grow. Hypertrophy is how your muscles
say you need to work   more to make  your  muscles  grow."   At the same    time, a new angle    of viewing    was
presented by Student C from Class 1, who wrote about how sleep affects growth as related to her inquiry of the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 459                                                   © ISLS
brain. Her post  highlighted  that during  the Non-Rapid     Eye  Movement    stage (NREM),    the body  is  actually
repairing damaged tissues and growing. New detailed information about bones was further expanded by Student
D from Class 2 who was studying bones. He mentioned that "bone grows from cartilage, they fuse together and
go through a process called ossification." Later, his peer who studied the same topic built on this note and added
more detailed accounts of the process of ossification: "Over time, a different type of cells called osteoclasts head
to the middle of the bone to help in. Now, inside osteoclasts there are hydrolytic enzymes and acids. These
enzymes and acids will help dissolve the temporarily bone (the cartilage) to make room for the permanent bone
(marrow)." Toward the end of the online discussion, Student E from Class 1, who was studying the endocrine
system, gave her explanation from the angle of the endocrine system, because the pituitary gland releases a
hormone that controls the growth as it plays a huge role in puberty and metabolism. A cross-cutting connection
was further built when Student F from Class 2, who was studying cells, found that humans start as cells and all
organs are made of cells, and the way cells grow is from mitosis; therefore, cell growth is key to how humans
grow. He imported his earlier note about mitosis from his home class discussion into the Super Talk space. This
note was read by other students and triggered deeper conversation in other classrooms' face-to-face meetings.
         The  Super  Talk extended   till the end of May  with    a total of 22 students from  the four  classrooms
participating in the  discussion.  Students   collaboratively explained    how  people  grow   involving bone   and
muscles, brain and nervous systems, cells and genetics, and digestive systems. Approximately 50% of the notes
are build-ons, reflecting a higher level of collaborative responses. Student notes were coded based on epistemic
complexity (Zhang et al., 2007), with 86% of the notes offering elaborated explanations beyond simple facts.
         After students shared  their Journal  of Thinking    and participated  in the Super Talk  collaboration on
ITM, each classroom community continued its inquiry activity in June. The teachers named the last mouth as
the "Month of Connection," and students extended their learning with the focus on the potential connections
between different human body systems. Metacognitive meetings were held to discuss how the different body
systems work together, integrating what students had learned from their own inquiry as well as from their peers.
As specific body systems and connections were mentioned by students, the teachers took visual notes of the
discussion, leading to the co-generation of the concept maps shown in Figure 4.

 Figure 4. Concept maps of four classrooms metacognitive meetings about connections between human body
                           systems (Class 1, Class 2, Class 3, Class 4, respectively).

         During the metacognitive meeting about connections between different human body systems in the 5th
month,  students made   solid reflections, build-ons, and had    deep conversations    about how   different systems
connect to each other. As their discourse expanded, students started to understand the concept of the cell as the
basic unit of the human body, however, they did not mention the mechanism of cells multiplication. The excerpt
below shows how students from Class 3, which was taught by Teacher K, tried to understand collaboratively the
cell as the start and basic unit of human body systems and the connections between various systems. Below is
an excerpt from Class 3' metacognitive meeting conducted in the 5th month of this inquiry.
         K21: I think the cells in the immune system should be connected to cells that fight off the germs to
         fight cells
         K8: Actually the immune system is made up cells.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    460                                                   © ISLS
       Teacher K: What else is made up of cells?
       K8: Blood
       K5: Isn't it everything
       K8: Yeah, well everything is made up of cells.
       K5: Well there are all different kinds of cells
       Teacher K: Ah uh!
       K1: Yeah, but everything is made up of cells.
       K8: It's the beginning of everything
       K5: We could have different specific types of cells, maybe we can go to a bunch of different kinds of
       cells. Like the brain cells just put it next to the brain?
       Teacher K: So basically cells is kind of like there is a reason why I drew it in the center. Is it the
       beginning of every part? Do we have anybody studying cells?
       K12: I know something about cells. oh, it's that, it's my dad told me, we all started out as one little cell
       and we start to grow.
       Teacher K: What? Isn't growth being the big question that we put out up there (on ITM)?
       K1: Yeah, so we grow teller just by see cells grow in our body
       K5: and then it just multiply, so there are tons of different types of cells. and that's why there are
       the differences, because there is a different amount of cells of certain types.
       K15: I think cells are connected to the growth. because as you grow more cells in your body
       Teacher K: Every kind of cells
       K15: If you get a lot of cells in your body at one type, that's how we growth spurts I think
       Teacher K: I think someone may have some growth expert spurts. Is there anyone want to say the big
       connections that we are missing?
       K10: Gene and heredity
       K8: So the immune system is connected to the digestive system, skin, eyes.
       Teacher K: Really? Tell us why?
       K8: So, it is connected to skin cause skin is actually one huge defense against pathogens.

In what ways did the cross-classroom "Super Talk" leverage deeper discourse in
each classroom?
In early June, each class held a face-to-face metacognitive meeting to revisit the question of how people grow.
Discourse analysis showed that students brought what they had learned from the "Super Talk" back to their
home class discussion  and made  further connections    with the   growth of other organs,  leading to deepened
understandings of the human body systems. Below is an excerpt from Class 3's metacognitive meeting.

       Teacher K: Your brain cells are dying? or not making new ones
       Student K8: You are not making new ones, but they do start out, they do die as you get older
       K5: When you run out of brain cells you die?
       K12: I saw something on ITM about chromosomes, it is kind of related to growth.
       Teacher: What is it, can you reiterate it? What are chromosomes are related to?
       K7: Mitosis?
       K5: DNA?
       Teacher K: Oh, Mitosis? what about DNA? what's that related to?
       K5: DNA and RNA.
       Teacher K: What is that related to?
       K8: RNA is just half of DNA
       K12: Mitosis is the process of one cell splitting into two new cells, it is a complex process of many
       steps. One prophase. In prophase the structures called centrioles move to opposite ends of the cell and
       fibers come out of them and enclose the cell. And in metaphase chromosomes line up in the center of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  461                                                    © ISLS
        the cell. Each attaches to two fibers. Chromosome halves pull apart the cell and divide the membrane.
        Step three is Anaphase and step 4th telophase.
        Teacher K: He is talking about really deep science that's behind this (pointing to the drawing) where
        the one cell is splitting into two equal parts. So when you cut an apple, you know, in the center of the
        apple gets really cut in half, it really does, that's not the same as what is going on here. With mitosis, it
        gets cut in half but each half gets exactly the same the central part. Like the same center of the apple
        grows into both pieces, when it splits apart, and then that's...they split apart to make two identical, and
        it still has that center of the apple, and what's in the center in the apple, or the center of the cell?
        K1: The DNA
        K2: Chromosomes
        Teacher: DNA and Chromosomes, and what can you tell us about heredity or DNA
        K1: Hair color, eye color.
        K17: Your genes there are like the blueprint.
        To    specifically examine   the conceptual    connections   built between    different  topical concepts,
researchers traced co-occurrence of the main domain concepts (e.g. brain, cell, bones, lungs, and heart etc.) in
each conversation turn in the two metacognitive meetings mentioned above before and after the "Super Talk."
Using the network analysis tool KBDex (Oshima, Oshima & Matsuzawa, 2012), we compared the betweenness
centrality of the key concepts, which shows which concepts act as `bridges' between concepts in a network.
Figure 5 shows the changing centrality of each key concept over time in each of the two meetings. Before the
"Super Talk", the concept "Brain" stood out as having the highest betweenness centrality among the discussed
concepts, suggesting that students' discourse positioned brain as the central topic connected with other systems.
In the meeting  after the  "Super Talk"  activity, the concept  of  "Cell" had   the highest  gain in  betweenness
centrality. Student K12, who acted as broker, brought back the concept of cell mitosis from the "Super talk" and
triggered extended discussion related to cells in the home class. According to the science standards, the concepts
of cell and mitosis are required by Grade 8 and Grade 9-12 respectively.

          Figure 5.  Betweenness centrality of the key concepts discussed in the metacognitive meeting before
                               (Left) and after the "Super Talk" meeting (Right).

Discussion and conclusions
This study tested  a multi-level emergence  design  of cross-community     interaction, with  students engaging      in
focused inquiry   and  discourse  within their  own  classroom  while   generating   reflective JoT    syntheses     as
boundary-crossing objects, and participating in the "Super Talk" to investigate a challenge problem together.
The results provided an elaborated account of the processes to generate reflective syntheses and pursue Super
Talk. Students showed solid reflections in JoT with the help of ITM compare with last year and students built on
knowledge building interactions through the cross-classroom collaboration to extend and enrich the discourse in
their home class. More specifically, with collaboration going on in the cross-boundary space, students further
expanded  their social connections,  engaged   in  addressing challenging  research  questions  and   demonstrated
higher  level  collaboration  and  understanding    beyond    their  classrooms'   walls.  The    cross-community
collaboration also enabled  students to  bring back valuable  insights to  their home   class and  triggered     further
build-on and leveraged the home class' understanding to "rise above" (Scardamalia& Bereiter, 2006).              Cross-
classroom interactions offer a multi-layer structure which enable the information flow across various sites in a

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   462                                                       © ISLS
mutually   understanding    approach    that suggested   by   Stahl (2013).  The  analysis of  the classroom   discourse
reveals  the  benefits  of a higher  level   of interaction  enabled by  the updated   design  of  ITM as  a  knowledge
infrastructure. Expanding our previous year's work (Zhang et al, 2017. Yuan et al., 2018), the findings shed
light on  the possible  designs   and   processes   to enable collaborative  knowledge    building across  a network  of
classrooms in a larger learning environment and ongoing learning process. These research results also provide
insights that  may    guide  teachers'  adoption    of cross-classroom   collaboration to  support student   inquiry and
extend knowledge building. During the learning process, the teachers played a crucial role in guiding students'
cross-classroom collaborations, embracing the ideas from other communities to extend students' thinking, and
using child-friendly language to leverage students' understanding, and making connections with other topics in
the current classroom.

References
Akkerman,     S.  F., &  Bakker,    A.  (2011).  Boundary     crossing  and boundary   objects. Review  of   educational
          research, 81(2), 132-169.
Chen, J., & Zhang, J. (2016). Design Collaborative Formative Assessment for Sustained Knowledge Building
          Using Idea Thread Mapper. In: Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences
          (ICLS 2016). Singapore: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analysis of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 6, 271-315.
Engle,  R.   A., &   Conant, F.  R.  (2002).  Guiding   principles  for fostering productive  disciplinary engagement:
          Explaining    an   emergent    argument       in  a   community    of   learners   classroom. Cognition    and
          instruction, 20(4), 399-483.
Laferrière, T., Law, N., & Montané, M. (2012). An International Knowledge Building Network for Sustainable
          Curriculum and Pedagogical Innovation. International Education Studies, 5(3), 148-160.
Stahl, G. (2013). Learning across levels. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,
          8(1), 1-12.
Scardamalia,     M.,  & Bereiter, C.   (2006).  Knowledge     building: Theory,   pedagogy,  and   technology. In R.  K.
          Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-115). Cambridge University Press.
Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge forum®. Education and technology: An encyclopedia, 183-192.
Slotta,  J.,  Suthers,   D.,  &   Roschelle,     J.  (2014).  CIRCL     primer:   Collective  inquiry  and    knowledge
          building. CIRCL primer series.
Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, "translations" and boundary objects: Amateurs and
          professionals in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907­39. Social Studies of Science.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social network
          analysis    application   for  knowledge      building    discourse. Educational   technology   research   and
          development, 60(5), 903-921.
Yuan, G., Zhang, J.,& Luo, C. (2018). Cross-Classroom Interaction Among Four Grade 5 Knowledge Building
          Communities. Conference on American Educational Research Association. New York.
Zhang,   J., Bogouslavsky,   M.,  &   Yuan,   G. (2017). Cross-Community      Interaction  for Knowledge     Building in
          Two Grade 5/6 Classrooms. International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Zhang, J., Chen, M.-H., Tao, D., Lee, J. Sun, Y., & Judson, D. (2015). Fostering Sustained Knowledge Building
          through    Metadiscourse   Aided   by  the   Idea Thread   Mapper.  International  Conference    on  Computer
          Supported Collaborative Learning (Vol. 1, pp. 166-173).
Zhang,   J., Scardamalia,    M.,  Lamon,     M., Messina,     R., &  Reeve,  R.   (2007). Socio-cognitive  dynamics   of
          knowledge     building  in the work    of nine-   and  ten-year-olds. Educational  Technology   Research   and
          Development (ETR&D), 55(2), 117­145.
Zhang, J., Tao, D., Chen, M.-H., Sun, Y., Judson, D., & Naqvi, S. (2018). Co-organizing the collective journey
          of inquiry with Idea Thread Mapper. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 27, 390-430.

Acknowledgments
This research was sponsored by the Cyberlearning Program of National Science Foundation (#1441479). The
views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding
agency. We thank our collaborating teachers and their students for their creative classroom work enabling this
research.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        463                                                  © ISLS
