      Embodiment of Computational Thinking During Collaborative
                                            Robotics Activity
                                       Theodore J. (TJ) Kopcha, Ceren Ocak
                                      tjkopcha@uga.edu, ceren.ocak@uga.edu
                                                University of Georgia

          Abstract:  This   case study  explored   how  young  children's  thinking   was  embodied    during
          collaborative robotics activity. Two 5th grade learners were recorded as they worked together
          to program and navigate a robot across a 3'x3' grid of obstacles. The video was then analyzed
          using a  grounded    theory approach   (Glaser  &   Strauss, 1967)   to determine   how   cognition
          manifested in an embodied manner (e.g., gesturing, use of conceptual metaphor) through the
          tools and affordances employed by the learners. Four primary tools were used by learners in
          solving their robotics task: (1) basic robot moves, (2) gestures, (3) the map and the computer,
          and (4), the grid and the robot. These tools provided symbolic access to direct experiences,
          supporting an emergent and reactive process in which perception and action were intimately
          linked. Implications for computer science and improving the design of computer-supported
          collaborative learning are discussed.

Introduction
Educators and policymakers currently are interested in integrating computer science into K-12 curriculum. At
the heart of computer science is computational thinking, a problem-solving process in which both abstract and
automated    processes  are  involved  in formulating   problems   and  developing    solutions  during   programming
activity (Cuny et al, 2010; Wing, 2006). Learners who engage in computational thinking decompose the larger
task into smaller subgoals, use algorithmic thinking and pattern recognition to create new and novel programs
that address those subgoals, and debug programs that are not performing optimally (Yadav, Mayfield, Zhou,
Hambrusch,   &   Korb,  2014).   These skills  are important  for developing   a  competent   21st century  workforce,
making computational thinking in K-12 settings a critical and current issue (Israel, Pearson, Tapia, Wherfel, &
Reese, 2015; Sengupta, Kinnebrew, Basu, Biswas, & Clark, 2013).
          One way computational thinking and computer science are brought into K-12 classrooms is through
robotics activities. Robotics creates an opportunity for learners to work collaboratively to program a robot and
complete various tasks (Yuen et al., 2015). The physical nature of this activity is important. Robotics activity
creates an opportunity for learners to make use of various tools and their affordances (e.g., the robot) to connect
their abstract  thinking with   the environment.    Thus, learners  who    engage  in  robotics  activity are likely to
experience   an embodied    experience, where   mind,   body, and  environment    are  intimately  connected  (Gibson,
1979) in an effort to set and achieve specific goals with the robot.
          However,   little is known  about   how  young  children's   thinking  might be  embodied    during  robotics
activity. Research on computer science and programming is lacking from K-12 classrooms (Lye & Koh, 2014).
Few   if any studies of  computational    thinking  examine   the process  through  the  lens of   embodied   cognition
(Grover & Pea, 2013). Likewise, there is a need for empirical studies of young children who engage in robotics
activity; early success  with   computer  science   through  robotics  has the  potential to  increase interest in and
success with STEM outcomes in future coursework (Sullivan & Bers, 2016).
          The purpose of this case study was to explore how young children's thinking was embodied during
collaborative robotics activity. Two 5th grade learners were recorded as they worked collaboratively to program
and navigate a robot across a 3'x3' grid of obstacles. The video was then analyzed using a grounded theory
approach   (Glaser  &   Strauss, 1967)  to determine    how   cognition manifested    in  an embodied     manner (e.g.,
gesturing, use of conceptual metaphor) through the tools and affordances employed by the learners. This study
provides  key   insight into   the ways   that learners learn together  through    the help   of digital  technologies;
examining computational thinking as an embodied phenomenon holds implications for collaborative robotics
activities with young learners.

Overview of ecological embodiment in its implications for collaboration

Ecological perspective towards embodiment

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     464                                                    © ISLS
Gibson's ecological psychology (1979) laid the foundation for our research. An ecological perspective towards
embodiment suggests that the body serves as a mediator between perception and action; both perception and
action are influenced by the environment (Gibson, 1977, 1979). From this perspective, thought is "a whole-body
activity in context than simply an in-the-head process" (p.171). In other words, embodied cognition involves a
complex   relationship between    the  mind,   body, and   the environment.  This stands   in contrast  with  our
understanding of information processing, where perception and action are treated "separately and sequentially"
(Michaels  &   Palatinus, 2014, p.20). As  argued   by Richardson, Shockley,  Fajen, Riley, and    Turvey (2009),
perception and action are mutual and act together to meet a particular goal. This suggests that thinking is a goal-
directed reaction against what is perceived from the environment (Chemero, 2011, Michaels & Palatinus, 2014).
In this paper, we draw on the basic premise of ecological psychology to explore children's thinking as a whole-
body activity, where the environment guides their decision making.

Affordances
The concept of affordances is at the forefront of the ecological perspective. Affordances are conceptualized as
opportunities or possibilities for action placed in the environment (Rietveld & Kiverstein, 2014). For example,
"a flat horizontal surface affords standing and walking, a graspable rigid object affords throw" (Hirose, 2002,
p.290). That being the case, the notion of affordance has been gaining prominence in different disciplines such
as game design and development, computer science, and learning sciences (Harlow, Dwyer, Hansen, Iveland, &
Franklin, 2018; Young, 2013).     For instance, Linderoth (2012) used the perception of the affordances in the
games and acting on them to understand the gameplay. Hammond (2010) examined the concept of affordance
regarding its  implications for the use of information   and  communications technology   (ICT)   in teaching and
learning.
          Tools can also serve as an affordance from the perspective of ecological embodiment. Liben (2002)
explained how "tools are the functional extension of the environment, it has specific affordances and provides
new opportunities for action" (p. 290). Tools can amplify perception to move beyond the physical capabilities of
the body. In addition, tools provide opportunities for learners for "active material engagement" (Malafouris,
2013, p. 169). Therefore, the tools become an affordance as the user acts upon them. In this way, the tool and
the user of the tool are often considered as a single unit of analysis (see Harlow et al., 2018). That is, the user
and the tools become a compound element of a larger system in a cycle of perception and action.

Embodied collaboration and gestures
Physical gestures are considered strong evidence of embodied cognition (Alibali et al., 2014). Gestures also
reveal the features of collaboration in that "gestural communication is based on a common conceptual ground,
on the shared knowledge of what `we both know together'" (Vasc & Ionescu, 2014, p. 150). Vasc and Ionescu
(2014) further  established  that   collaboration in   a given  medium   has two  sides:  the  receiver   and the
communicator; the receiver knows the meaning that a gesture carries and the communicator uses the gestures
with confidence that the receiver would understand since it emerges out of a shared experience. That being the
case, learners' gestures add another layer to understand how collaboration emerges as an embodied phenomenon
as pairs of learners mutually act on the affordances they perceive. In this study, we therefore examine the way
tools were used as affordances, and how gesturing supported learner's thinking as they engaged in collaborative
problem solving during robotics activity.

Methods
The video data that was analyzed in this study was collected as part of a larger design research project that
focused on developing and testing a robotics unit. The unit was designed as integrative STEM curriculum that
supported computational thinking and embodied cognition during collaborative problem solving (see Kopcha et
al., 2017). Six 5th grade teachers from a local school setting played an integral role in developing and testing the
unit. The unit was enacted over a 2-week period, where learners worked in small groups to navigate a robot
through a 3'x3' grid containing various obstacles. As part of the unit, learners explored science and math-related
concepts  that met specific  state  standards, including:  constructive and  destructive forces;  operations  with
fractions; coordinate grid; and algebraic thinking.
          Video of Learner activity was recorded in each of the six teacher's classrooms throughout the three
class periods in which learners engaged in programming the robot (120 minutes total). Cameras were placed
such that small group activity was recorded at both the computer (i.e., when programming) the robot as well as
the grid where they executed their program. This provided data for fine-grained analysis of gesturing as well as
evidence of the different forms of computational thinking (e.g., problem decomposition, debugging).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    465                                                 © ISLS
          To investigate embodied cognition during collaborative robotics activity, we focused on the final 60-
minute segment of video in which learners completed the majority of the robotics task. We reviewed the video
data from each classroom and ultimately selected a single case to explore our research question. The case was a
pair of 5th grade learners (one boy, one girl) who successfully completed the robotics activity. Using a single
case allowed for an in-depth and fine-grained analysis of the how the learners used each tool and affordance to
successfully  complete    the robotics task. It also  allowed  us to   better understand  the ways  that various tools
served as an affordance to support successful robotics activity as an embodied collaborative experience.

Instructional context
The robotics task was designed around the source-path-goal schema (Johnson, 2008). Learners were tasked with
helping scientists use a robot to collect three samples from an active volcano. These three samples served as the
checkpoints   that the robot  needed   to visit in the overall   task. Independent  from  the  what path  it followed,
Learners were asked to program the robot to stop at each collection then arrive back to its original location. The
pair then collaborated to determine an overarching solution path and the decompose the overarching task into
smaller subunits.
          The active volcano was represented on a 3-by-3-foot grid consisting of 36 six-inch squares. The three
collection sites were scattered about the grid, along with a variety of elements associated with an active volcano
(e.g., dust plume, flowing lava). Learners were challenged to maneuver the robot around the grid, avoiding the
elements of the active volcano and visiting each of the three collection sites. The grid served as a testing site
where learners practiced the codes that they wrote.
          Computer-supported collaboration took place throughout the activity. Learners were put into pairs and
tasked with breaking the task down into sub-goals, programming the robot, and accomplishing as much of the
overall task as possible. They repeatedly moved between programming the robot at the computer and testing
their programming at the grid (see Figure 2). With every attempt, learners continuously advanced and optimized
their  calculations    to  be    able  to    move    the  robot    in   the   coordinates  of   the  grid    precisely.

       Figure 1. The visual block coding program (left) and the grid representing an active volcano (right).

Data analysis: A grounded approach
Knowing    that gestures   carry a  semantic    value  (Alibali, 2005),  we   transcribed the  video and   audio data
simultaneously for the selected case. Transcripts included the full conversation between learners, paired with
short sequences of images from the video to illustrate specific gesturing and learner action. We then followed a
grounded theory approach (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), employing an inductive data analysis process to generate
our own theoretical understanding of the ways thinking was embodied during robotics activity. A grounded
theory approach served the aims of this study because it results in identifying overall patterns that are grounded
in data.
          Data analysis started with open coding (Johnson & Parry, 2016). During open coding, we tried to be
"stay close to the data" (Charmaz, 2006, p.49) by avoiding apriori theoretical presumptions that we had. Our
initial codes included: tools/affordances, gestures, and semantics/verbal content. Tools/affordances included the
objects in the environment that the learners drew upon as part of their collaborative problem solving, such as the
map   and the computer    and  the robot  at the grid. Gestures   were  any   hand or body movements     made  by the
learners during collaborative work; this often took the form of imitating the movement of the robot. Semantics/
content included specific aspects of note such as descriptions of specific gestures (e.g., learner uses hands to
mimic wheels of robot turning right) or the meaning behind those gestures. These codes were broad enough to
begin analysis while leaving room for new codes to emerge.
          After the open coding, the researchers came together to identify a core variable from the initial codes
that was also related to our inquiry. Our goal was to better understand the tools that were used as affordances by

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     466                                                   © ISLS
learners and how their thinking was embodied with and through those tools. Our core variable was therefore the
tools that learners drew  upon  during   collaborative  problem   solving. After   identifying our  core variable, we
returned to the transcripts to engage in selective coding and establish the relationship between the categories
surrounding the core-variable (Johnson & Parry, 2016). Using the participants' own words to examine these
relationships helped retain the essence of the mutual conversation and understand the affordances and semantic
context that framed the gestures (Birks & Mills, 2011). This confirmed that the learners used four primary tools
while solving their robotics task (Charmaz, 2006): the robot, the grid, the map and the computer.
         Two additional coding categories emerged from this deeper analysis. First, we coded basic robot moves
that the learners developed as part of a shared language during their problem solving, such as turning at a right
angle and  moving   one   unit square   on the   grid. Second,  we   coded specific  gestures  that also  served as a
fundamental   tool  for communicating    problem   solving.    These  two  codes   were strongly  related in that  the
gestures used for problem solving often reflected basic robot moves. This served as an indicator that learners'
thinking was distributed onto "external information bearing structures" (p.15) (e.g., hand motions indicating
turns or unit movements)    to articulate  their underlying    cognition and  improve   their problem-solving during
computational thinking (Rowlands, 2010).

Findings
Four  primary tools  that the  learners used while     solving their robotics task were: (1)  basic robot moves,   (2)
gestures, (3) the map and the computer, and (4), the grid and the robot. These tools illustrate the ways that
thinking was embodied during their collaboration.

Tool 1: Basic robot moves
The learners began by establishing an overarching solution path. In this case, the overarching solution was to
program the robot to visit the three collection sites without hitting the obstacles scattered in the grid (see Figure
2). The learners then formulated that path into two basic robot moves: (1) a unit square and (2) a 90-degree turn.
The unit square was a move that traversed one of the squares on the grid. It was created explicitly by the pair to
solve the problem; units could be combined to represent larger movements by the robot. In this way, these basic
robot moves represented an abstraction of the 6x6 grid in that they represented a group of underlying algebraic
thinking - moving one unit meant making the robot move at a specific speed for a specific amount of time. If
two units were desired, the learners would double the time of associated with that speed. This increased the
precision of their calculations while allowing them to work more effectively without repeated visits to the grid.

         Figure 2. The dotted lines represent the learners' different attempts at completing the robotics tasks.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     467                                                   © ISLS
The 90-degree turn represented an abstraction of multiple underlying algebraic calculations, in the same way as
the unit square functioned. To achieve the 90-degree turn, the pair needed to think about multiple variables at
once ­ the relational speed of the wheels with one another as well as their turning direction and duration of the
movement. Negotiating those variables led to the development of a shared language in which each of the basic
moves (i.e., unit square and 90-degree turn) made collaborative problem solving more efficient and effective.
For example, the learners repeatedly returned to the computer after testing a potential set of movements from the
robot. Here, they re-enacted the robot's movements at the grid and constructed new movements to correct any
problems with their solution path. They accomplished this by invoking these basic moves to articulate their
thinking (e.g., "We need to go forward one, then turn right.")

Tool 2: Gestures
The findings from the data indicated that the emergent physical gestures supported learner's thinking as they
engaged in collaborative problem solving during robotics activity. The gestures largely served as a re-enactment
of the robot's movement    at the grid. The    gestures helped  the learners gain the  perspective of the robot,
specifically when debugging the solution and reprogram the robot's movement. In this way, their gestures served
as a tool for thinking through and communicating their ideas for combining basic moves into more complex
movements (see Figure 3).
        The most common combination of basic moves was moving straight and turning; this took place five
times over the course of the entire solution path. As the learners collaboratively planned these combinations of
basic moves, they employed several gestures to denote the movement of the robot. Figure 3, parts a, b, c, and d,
display the gestures associated with this sequence of movements: "We stopped right there and we turned to the
left [3a]. And now we need to go forward for one second at speed 5 [3b]." The boy then moves his hands apart
to match the distance he wants the robot to traverse after turning (3c). The girl then programs the sequence in
the computer as the boy begins to repeat his thinking (3d). The type of gestures reveals how learners built upon
their basic moves in an embodied fashion to work more adeptly between their abstract and concrete thinking.
Lakoff and Nunez (2000) explained how, as humans, we naturally draw on our basic bodily movements to better
understand abstract concepts. From this perspective, the learners' gestures suggest that their thinking was highly
embodied as they planned a solution path for the robot.

a.                            b.                            c.                          d.

     Figure 3. Gestures communicating basic moves combined into larger sequences of movement and thinking.

Tool 3: The map and the computer
The learners combined the visual block coding (i.e., computer program) and a small, hand-drawn map to serve
as a tool for  supporting their  collaborative problem-solving.    The  map  and computer  together served    as a
physical representation of their thinking; they would visualize movements from the code itself and then attempt
to act those movements out to determine if they would be effective. This is strong evidence of embodiment -
learners were offloading cognition onto the map and computer, using the environment to mutually inform their
cognition (Wilson, 2002). This is important because it shows how learners dealt with the abstract aspects of
computer programming.
        Figure 4 displays how the boy used the map (Figure 4a) and computer (4b) to plan a 90-degree turn.
The boy explained: "That is where we take the turn (4c). And, that is delay [pointing to the screen, he finds the
code that represents the delay] (4d)." The boy's gestures suggest that he has found two physical representations
of his abstract thinking to better communicate with his partner. The learners are looking at both the codes on the
screen  and   the  location   on   the  map    to   predict    how  the  robot   will  move.  They    continued:

        B:  To take the right turn, we need to set the time.
        G: For how many seconds?
        B: The half, point five,
        G: Point five... Sure [pointing to the screen, both learners look at the monitor and come to a mutual
        decision].

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   468                                                 © ISLS
         B: And now we need to set the delay.

This exchange suggests that the tools served as an affordance that helped them come to agreement. The physical
representations of both the grid and the movement of the robot helped the learners visualize their thinking and
determine whether they agreed with each other.

       a.                  b.                           c.                        d.

          Figure 4. The map and computer together served as a physical representation of abstract thinking.

Tool 4: The robot at the grid
The robot also served as an important affordance that mediated perception and action. As the learners viewed
the robot at the grid, they watched to see whether the robot's movements aligned with their overarching solution
path for completing the task. To the extent that those movements did not, the learners returned to their other
affordances (e.g., gestures; the map and computer) to debug their program or revise their intended goal in a
collaborative fashion. This repeated itself until the task was successfully completed.
         Figure 5 displays this process. At the grid, the learners see how the robot did not reach the intended
destination (Figure 5a). The girl identified the problem: "We need to go really faster. Not alone faster but ...
[pause, waiting for a response from her partner] (5b)." The boy then responds: "Let's make it the time [that
1`we used] before [waiting for an approval from the partner] (5c)." The girl then offers a guess: "Yeah, make
the time...so point 3 more?" The boy then recognizes how they tried this speed setting previously, leading to a
new solution in which they retrace their previous attempts at completing the overarching solution path.

       a.               b.                            c.                          d.

                 Figure 5. The grid and the robot serve as a mediator between perception and action.

Conclusion and implications
This  study  presents a grounded    theory  of  problem  solving during   robotics activity    from  an embodied
perspective. The learners engaged in a process in which they were repeatedly evaluating whether their current
thinking  helped them   achieve  their overarching  solution  path. This  process was    emergent   and reactive -
sometimes they debugged their programming while other times they revisited their solution path. This dynamic
process emphasizes the nature of cognition from the perspective of ecological psychology -- the learners set a
goal, and information from the environment confirmed whether their actions helped achieve that goal. This is
particularly apparent when    looking  across the learners' attempts  at solving  the  overall task. Their second
attempt took them in an entirely different direction than their first (see Figure 1). They then reacted to what
emerged within the environment. Their third attempt is a continuation of their second rather than a re-creation of
their first. In this way, their thinking shaped the environment while, at the same time, the environment shaped
their thinking. This  dynamic   interplay between  mind, body,   and  environment  is   at the heart of embodied
cognition and typifies Gibson's (1979) notions of an affordance.
         The tools identified in this study, then, illustrate how collaborative robotics activity is an embodied
experience. Liben (2008) explained how, as humans, we engage in abstract thinking by manipulating external
spatial representations both directly and symbolically. In this study, the robot at the grid provided direct access
to the learners' problem solving. The learners they drew on their other tools to create symbolic access in the
absence of direct access - they used gestures, the map, and the computer to communicate their thinking and
create an effective solution.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   469                                                 © ISLS
         These    findings  hold  several  implications   for  the    embodiment     of computational    thinking during
collaborative robotics activity in K-12 settings. To begin, learners may need a variety of tools to support their
engagement in abstract thinking. Tools that provide symbolic access to their direct experiences with the robot
can help    them  offload  cognition  into  the environment     during  complex      problem-solving. This  can   support
collaborative activity. In this study, creating symbolic access helped the learners make their abstract thinking
visible  to each  other.  Tools  such   as maps,    block programming,      and  basic  movements    helped   them more
effectively  decompose    a task, set   goals,  and create solutions    that are    mutually  agreed upon.  Others  have
similarly found that these tools can support robotics activity in the classroom (Harlow et al., 2018; Liben, 2012).
         Additionally, this study offers insight into the way that collaborative robotics activity is an embodied
phenomenon.    While   a  great deal  of attention  has  been  spent   on   robotics and computer    science, few  if any
studies  view  it from an   embodied    perspective. Viewing    this   activity as  an  embodied  phenomenon    opens   a
wealth of unexplored questions and potential for future research. For example, how can we design learning
environments from an embodied perspective and be more responsive to learners' needs? How does the design of
a robot affect how learners move between symbolic and direct access, and can we reduce the distance between
these types of access? Moreover, what is gained by studying how we solve complex problems not as a linear,
sequential process but rather as a coupling of perception and action in an emergent, complex setting? This study
is an initial attempt at exploring these questions in the context of computer science and improving the design of
computer-supported collaborative learning in today's schools.

References
Alibali, M.  W.   (2005).  Gesture   in spatial cognition: Expressing,      communicating,    and thinking about  spatial
         information. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 5(4), 307-331.
Alibali, M. W., Nathan, M. J., Wolfgram, M. S., Church, R. B., Jacobs, S. A., Johnson Martinez, C., & Knuth,
         E. J. (2014). How teachers link ideas in mathematics instruction using speech and gesture: A corpus
         analysis. Cognition and instruction, 32(1), 65-100.
Birks, M., & Mills, J. (2011). Essentials of grounded theory. Grounded theory: a practical guide, 11-26.
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis: Sage.
Chemero, A. (2011). Radical embodied cognitive science: MIT press
Cuny, J., Snyder, L. & Wing, J.M.: Demystifying computational thinking for noncomputer scientists. Work in
         progress (2010)
Gibson, James J. (1977). "The Theory of Affordances." In Robert Shaw and John Bransford (eds.), Perceiving,
         Acting, and Knowing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company..
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). Grounded theory: The discovery of grounded theory. Sociology the journal of
         the British sociological association, 12, 27-49.
Grover, S., & Pea, R. (2013). Computational thinking in K­12: A review of the state of the field. Educational
         researcher, 42(1), 38-43.
Hammond,     M.   (2010).  What   is an  affordance  and  can  it help  us   understand  the  use of  ICT  in education?
         Education and Information Technologies, 15(3), 205-217.
Harlow, D. B., Dwyer, H. A., Hansen, A. K., Iveland, A. O., & Franklin, D. M. (2018). Ecological Design-
         Based Research for Computer Science Education: Affordances and Effectivities for Elementary School
         Students. Cognition and instruction, 1-23.
Hirose, N. (2011). Affordances, effectivities, and extension of the body. In W. Tschacher & C. Bergomi (Eds.),
         The implications of embodiment: Cognition and communication. (pp. 231­252). Charlottesville, VA:
         Imprint Academic.
Hirose, N. (2002). An ecological approach to embodiment and cognition. Cognitive Systems Research, 3(3),
         289-299.
Ionescu, T., & Vasc, D. (2014). Embodied cognition: challenges for psychology and education. Procedia-Social
         and Behavioral Sciences, 128, 275-280.
Johnson,    M. (2008).    The   meaning    of   the body.   In  Developmental        perspectives on  embodiment      and
         consciousness (pp. 19-43). Psychology Press.
Johnson, C. W., & Parry, D. C. (2016). Fostering social justice through qualitative inquiry: A methodological
         guide: Routledge.
Kopcha,   T.  J., McGregor,   J., Shin,  S.,  Qian,  Y.,  Choi,   J., Hill, R., ...  &  Choi, I. (2017). Developing    an
         integrative STEM curriculum for robotics education through Educational Design Research. Journal of
         Formative Design in Learning, 1(1), 31-44.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      470                                                     © ISLS
Israel, M., Pearson, J. N., Tapia, T., Wherfel, Q. M., & Reese, G. (2015). Supporting all learners in school-wide
        computational thinking: A cross-case qualitative analysis. Computers & Education, 82, 263-279.
Lakoff, G., &  Núñez,    R. E. (2000).   Where  mathematics   comes  from:   How  the  embodied     mind brings
        mathematics into being. AMC, 10, 12.
Liben, L. (2008). Representational development and the embodied mind's eye. Body in mind, mind in body:
        Developmental perspectives on embodiment and consciousness, 191-224.
Liben, L. S. (2012). Embodiment and children's understanding of the real and represented world Developmental
        perspectives on embodiment and consciousness (pp. 207-240): Psychology Press.
Linderoth, J. (2012). Why gamers don't learn more: An ecological approach to games as learning environments.
        Journal of Gaming & Virtual Worlds, 4(1), 45-62.
Lye, S. Y., &  Koh,   J. H. L. (2014).   Review on  teaching  and  learning of computational thinking  through
        programming: What is next for K-12?. Computers in Human Behavior, 41, 51-61.
Malafouris, L. (2013). How things shape the mind: MIT Press.
Michaels, C. F., & Palatinus, Z. (2014). A ten commandments for ecological psychology. Routledge handbook
        of embodied cognition, 19-28.
Richardson, M. J., Shockley, K., Fajen, B. R., Riley, M. A., & Turvey, M. T. (2009). Ecological psychology:
        Six principles for an embodied­embedded approach to behavior. In Handbook of Cognitive Science
        (pp. 159-187).
Rietveld, E., & Kiverstein, J. (2014). A rich landscape of affordances. Ecological Psychology, 26(4), 325-352.
Rowlands, M. (2010). The new science of the mind: From extended mind to embodied phenomenology: MIT
        Press.
Sengupta, P., Kinnebrew, J. S., Basu, S., Biswas, G., & Clark, D. (2013). Integrating computational thinking
        with K-12 science education using agent-based computation: A theoretical framework. Education and
        Information Technologies, 18(2), 351-380.
Sullivan, A., & Bers, M. U. (2016). Robotics in the early childhood classroom: learning outcomes from an 8-
        week   robotics  curriculum   in pre-kindergarten   through  second   grade.  International Journal    of
        Technology and Design Education, 26(1), 3-20.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 9(4), 625-636.
Wing, J. M. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 49(3), 33-35
Yadav, A., Mayfield, C., Zhou, N., Hambrusch, S., & Korb, J. T. (2014). Computational thinking in elementary
        and secondary teacher education. ACM Transactions on Computing Education (TOCE), 14(1), 5.
Young,  M.  (2013). An   ecological psychology  of instructional design: Learning and  thinking by  perceiving­
        acting systems Handbook of research on educational communications and technology (pp. 180-188):
        Routledge.
Yuen, T., Stone, J., Davis, D., Gomez, A., Guillen, A., Tiger, E. P., & Boecking, M. (2015). A model of how
        children construct   knowledge   and understanding    of  engineering  design within robotics  focused
        contexts. International Journal of Research Studies in Educational Technology, 5(1).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  471                                                © ISLS
