Bugs as a Nexus for Emergent Peer Collaborations: Contextual and
   Classroom Supports for Solving Problems in Electronic Textiles
                        Deborah A. Fields, Utah State University, deborah.fields@usu.edu
                     Gayithri Jayathirtha, University of Pennsylvania, gayithri@gse.upenn.edu
                          Yasmin B. Kafai, University of Pennsylvania, kafai@upenn.edu

          Abstract: Few studies have examined the role of failure in more open-ended situations where
          problems develop as a consequence of designing projects and where collaborations can emerge
          as an  outgrowth   of debugging      said   problems.   In this paper,  we  explore  the   peer-to-peer
          collaborations that emerge spontaneously in the context of coding, crafting and design bugs
          within  open-ended    design    activities, specifically   an electronic textiles unit for    secondary
          students taught    over   10-12    weeks    in introductory   computer   science  classes. Examining
          observations from three introductory computer science classrooms, we address the following
          research   questions: (1)    How     and what    kinds  of peer-to-peer    collaborations  emerged    in
          unstructured ways, especially around bugs in open-ended projects? and (2) What curricular,
          spatial, social, and teacher supports allowed these interactions to emerge and flourish? In the
          discussion, we consider implications for supporting similar types of emergent collaborative
          learning in open-ended computational making designs.

Introduction
One  could   argue that failure in    its various  forms   has more  often  been   seen as  an impediment   rather  than a
complement to successful collaboration (Barron, 2003). Indeed, failure can lead to stable patterns of discourse in
a classroom community with troubling consequences for students' ideas about themselves (DeLiema, 2017).
However, the recent success of "productive failure" (Kapur, 2008) has put failure into a different light: it highlights
the counterintuitive notion that failure can precede later success in learning. Yet the research on productive failure
has generally emphasized tight structures both in collaborative groups and in the sequence of planned ill- and
well-structured problems (e.g., Kapur & Kinzer, 2009, Kapur, 2008). Missing in these studies is an opportunity
to examine   the  role of   failure in more    open-ended   situations  where   problems   develop   as a  consequence   of
designing projects and where peer collaborations can emerge as an outgrowth of debugging said problems.
          Problems that stem from designing open-ended projects, such as those common in most STEM-oriented
maker activities (Peppler, Halverson & Kafai, 2016), occur frequently in many situations where groups are not
pre-designated. In open-ended maker activities, temporary failures or unexpected bugs are not just hindrances but
also opportunities for learning, when and if students reach outside of their immediate work to a wider group of
people and resources (e.g., Sheridan et al., 2014). Reaching out can generate emergent collaborations, that occur
quite frequently in makerspaces as students help each other, invent uses for technology, and catch ideas from each
other (Halverson, Litts & Gravel, 2018). This raises questions about how peers help each other and what attributes
of the broader environment facilitate such improvised collaborations, for even spontaneous collaboration does not
take place in a vacuum.
          In this paper, we explore the peer-to-peer collaborations that emerge spontaneously in the context of bugs
(or problems) within open-ended design activities, specifically an electronic textiles unit for secondary students
taught over 10-12 weeks in introductory computer science classes (Fields et al., 2018). Electronic textiles (e-
textiles) involve  programmable       circuits hand-sewn    onto  soft  objects like clothing  and  stuffed animals,  with
conductive thread, LEDs, digital sensors, and sewable microcontrollers, providing a space for creating personally
relevant  computational     artifacts (Buechley,   Peppler,  Eisenberg    & Kafai,   2013). Making   an   e-textile artifact
involves learning not only about crafting, circuitry and code but also about identifying, isolating, and fixing bugs
at the intersection of these domains (Fields, Searle, & Kafai, 2016; Jayathirtha, Fields & Kafai, 2018). Whereas
the study of collaboration has often focused on structural supports that teachers or computer environments provide
to ensure success, this study focuses on how peers help each other progress through failure and the qualities of
the broader learning environment that support these emergent collaborations. The particular context of our study
includes three introductory computer science high school classrooms with 69 students where different teachers at
separate public secondary schools led an e-textiles unit in which students created a series of four e-textile projects
(Fields et al., 2018). In this paper we explore 1) How and what kinds of peer-to-peer collaborations emerged in
unstructured    ways (i.e., outside   of  assigned  collaborative  groupings),   especially around   bugs   in open-ended
projects?    2) What   curricular,  spatial, social,  and  teacher supports  allowed  these   interactions  to emerge  and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         472                                                    © ISLS
flourish? In  the   discussion   we consider  implications   for supporting     similar types of  emergent   collaborative
learning in open-ended computational making.

Background
Debugging has long been noted as a productive, if not particularly collaborative, site of learning (e.g., Papert,
1980). As   a  site of  problem    solving, debugging    is recognized     as a key  computational   thinking  practice  in
engineering and computing that is essential but often overlooked in K­12 classrooms (College Board, 2016;
McCauley et al., 2008). Debugging computational issues requires a deep and systematic understanding of the
program along with the programming language and environment (i.e., McCauley et al., 2008). The ability to debug
or troubleshoot may be especially challenging for novice programmers who lack experience in seeing programs
as a whole   and  systematically    identifying, testing, and   solving    problems  (Vessey, 1985).  Yet   while  there is
significant research around tools and programming environments designed to support learners through the process
of debugging (e.g., Ko & Myers, 2004; Sorva, Lönnberg, & Malmi, 2013), there is relatively little research about
other kinds of pedagogical, social, and environmental structures that can support learners dealing with various
debugging challenges. Understanding learning environments that support debugging is especially important since
the complexity associated with debugging demands not just programming skills but also other skills such as
decision-making, emotional intelligence, and perseverance (e.g., Patil & Codner, 2007).
          Within the field of computer science education, collaboration is generally understudied even if it is
recognized   as helpful.    Most  prominent   is the  research   on pair   programming    where   a team  of   two learners
collaborate  on   one   project,  designing,  coding,  testing   and  debugging     on  a single  machine   with   students
periodically changing roles as "driver" and "navigator" (Williams & Kessler, 2000). While this model illuminates
the social aspect of problem solving in programming contexts, this more formal, structured model of collaboration
does not include other possible modes of collaboration when more than a pair of learners attempt to support each
other. Further, these formal collaboration arrangements become more difficult to maintain when learners are
programming in hybrid computing environments such as robotics and e-textiles. For example, the studies about
collaboration in making e-textiles or similarly crafted computational artifacts have shown students splitting up
their learning in inequitable ways rather than learning productively from each other (e.g., Litts et al., 2017).
Moreover, a focus on only formal ways of pairing up students misses opportunities to explore other more open-
ended forms of collaboration and emergent social supports where students can draw help from peers other than
their immediate partners.
          In this study then, we focus on the nature and contexts of emergent peer learning while debugging in a
classroom environment, how it emerged (because of the teacher, peers, or through other means), and how it
mattered  to  individual    students. This  type of   peer-to-peer  collaboration   has received  much    less attention in
research because most studies have focused on organized small groups, with students taking on various roles or
with some students designated as more experienced experts or less experienced novices in situations intended to
generate "peer pedagogy" where peers educate each other (e.g., Ching & Kafai, 2008). Yet teachers are already
developing environments where more emergent peer pedagogy, not structured in specific groups, can take place.
For  instance,  a prior   study  on   the e-textiles curricular  unit for  introductory   computing  classes   documented
productive teacher practices that supported equity, namely by legitimizing peer expertise and supporting iterative
learning  (Fields   et al., 2018). The    researchers observed   that teachers  modeled    their own  and  their students'
mistakes to the whole classroom, lowering the risk associated with failure and allowing students to provide ideas
to solve  problems     in   the projects.  Sometimes,    especially   in situations  where  the   teacher could    not give
individualized help to each student, the teacher would train one student in a task (e.g., a crafting or computing
technique) with the expectation that that student would then share that knowledge with others. These and other
practices, structures, and environmental features may support productive peer pedagogy.
          The many peer-to-peer learning collaborations that emerged beyond formal partnerships in our study
appeared  to  be  highly    significant to students'  continued  perseverance    in the e-textile unit. So,  we  sought  to
understand how these specific collaborations emerged, what relevance they had to individual students, and what
aspects of the larger classroom environment facilitated these types of interactions.

Methods

Context and participants
Over  the course    of  two  years,   we  developed   an e-textiles   unit for  the Exploring Computer     Science  (ECS)
curriculum, a year-long introductory computing course with equity-focused and inquiry-based teaching (Goode,
Chapman, & Margolis, 2012). This paper focuses on the second year of this e-textiles unit implementation, where
three teachers led the unit separately in each of their respective schools. The e-textiles unit took place over 10-12

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        473                                                     © ISLS
weeks and consisted of a series of four projects: 1) a paper-card using a simple circuit, 2) a wristband with three
LEDs   in  parallel,  3)  a classroom-wide    mural  project completed   in  pairs that incorporated   two switches   to
computationally create four lighting patterns (the only collaborative project), and 4) a "human sensor" project that
used handmade sensors to create conditions for lighting effects (see Kafai & Fields, 2018). Each project allowed
increasing flexibility in design and personalization in the context of learning challenging new computing concepts.
The   e-textile  projects provided  many    opportunities for  debugging   since problems   occurred   in the  code, the
circuitry, and   the physical  designs,   requiring students to test and isolate  problems,  often  fixing multiple  co-
occurring issues that added to the complexity and challenge of the projects (Kafai et al., 2014; Fields et al., 2016;
Jayathirtha et al., 2018). The unit also drew on ECS practices such as pair programming during certain coding
lessons.
          The three schools were located in a large metropolitan school district and served a large number of
students who came from ethnic/racial groups that are traditionally underrepresented in CS. At the three schools,
54-95%    of students    were identified  as  socioeconomically  disadvantaged     as defined by   the state,  and  were
ethnically diverse (40-90% Hispanic or Latino/a, 1-25% White, 4-43% African American, 0-18% Asian, 0-10%
Filipino). The classes each included 20-35 students from 9th-12th grade (14-18 years old) and were diverse in
terms of and gender ratios (36-66% girls). All teachers received six days of professional development over two
years: three days in the first year of the curriculum development focused on design and content learning, and three
days in the second year focused on supportive pedagogical practices.

Data collection and analysis
Data for our analysis was drawn from fieldnotes, student artifacts, and interviews across the three classrooms.
Two researchers, including the first author who was also a lead designer of the unit, collected weekly field notes
in each classroom adding up to 39 fieldnotes. In addition to observational fieldnotes, we collected students' design
notebooks, journals, and end-of-unit portfolios where students reflected on challenges and learning during the
unit. Further,   we  interviewed   12 students  from  each   classroom  in  focus  groups at  the  end of  the unit  and
interviewed teachers before, during, and after the unit. Of note, the original focus our data collection was on
students' learning of computational and circuitry concepts, which matched our research agenda. However, we
recognized the central role of unplanned peer-to-peer collaborations in students' learning and perseverance in the
unit after initial analysis of students' progressions of learning with e-textiles. This led us to analyze emergent
collaboration in its own rite.
          In analyzing the data, we first sought to identify all examples of emergent peer-to-peer collaboration
across our observations. We defined this to include only student collaborations outside of teacher-directed groups
(i.e., pair programing lessons) or formal partnerships (i.e., the collaborative pair-work in project #3) that related
to student work (i.e., excluding casual banter unrelated to classwork). Drawing from the principles of grounded
theory (Charmaz, 2014), two researchers initially coded a set of three field notes (close to 10% of the total), to
come to agreement on applications of this definition, and coded a second set to verify consistency. Then one
researcher culled all examples of emergent peer-to-peer collaboration in the entire dataset. We then analyzed these
moments    holistically   (Miles, Huberman    & Saldana,  2014),  often  returning  to  fieldnotes or related  data (i.e.,
portfolios where students reflected on problems), to understand what stimulated those moments of emergent
collaboration, the larger context that surrounded them, and their implications on the students. Next, using a two-
step open coding analysis (i.e., developing initial codes, analyzing the dataset in full, re-visiting and editing the
codes, and re-analyzing the dataset in full), we jointly developed the following categories which we will elaborate
on in the findings section:
    ·     Stimuli for collaboration: Bugs, verbal exclamations, help other than debugging, stimulus from a
          lesson, other.
    ·     Subject of collaboration: Problem-solving, feelings of camaraderie, extra pair of hands, other.
    ·     Enabling environmental factors: Physical proximity, overseeing/overhearing, curricular affordances,
          teacher practices, distributed expertise, adult brokerage, earlier friendship
Overall, our analysis was similar to Sawyer's work (2012) in that there was a focus on individual actions that was
used to identify the events of emergent collaboration, which then guided a deeper sociocultural analysis of the
contextual factors around these events.

Findings
We    identified five types   of  stimuli for emergent  peer  collaboration: bugs   (a  problem in  a  project or  task);
exclamations (students saying something loudly, such as something that went well); general help (including

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      474                                                    © ISLS
learning a new technique, getting advise on the aesthetics or appearance of a project or completing a necessary
task); following through on a lesson-based task that was not intended for group work, or a general "other". Figure
1 shows the frequency of instances in each of these areas as well as the type of collaboration that occurred: solving
a problem, building camaraderie between peers, working together not on a problem but on something that required
"extra hands" (i.e., holding something), and of course, "other."

      Figure 1. Graphical visualization of all the instances of emergent collaborations across the themes.

        Since  the majority    of the   instances that involved  bugs  (a little  less than half of all emergent
collaborations), we focus the remainder of this paper on investigating this area more deeply. Bug-related events
might involve realizing a breakdown,     identifying a bug,  fixing, testing or otherwise debugging  a  project or
celebrating fixing a bug. Collaborations stimulated by bugs included directly helping in problem-solving (red and
orange dots in Figure 1) or providing emotional support (i.e., "camaraderie"--orange and yellow) by fostering a
sense of camaraderie around making mistakes by encouraging, being comical or even heckling. In order to share
the wide variety of technical and emotional supports that students provided to each other, below we explicate
three examples of peer collaboration which illuminate the diversity of supports and immediate contextual factors
that enabled the collaboration. We also include information about the significance of these moments for students
who were involved in these collaborations. At the end we consider the broader contextual factors that enabled
these emergent collaborations, including the tools, spaces, classroom and lesson structures, classroom practices,
and student and teacher roles.

Observations of emergent collaborations

Initiating peer-to-peer debugging
One way that bugs became a source of collaboration was when students noticed another student's bug and inserted
themselves into the debugging process without being invited. For instance, this happened with Andrea, a student
who had earlier been identified by her teacher as a `middle of the class' student who struggled with motivation in
the class. Unusually for her (teacher post-interview, May 24, 2017), Andrea was one of the first to finish her final
project (the human sensor project) and noticed that a friend sitting at the same table, Maria, was struggling with
her project. The collaboration proceeded as follows:
        First, Andrea noticed that Maria was having trouble with her project. Andrea shifted her seat to be next
to Maria and began to interact with Maria's project. When uploading the code, an error message about the "port"
came up, and the girls realized that the USB cable was not working. They switched out the cable and were able to
upload the code, but no lighting patterns were triggered when the sensor (two aluminum foil patches) was activated
by their touch. Andrea set her computer next to Maria's to check the code. Andrea went line by line through the
code with Maria to see if was correct. `I think it's the 1000 [sensor range]. Mine is set to 900 and it works better;
maybe your range is too small,' Andrea said. In this, Andrea identified that the sensor threshold was too high, and
the ranges within the conditional statements did not trigger the outputs Maria had programmed. Once they changed
the ranges, two of the  four   patterns in Maria's  project worked.  Maria   then began  to debug  her  own code,
identifying some places in her lighting patterns that were not giving the effects she intended. Andrea continued to
sit next to Maria for the rest of the time, playing with a fidget spinner and answering questions whenever Maria
asked for help (field note, May 18, 2017).
        This spontaneous collaboration began with a bug in Maria's project apparent without any requests for
assistance. In fact, spotting a simple USB cord problem led to a series of bugs including the more challenging
customization of sensor ranges within a set of conditional statements. Notably, both the teacher and researchers
noticed a change in Andrea during the e-textiles unit, moving from hesitation about computing and coding to
being "way more proud and way more into the work" (teacher post-interview, May 24, 2017). This change was

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   475                                                  © ISLS
visible in Andrea's confident approach to her friend and tablemate Maria, and in the ways that she both helped
identify and fix problems and stood by while Maria continued to debug on her own.

Soliciting help on peer-to-peer debugging
Another type of emergent peer collaboration involved students explicitly soliciting another's help to debug their
projects. Many a times students requested help from peers they considered more expert in a specific area, from
threading a needle to checking a circuit diagram to fixing code. This recognition of expertise may have come from
a teacher or researcher suggesting getting help from a particular student or, more often, from prior knowledge of
a student's expertise from earlier in the class, as it did with Jesse below.
       During the fourth project, Jesse had successfully sewn and tested his lights and had sewn his sensors
patches on but was "terrified" to start the coding of his sensors, which involved reading the sensors and deciding
on a set of ranges that would work with different levels of squeezing the two patches (fieldnote, Mar. 07, 2017).
To start on the coding, he got up from his seat and went to the other side of the classroom to seek help from
Gencio, a student who had already worked through much of his sensor code (with the help of a researcher) and
who was known as a very proficient coder in the class. After getting assistance from Gencio, Jesse came back to
his table and almost immediately switched roles from being helped to helping, looking at his neighbor Joyce's
code and pointing out an incorrectly (or inconsistently) named variable. Joyce quickly corrected her error, but not
before the interaction drew the attention of Felix, sitting at the same table, who teased Joyce for not listening
carefully.
       The whole sequence of events demonstrates an example of cascading help that was provided from one
person to another. First, the researcher helped Gencio and his partner with coding and debugging the sensors on
their projects. Later, Jesse approached Gencio for help. Then Jesse pointed out an error to Joyce, and the whole
table became involved in Felix's teasing about Joyce's coding bug. Conversations such as these where students
developed a sense of camaraderie by heckling, joking and even encouraging each other were observed frequently
as demonstrated in the Dante and Juan's story (see next section).

Peer camaraderie over failure
One other type of collaboration that occurred around debugging included many friendly conversations where peers
sympathized about bugs. Often prompted by a student's encounter with some mistake or issue, these conversations
became places  where  students not only shared their individual    problems,     but also debated  their causes and
considered possible solutions. Along with promoting a sense of camaraderie and/or sympathy, these moments
provided much needed emotional support for one to persevere through moments of frustration and sense of failure.
For example, below is a fieldnote record (Jan. 26, 2017) illustrating Dante's experience when debugging his
dysfunctional wristband (project #2) led to a spontaneous conversation, inviting his nearby classmate's attention.
During this episode, Dante shifted from discouragement to sharing laughter with peers about common mistakes,
highlighting the way camaraderie influenced his participation.

       Researcher: How's it going?
       Dante:      I can't sew. Yeah, I keep messing up like 30 times. (Other students giggle.)
       Researcher: What did you mess up on? (Others are still snickering.) Everybody else knows what
                   you're messing up on?
       Dante:      It's `cause I didn't pull the string all the way, so I had loops in the back...
       Juan:       Yeah, but his first mistake was getting that color, though.
       Dante:      Oh yeah. Yeah, my first mistake was getting this [gray] color felt, so I barely see the [gray
                   conductive] string.
       Researcher: Ohhh, it's hard to see!... So that was the first problem, the color?
       Dante:      Yeah, because I didn't know what I was doing so I was just pulling the strings, and before
                   I knew it, I was pulling apart... (Points to frayed areas of felt on his project).
       Researcher: Oh, `cuz you can't tell what's the string and what's the fabric.... (Juan laughs) And Juan,
                   why're you laughin' at him?
       Juan:       'Cuz I made the same mistake!
       (Juan, sitting across the table from Dante, starts to describe how messy the back of his wristband was,
       after he thought he did a good job stitching and pulling the thread all the way through. He talks on for
       a minute.)

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  476                                                    © ISLS
         Juan:        Yeah, and when you look at the back... (Several others laugh, including Dante).

         Dante's visible errors--large knotty clumps of thread with fabric the same grey color of the thread--
invited attention and laughter from his classmates, providing an opportunity for Juan to share his own similar
mistakes. While the laughter of Dante's classmates may initially appear off-putting, the tone of the conversation
implies that the laughter was more in sympathy than in jest, effectively lessening the significance of a single
mistake. In fact, Dante joined in on the laughter at the end, sharing a sense of camaraderie over common problems.
Although Dante never successfully completed his wristband, this did not prevent Dante from finishing his next
two (more difficult) projects. In the end, even creating a fully-functional final project which involved a spatially
complex, three-dimensional interactive ball created attaching four pieces of felt.

Designs and supports for emergent collaboration
Analyzing the occurrences of emergent collaboration around bugs (including those above as well as our entire
dataset), here we consider the features of the learning environment that supported this phenomenon. Overseeing,
overhearing, and close proximity to peers were important features that related to physical aspects of both the
projects and the spaces in classrooms. For instance, bugs stood out visibly in the physical tangibility of e-textiles.
Mistakes such as knotty threads or malfunctioning lights were visible to others within eyesight, effectively serving
as "open   tools" (Hutchins,  1995)  that  triggered collaboration  and,  as   seen above   with Dante and   Juan,
commiseration  over   problems.  Further, all three  classrooms had    open physical spaces  where  students were
grouped at tables and could see each other's work. A number of collaborations happened between students sitting
next  to each  other or  across the table from  each  other (e.g., Andrea   and  Maria). Muttered  frustrations or
exclamations   also  led to conversations and  collaborations   about  problems,   even when  problems  were    not
physically visible.
         More subtle than visible and audible awareness of bugs, the curricular structures of the e-textile unit
further enabled emergent collaborations. The design constraints for the projects meant that each student had to
learn similar concepts (i.e., coding conditionals for human touch sensor patches in project #4) while allowing for
personal customization (Kafai & Fields, 2018). This combination of constraints and personalization meant that
students could legitimately learn from each other and even copy techniques of code, circuitry, or craft while still
making something unique. For instance, looking at a peer's code served as a stepping stone for students like Maria
or Jesse to debug their projects. Further, the curriculum suggested regular formal collaborations in certain lessons,
including pair programming, a collaborative project (project #3), and whole class discussions. This provided
precedence and practice for students to work together, and many students either returned to earlier partnerships
or used knowledge about peers' expertise gained from class discussions to seek help.
         The social structures promoted in the curriculum combined with prior social networks in the classes to
facilitate emergent collaborations. Adding to the formal collaborative pairings and discussions, students used their
own prior networks of friendship in providing help, seeking assistance, and sympathizing over problems. Many
emergent collaborations took place between students who had been long-time friends, as was the case of Andrea
and Maria. In addition, some students like Dante stated that they developed new friendships during the unit more
than at any other time of the school year, expanding social networks.
         Finally, teachers' practices and classroom management played both indirect and direct roles in emergent
collaborations around bugs. For instance, unspoken classroom rules allowed for the mobility of students and for
informal conversation about problems. Though students were expected to be on task, this did not mean that they
had to sit silently at their own seat as they might be expected to in other school contexts. In addition, teachers
often intervened more directly to support peer-to-peer learning by brokering help between students. Further, as
we found in our study of teacher practices in the unit (Fields et al., 2018), teachers frequently legitimized students'
diverse and developing expertise, highlighting students' knowledge from their earlier mistakes in classroom
reflections and sharing of "tips and tricks". This supported the idea of turning to students, not just teachers, as
sources  of knowledge.    Open  physical  spaces, tangible  artifacts, project constraints, formal collaborations,
informal social networks, combined with classroom practices to facilitate emergent peer collaborations around
bugs.

Discussion
In this paper we described unplanned peer-to-peer collaborations that emerged around problems, or bugs, in
students' open-ended e-textile designs. Though others have pointed out the collaborations that happen around
idea-generation and technique diffusion in makerspaces (Halverson et al., 2018), in our study problem-naming,
fixing and helping were a nexus for emergent peer collaboration. Student-to-student collaborations around bugs

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   477                                                  © ISLS
resulted in just-in-time assistance with troubleshooting, encouragement, and even humor that helped students'
progress and persevere through problems. In doing so students took up roles of leadership and expertise while
developing friendships in  the class and inserting humor    into an often-frustrating  design process. Unlike the
engineered moments of "productive failure" scenarios (e.g., Kapur, 2008), there is an ample supply of bugs in e-
textile designs that arise without structured planning. Together these findings not only refine our understanding
of student collaborative experiences in the face of failures but also highlight some of the key contextual factors
that turn these moments into productive ones.
       In discussing various environmental features that support emergent collaboration, we considered the
roles of physical, curricular, social, and teacher attributes. Tangible artifacts and open spaces combined with social
norms that allowed movement, conversation, and improvisation afforded opportunities for students to see, hear,
and converse with each other over challenges. In settings where making or constructing are the focus and where
the teacher is not the only expert in the room, it is important to highlight the more tacit qualities of learning
environments and  classroom    practices that  facilitate learning. We    do  not assume  to   have captured     all
environmental aspects that support emergent peer collaboration. Rather we hope that this study provides a starting
point for exploring bug-focused collaborations and contextual factors that support emergent collaborations. Much
more awaits further study, such as potential relationships between types of problems and the collaborations that
emerge around them, the role of different tools and representations in the problem space in inviting collaboration
(or not), and further environmental supports (structures, spaces, norms, practices) that facilitate or constrain peer
collaboration. More work is also needed on the social-emotional qualities of emergent collaborations, for instance
the "camaraderie" identified in this study, which played an important role in making "failure" and bugs more
socially acceptable to students like Dante and Juan, facilitating not just problem-solving but emotional robustness
and overall perseverance during the course of the unit.
       Much work in computer supported collaborative learning has focused on designing direct scaffolds for
participation, whether in the form of group roles, group structures, on-screen or in-class scaffolds, or tasks that
facilitate collaboration. One of the challenges with such fixed arrangements is that they provide little agency for
students to develop their own competencies in dealing with frequent unforeseen challenges that occur while
making computational artifacts outside the structured settings. Emergent peer collaboration provides a means to
acknowledge  and support   student   agency,  expertise,  and creativity. Designing   environments  for emergent
collaboration, including in relation to more formal collaborations, may open up even greater opportunities for
student learning and development.

References
Barron, B. (2003), When Smart Groups Fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Buechley, L., Peppler, K., Eisenberg, M., & Yasmin, K. (2013). Textile Messages: Dispatches from the World of
       E-Textiles and Education. New Literacies and Digital Epistemologies. Volume 62. Peter Lang Publishing
       Group. 29 Broadway 18th Floor, New York, NY 10006.
Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing grounded theory. Sage publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Ching, C. C., & Kafai, Y. B. (2008). Peer pedagogy: Student collaboration and reflection in a learning-through-
       design project. Teachers College Record, 110(12), 2601-2632.
College Board (2016). AP Computer Science Principles: Course and Exam Description Effective Fall 2016.
       College        Board:         New       York,        NY.       Retrieved        from:       https://secure-
       media.collegeboard.org/digitalServices/pdf/ap/ap-          computer-science-principles-course-and-exam-
       description.pdf.
DeLiema, D. (2017). Co-constructed failure narratives in mathematics tutoring. Instructional Science, 45(6), 709-
       735.
Fields, D. A., Kafai, Y. B., Nakajima, T. M., Goode, J., & Margolis, J. (2018). Putting making into high school
       computer  science   classrooms:   Promoting equity   in teaching   and learning with electronic  textiles in
       Exploring Computer Science. Equity, Excellence, and Education, 51(1), 21-35.
Fields, D. A., Searle, K. A., & Kafai, Y. B (2016). Deconstruction kits for learning: Students' collaborative
       debugging of electronic textile designs. In FabLearn '16, Proceedings of the 6th Annual Conference on
       Creativity and Fabrication in Education, ACM, New York, NY, 82-85.
Goode, J., Chapman,    G., &   Margolis,  J. (2012). Beyond      Curriculum:  The  Exploring   Computer  Science
       program.ACM Inroads, 3(2), 47-53.
Halverson, E., Litts, B., & Gravel, B. (2018). Forms of Emergent Collaboration in Maker-based learning. In
       Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, 2018, 921-924.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   478                                                 © ISLS
Jayathirtha, G., Fields, D., & Kafai, Y. (2018). Computational Concepts, Practices and Collaboration in High
       School Students' Debugging Electronic Textiles projects. Proceedings of the International Conference
       on Computational Thinking Education 2018. Hong Kong: The Education University of Hong Kong. 27-
       32.
Kafai, Y. & Fields, D. (2018). Some Reflections on Designing Constructionist Activities for Classrooms. In
       Proceedings of the Constructionism Conference 2018. Vilnius, Lithuania. 601-607.
Kafai, Y., Fields, D., & Searle, K. (2014). Electronic textiles as disruptive designs: Supporting and challenging
       maker activities in schools. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 532-556.
Kapur, M. (2008). Productive Failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26,(3), 379-424.
Kapur, M., & Kinzer, C. K. (2009). Productive failure in CSCL groups. International Journal of Computer-
       Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(1), 21-46.
Ko, A. J., & Myers, B. A. (2004, April). Designing the whyline: a debugging interface for asking questions about
       program   behavior.  In    Proceedings of   the SIGCHI   conference on  Human     factors in  computing
       systems,151-158. ACM.
Litts, B. K., Lui, D. A., Widman, S. A., Walker, J. T., & Kafai, Y. B. (2017). Reflections on Pair E-Crafting: High
       School Students' Approaches to Collaboration in Electronic Textiles Projects. In Proceedings of the
       International Conference of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2017, Philadelphia, PA (2)
       569-572.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook. Sage
       publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
McCauley,  R., Fitzgerald, S., Lewandowski,   G.,  Murphy,  L., Simon, B., Thomas,   L., & Zander,   C. (2008).
       Debugging: a review of the literature from an educational perspective. Computer Science Education,
       18(2), 67-92.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc..
Patil, A., & Codner, G. (2007). Accreditation of engineering education: review, observations and proposal for
       global accreditation. European journal of engineering education, 32(6), 639-651.
Peppler, K., Halverson, E., & Kafai, Y. B. (Eds.). (2016). Makeology: Makerspaces as learning environments
       (Vol. 1). Routledge.
Sawyer, K. (2012). Extending sociocultural theory to group creativity. Vocations and Learning, 5(1), 59-75.
Sheridan, K., Halverson, E. R., Litts, B., Brahms, L., Jacobs-Priebe, L., & Owens, T. (2014). Learning in the
       making: A comparative case study of three makerspaces. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 505-531.
Sorva, J., Lönnberg, J., & Malmi, L. (2013). Students' ways of experiencing visual program simulation. Computer
       Science Education, 23(3), 207-238.
Vessey, I. (1985, December). Expertise in Debugging Computer Programs: Situation-Based versus Model-Based
       Problem Solving. In International Conference of Information Systems 1985, 18, 288-302.
Williams, L. A., & Kessler,    R. R. (2000). All I really  need to know about pair  programming    I learned in
       kindergarten. Communications of the ACM, 43(5), 108-114.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation to Yasmin Kafai and Michael Eisenberg
(#1742140). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF, the University of Pennsylvania, or Utah State University.
Special thanks to Tomoko Nakajima for her help with data collection and to Alecia Magnifico, Debora Lui, Justice
T. Walker, and Mia Shaw for their valuable feedback.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  479                                                 © ISLS
