    Supporting Collaborative Curriculum Customizations Using the
                             Knowledge Integration Framework

                                Korah J. Wiley, Allison Bradford, and Marcia C. Linn
                 korah.wiley@berkeley.edu, allison_bradford@berkeley.edu, mclinn@berkeley.edu
                                          University of California, Berkeley

          Abstract: Teachers are currently facing a major instructional challenge, namely, supporting
          students   to meet   the three  dimensional     learning   goals    of  the  Next   Generation    Science
          Standards without adequate curriculum materials to do so. In this paper, we report the design
          and outcomes of professional development activities that support teachers and researchers to
          collaboratively  customize   Web-based     Inquiry   Science     Environment      (WISE)   units  to help
          students develop coherent science knowledge. The WISE units and professional development
          activities were developed using the Knowledge Integration (KI) Framework. We show that the
          KI framework     functioned  as  an   effective   scaffold   to support   teachers  in    modifying  their
          teaching practice to make curriculum customizations that are evidence-based and aligned with
          a theory   of learning.  We  discuss   how  our   study  results    informed  the  design   of an online
          curriculum    customization  and  implementation       interface and    offer the  principles  of the   KI
          framework     as design  principles   for  the  development      of  other   collaborative   professional
          development endeavors.

          Keywords: curriculum customization, professional development workshop, teacher-researcher
          collaborative learning, NGSS, knowledge integration

Introduction
We   report  on  the design  and   impact  of   a  professional   development       workshop  that   positions teachers   and
researchers as collaborative partners in customizing Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE) units to
align with   the Next   Generation  Science     Standards   (NGSS,     2013).  To   the workshop,    teachers  brought    their
teaching expertise and used their experience implementing the units and logged student data to improve the unit.
Researchers   brought    their  expertise  in   designing     the units   following     the  Knowledge      Integration   (KI)
pedagogical   framework     and   used the    framework     to   guide    the  professional   development     activities. We
hypothesized that, if aligned with curriculum activities, the four steps of the KI process (i.e. eliciting ideas,
adding ideas, distinguishing ideas, and reflecting on ideas) would serve as instructional strategies and scaffold
teachers' application of the underlying constructivist theory of learning. We further hypothesized that, if aligned
with the workshop activities, the four KI steps would give teachers and researchers an experiential knowledge of
the process, facilitate the integration of their respective knowledge, and foster the collaborative customization of
WISE units for NGSS-alignment and variegated classroom implementation. We discuss how the results from
this study informed the design of an online interface on the WISE platform to support teachers to customize and
implement    NGSS-aligned    curricula in  ways    that helps  students    develop    coherent, three-dimensional     science
knowledge.

Background
Since its publication in 2013, the NGSS (NGSS, 2013) has been widely adopted by U.S. states, often without
accompanying     curriculum    materials. During    initial implementation     of   WISE     units, many   teachers  reported
interest in better aligning their instruction with NGSS, motivating this study. Given the new, three-dimensional
learning goals of the NGSS, developing curricula de novo that can support students to meet these ambitious
standards is a formidable task, even for the most adept teacher. In their instructional comparison study, Penuel
and Gallagher (2009) showed that when teachers assume the role of curriculum customizer rather than designer,
they  produce   higher  quality curriculum,     as measured    by  its ability   to support  inquiry  and   promote   student
science understanding.     Building on    these findings,   we designed    a   knowledge     integration workshop    to build
teachers' capacity to customize existing curricula rather than design new curricula.
          A review of professional development supporting teachers to use technology-enhanced science inquiry
curricula   found  a significant   effect for   programs    that  followed    the   KI  framework    (Gerard   et al, 2011).
Successful professional development efforts elicited teachers' ideas, added new ideas to their existing repertoire,
and  encouraged    teachers  to distinguish   among     their ideas,   reflect upon    their experiences,   and   develop  an

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        480                                                       © ISLS
integrated, coherent view of instruction (Linn & Eylon, 2011). The KI framework draws on extensive research
supporting a socio-constructivist view of learning.
          A   key   tenet of    socio-constructivist   learning    and   knowledge  integration   is   sustained  collegial
collaboration. In successful professional development efforts, this collaboration involves teachers from multiple
schools   along  with university    mentors    (Penuel et  al., 2007).   As  teachers   collaborate   with other education
community     members     in activities  such  as customization,    they negotiate  meaning    (Lave,   1996), which    is a
critical aspect of learning.

Research questions
Research  suggests    the value     of focusing   on the   customization  of  existing  curriculum    materials. However,
supporting teachers to incorporate the NGSS into their teaching practices calls for new models of professional
development.     The  KI     framework    as a  professional development     model   offers promise,    especially for  the
customization   of  WISE     units, since  they  were  designed    using the KI  framework.    Thus,  we   investigated the
following research questions:
    1.    Can   the   KI  framework       guide  the  design    of both   curriculum    customization   and    professional
          development?
    2.    Which professional development activities:
                    Enable   teachers   to  use pedagogical   principles  to  align existing   curriculum   materials with
                    NGSS?
                    Support teachers and researchers to collaborate to develop curriculum that enables students to
                    meet the three-dimensional learning goals of the NGSS?

Methods and materials
We designed and tested professional development activities consisting of a 1.5 day workshop to review and
customize WISE units, in-class support during implementation of the customized unit, and post-implementation
interviews. The professional development activities followed the KI pedagogy of eliciting ideas about teaching
the unit, adding   new    ideas to  customize   the  unit, distinguishing   among   ideas  during implementation    of  the
customized unit, and reflecting on the experience.

Participants
The workshop participants included 21 middle school science teachers and 15 researchers. The teachers came
from 8 schools across 6 districts and the researchers came from 2 universities. All teachers had implemented at
least one WISE curriculum unit prior to attending the workshop.

WISE curriculum units
WISE    units are  developed    using   the  KI Framework.    They   elicit student ideas  from   their own   experiences;
engage  students   in gathering     new   ideas  using embedded     models   and  simulations   and   hands-on   activities;
encourage students to distinguish among these ideas by building models, testing alternative views, or critiquing
ideas of others; and request reflections in reports or presentations. The WISE units used by teachers in this study
are: Photosynthesis, Global Climate Change, Plate Tectonics, and Self-Propelled Vehicles. Each unit features
embedded assessments, logs student responses, and captures student activities (e.g. click-stream data). Teachers
and researchers can access all logged, de-identified student data via the data export interface in the Grading
Tool.

Customization materials and activities
Before the workshop, in preparation for the customization process, we analyzed the WISE units to identify the
NGSS performance expectations addressed in each. Then, we restructured the units into lesson series such that
each  lesson  in  the unit   targeted   a single  NGSS     performance   expectation.   To support    coherent   knowledge
building for the target performance expectation, we also structured each lesson in the unit to engage students in
each step of the KI process (i.e. one lesson corresponds to engagement in a complete KI cycle). The lessons
were designed such that they could be taught in sequence as a unit or as independent lessons.
          In addition, we created a diagrammed version of each unit consisting of a 5" x 7" notecard for each
lesson with each activity in the lesson briefly described on 3" x 3" sticky notes, color-coded by each KI step
(pink: Elicit Ideas; orange: Add Ideas; green: Distinguish Ideas; blue: Reflect On/Revise Ideas, see Figure 2C).
On  the 5"  x 7"   notecards    was  the  following  lesson  information:   unit title, lesson title, recommended     grade

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        481                                                     © ISLS
levels, targeted performance    expectation,   and  a  brief description  of    the  learning goals.  These     tangible,
diagrammed    versions of   the WISE   units   were  the objects of    customization  and   were  designed  to   pilot      a
prototype version of a unit customization interface on the WISE platform.
          After the workshop, the researchers incorporated the customizations of the diagrammed version of each
unit into a complete digital version for subsequent post-workshop classroom implementation.

Data sources and data analysis
To address   our research   questions, we   gathered  data corresponding     to each  of the  KI-aligned professional
development activities. During the 1.5 day workshop, we documented the customized units for comparison to
their previously implemented counterparts. Throughout the workshop, the researchers captured audio recordings
and photographs of the workshop activities, and collected teachers' written responses to the following prompts:
          What are some things you learned or have taken away from engaging in this customization process and
          sharing with other teachers?
          Was this customization process and reflecting on the KI cycle helpful for you in thinking about how to
          achieve your NGSS and other curricular goals?
          Do you think you could use this customization process for another unit you'd like to run?
          Please share any other reflections or feedback you have from the workshop.
          To analyze the customization of the WISE units, we counted the number and type of interleaved KI-
aligned,  non-WISE   activities that teachers  added  to the diagrammed      units. Our  analysis of  teachers'  written
reflection consisted of identifying themes related to the customization and collaboration process. For this paper,
we analyze the implementation of the customized WISE Photosynthesis unit as carried out by two, 7th grade
teachers, Mr. Vega and Mr. Harrison. We took field notes during classroom observations and conducted post-
implementation   interviews     to  discuss their   customization    decisions   and  their   overall implementation
experiences. We evaluated our observation notes and interview data in terms of their implementation of the
workshop customizations and the type of customizations they made during implementation.

Results

Knowledge-integrating and experiential activities
The activities of the 1.5 day workshop aligned with the four steps of the KI process (see Table 1) and positioned
teachers as experts on their teaching practice and researchers as experts on their curriculum designs. To begin
the workshop, the researchers facilitated a whole group discussion to elicit ideas about the function of each
dimension of the NGSS performance expectations in terms of lesson development (e.g. disciplinary core ideas
provide the lesson content). During this discussion, the researchers introduced the KI framework and invited
teachers to share activities they used or could KI process. This activity was designed to highlight the similarities
between   how  the teachers  and   researchers conceptualize  and    support the knowledge    building  process.    Each
group activity of the workshop (whole group and small group) was designed to highlight the expertise of both
teachers and researchers and to create opportunities for expertise sharing.

Table 1: A summary of the professional development activities, their alignment with the KI process, and sample
teacher reflections.

 Professional Development     Knowledge Integration       Sample Teacher Reflections
 Activity                     Alignment

 KI Framework for NGSS        Eliciting & Adding Ideas    "I enjoyed looking at the KI. It is very similar to how we plan
 Lesson Development                                       our lessons and it was cool to see we were aligned in our
                                                          thinking."

 Identifying KI-supporting    Eliciting & Adding Ideas    "[KI] allowed [me] to better think about the learning
 Activities                                               process. Breaking it down into components and deciding
                                                          what kind of activities and scaffolding will go into that part of
                                                          the project"

 WISE Unit Analysis Using     Adding & Distinguishing     "This is something I will use in the future with other lessons

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    482                                                      © ISLS
 Student Data                  Ideas                      to make sure it is really meeting all areas[, if] students [are]
                                                          really understanding a lesson."

 Interleaving KI-supporting    Adding & Distinguishing    "The customization process and reflecting on the KI cycle are
 Activities into WISE Units    Ideas                      definitely helpful for me. I understand better how each unit is
 (Customizing)                                            built and how I can interact with it. I can pull different
                                                          components together to fit the needs of the curriculum or the
                                                          time constraints"

 Reviewing Unit                Distinguishing &           "It was really interesting to hear other teachers' reflections
 Customizations                Reflecting On Ideas        on their units.  It gave me the chance to think about how I
                                                          might want to use some similar ideas in the units I plan to
                                                          run in my classroom."

 Actualizing Customizations    Adding Ideas               "I added new labs to the WISE project, learning how to use
 Using the WISE Platform                                  the authoring tool was great to be able to add our new ideas
                                                          into the project."

 Implementation of             Distinguishing &           "I deployed instruction in similar fashion to the Knowledge
 Customized Unit               Reflecting On Ideas        Integration process through a unit designed and planned by
                                                          [another curriculum provided] for 6th graders learning from
                                                          instruction that is 3-D and that conforms to the NGSS.       I
                                                          generally follow the same process throughout each unit of
                                                          instruction."

 Post-Implementation           Reflecting On Ideas        "The [KI] labels on each step [of the customized WISE unit]
 Interviews                                               were  useful  to  me  in   identifying   the stage of  learning  the
                                                          students were     in; to   which, I targeted    my  instruction  or
                                                          interactions  with    small groups.    I loved  how    the unit was
                                                          divided into distinct but incremental lesson[s] for that exact
                                                          reason, they demarcated conceptual bubbles that can exist on
                                                          their own but are still a part of something larger, the bigger
                                                          picture, the overarching idea."

       The     sharing and   integration  of  expertise  was  evident    in  the   customization       activity. For  the  unit
customization    activity, teachers  were assigned    to a  small  group      corresponding        to  a unit    they recently
implemented and with researchers who had developed the units. Teachers were asked to think of and write on
colored 3 x 3 sticky notes as many activities as they could think of for each step of the KI process (Pink: elicit
ideas; Orange: add ideas; Green: distinguish ideas; Blue: reflect on/revise ideas). Teachers were invited to share
their KI activity ideas with other workshop participants by placing the sticky notes on a long table centrally
located in the meeting room (see Figure 1). The goal of this activity was to further elicit and add ideas regarding
topic-specific activities that were accessible to teachers and would support the KI process.

                                  Figure 1. Shared interleaved teacher activities.

       To further add ideas regarding unit customization, the researchers provided teachers with evidence of
their students' learning. Specifically, researchers gave the teachers a random sampling of 30 of their students'
responses   to a post  test  assessment  item   that targeted  at  least  one   dimension     of   an    NGSS    performance
expectation addressed in the unit. Teachers were asked to evaluate the responses to identify areas of strength and
weakness in their students' understanding.
       The     researchers  then invited  the teachers   to customize     the   unit  by interleaving     the activities   they
previously wrote on the color-coded sticky notes with those on the lesson notecards. The goal of this activity

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     483                                                            © ISLS
was to customize the unit in ways that would better support students in developing an integrated understanding
of the targeted  NGSS    performance       expectation,  using evidence    of previous   student learning  as  a point  of
reference. Teachers    were  given    full license   to eliminate,  substitute, or add   any KI-supporting    activity  by
rearranging the sticky notes on the lesson notecards. In this way, teachers could distinguish their ideas about
how to customize the unit in ways that would support their students in the KI process and function within their
classroom constraints and resources (see Figure 2A, 2B).

    Figure 2. WISE unit customization process: Identifying non-WISE, KI-aligned activities (a); Identifying
   relevant activities to customize the unit (b); Integrating their activities into the diagrammed WISE unit (c).

Teachers   worked  collaboratively    within  and    across  their small  groups   to exchange   ideas  and  activities to
customize their unit. Of all the customizations that teachers made across all the units, 33% (31/94) would elicit
students' ideas, 33% (31/94) would add to students' ideas, 10% (9/94) would support students in distinguishing
their ideas, and 24% (23/94) would help students reflect on or revise their ideas (see Figure 3).

            Figure 3. Percentage of unit customizations aligned to each Knowledge Integration step.

        In  another    group workshop      activity, teachers  were   asked to  evaluate  whether their customized   unit
would  support   their students in developing    an     integrated understanding   of the disciplinary  core ideas, cross
cutting concepts, and science or engineering practices targeted in the unit lessons. After teachers made their
final customizations, they were invited to share their customized units with other teachers who were interested
in implementing the unit. During this unit exchange activity, teachers were able to get feedback from other
workshop participants about their customization decisions.
        In the final group workshop activity, the researchers demonstrated and helped teachers use the unit
authoring  tools currently   built-in into  the WISE     platform.  During  these  small  workgroup    sessions, teachers
chose 1-2 customizations to reify in the digital version of the unit on the WISE platform.
        To   conclude    the  workshop,     teachers    were asked    to provide   their reflections on their  workshop
experiences  (see Table   1). Of   the  21   teacher    participants, 15  (71%)  provided   responses   to the reflection
quetsions. As for whether the KI framework was a productive lens through which to evaluate and customize a
unit, 80% of teachers (12/15) answered in the affirmative. In response to the question, "Do you think you could
use this process again to customize another unit you'd like to run?", 87% of teachers (13/15) answered in the
affirmative. Additionally, many teachers (87%, 13/15) shared that the lesson series format of the WISE units
provide great affordances for customization using their own activities.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        484                                                   © ISLS
Reflection on and implementation of a customized unit: The cases of Mr. Vega and
Mr. Harrison
To continue exchanging expertise after the workshop and to extend the collaborative customization efforts, the
first author  provided   in-class  support during  implementation     of the customized     unit. The  following   are the
results     of      the     implementation         of     the      customized        Photosynthesis         WISE       unit
(https://wise.berkeley.edu/project/24548) in the fall term after the summer workshop by two teachers, Mr Vega
and Mr. Harrison. Mr. Harrison worked in the small group that customized the Photosynthesis unit during the
summer workshop, however Mr. Vega worked in the small group that customized the Global Climate Change
unit. Over the course of implementation of the customized Photosynthesis unit, the first author noticed how both
teachers interleaved non-WISE activities, most of which were designed to provide students with additional ideas
to supplement     their limited prior  knowledge    about certain  topics, like  chemical   reactions.  This  observation
supports  the   analysis  of   the  unit customizations   made     during    the workshop    where     33%   of  the total
customizations aligned with the Adding Ideas step of the KI process (see Figure 3). In both cases, the teachers
used a molecular modeling kit to provide their students with ideas about atoms, molecules, and the nature of
chemical reactions related to photosynthesis. Additionally, Mr. Harrison incorporated a multi-modal activity on
the   conservation  of  matter  during the photosynthesis     reaction as  a transition  from   Lesson  1   (Plant Growth
Needs)  to   Lesson  2   (Photosynthesis   and  Cellular  Respiration    Reactions).   During   the post-implementation
interview  he   commented      that he   used the  WISE   concept   mapping      activities to  support  his  students  in
distinguishing their ideas about energy and matter cycling, the targeted cross-cutting concept in the unit. Mr.
Harrison's use of WISE activities over his own activities to help students distinguish their ideas correlates with
the result from the customization activity, namely the low levels (10%) of customization activities aligning with
the distinguishing step (see Figure 3). This finding also parallels Mr. Vega's reflection comment that he plans to
"[s]trengthen the role WISE plays during the Distinguishing...phase".

Mr. Harrison: A deeper look
During  the   workshop,   Mr.   Harrison   expressed   reticence regarding   the  customization     partnership. His   past
experiences    with the  units  led  him  to  feel like they   were "adapted     to fit the  need   of each  researcher",
additionally he could not see how the digital version of the WISE unit could be restructured into related but
independent lessons aligned to specific NGSS performance expectations. However, when asked how he thought
the customized, digital Photosynthesis unit aligned with the NGSS he remarked, "It's definitely aligned, it fits
right in with our [other curriculum materials] because we go from Photosynthesis right into ecosystems" (which
is Lesson   4  of  the  customized   Photosynthesis    unit). This  comment      highlights the   way  that  Mr. Harrison
interleaved the WISE Photosynthesis unit with his existing curriculum to better support his students in meeting
the   targeted NGSS      performance     expectations.  Specifically,  Mr.   Harrison    commented      that his   existing
curriculum, although nominally aligned with the NGSS, did not actually provide his students with sufficient
opportunities to develop a robust and coherent understanding of the targeted ideas, concepts, and practices. He,
therefore, used the customized WISE unit to provide his students with these opportunities. Mr. Harrison further
discussed the difficulty and discomfort he experienced when implementing curriculum that he did not develop
and therefore greatly appreciated the ability to customize the WISE unit with his own activities to make the unit
"his own". When the first author asked Mr. Harrison how the researchers could further collaborate to address his
curriculum customization challenges, he offered the idea of incorporating specific WISE lessons and activities
into the Google Classroom that he used to plan and organize his instruction. He stated that doing so would solve
the notoriously difficult problem of trying to re-synchronize students who progress at different speeds through
the WISE activities. (We elaborate upon this idea in the Conclusion section.)

Mr. Vega: A deeper look
Mr. Vega also engaged in extensive customization during implementation to assume greater "authorship" of the
unit. During the implementation, he commented to the first author, "I was motivated to Edit Content to the
unit...Take a look", referring to his use of the unit authoring tools on the WISE platform, a feature historically
used only by researchers. In these edits, Mr. Vega customized the prompts for the concept maps to align with
the topics and terminology used in his non-WISE activities. In this way, he created greater continuity between
WISE    and   his  other  curriculum   materials.  Mr.  Vega's   customization      of  the Photosynthesis    unit  during
implementation is of particular note since during the workshop customization activity he was not part of the
Photosynthesis small group. Therefore, Mr. Vega's customization of the Photosynthesis unit demonstrates that
he was able to transfer and apply the knowledge he gained during the workshop to another unit, actions that
substantiated his "YES" to the reflection question of whether he could customize another unit. Beyond making
edits to provide greater continuity between the WISE unit and his existing curriculum materials, Mr. Vega also

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      485                                                      © ISLS
applied his understanding of the KI process to all his instruction. During the post-implementation interview he
stated that he used the steps of the KI process to keep track of the stage of learning in which his students were
engaged and thus provide them with targeted support.

Discussion

Design principles for Knowledge Integration customization
In this paper, we described professional development activities that were aligned with the KI framework and
showed how the framework helped teachers customize their existing curriculum to better support their students
in meeting the three dimensional learning goals of the NGSS. The workshop reveals three design principles that
we recommend for teacher-researcher professional development: support teachers and researchers to learn from
each other; make thinking about customization visible; and support sustainable customization practices. In the
sections below, we highlight the value of each design principle in supporting collaborative learning amongst
researchers  and teachers.    We  conclude    the  section  with   a discussion   of how  the   insights gained    during   the
customization activity inform the design of an online curriculum customization interface.

Supporting teachers and researchers to learn from each other
The workshop facilitated the integration of teachers' and researchers' knowledge and expertise. Throughout the
workshop    activities, researchers   used   the KI  framework     as a mediating    tool to  share  their  insights  into  the
learning process,   and    teachers shared   their insights  into  the  instructional   constraints and  resources      of their
teaching contexts. Transitioning from whole to small group activities allowed workshop participants to learn
from each other and consider new strategies and activities to help students meet the learning goals of the NGSS.
Teachers    expressed   that having   opportunities   throughout   the  workshop     to learn  from  researchers     and   other
teachers within and outside their school was invaluable, as they do not regularly have such opportunities. The
final customized WISE units reflected the integration of the ideas and expertise of researchers and teachers.
Thus,   the workshop    embedded      research-based  pedagogical     insights into  teachers'   curriculum     customization
practices and expanded researchers' understanding of teachers' instructional constraints and resources.

Making thinking about customization visible
To customize the WISE units, we designed workshop activities that made the customization process visible. The
diagrammed WISE units made the researchers' thinking visible to teachers by highlighting the units' salient
features and the researchers' design rationale. The diagrammed units facilitated productive conversation about
the feasibility of  unit implementation      and  theories  of learning, specifically   the   KI framework.     Writing    their
ideas for lesson activities on sticky notes color-coded according to the steps of the KI process provided teachers
tangible  artifacts with   which    to organize    their current   curriculum   materials    in  ways   that would      support
constructivist-grounded pedagogy. Having the content of the sticky notes at the grain-size of lesson activity
supported experimentation with lesson structure and sequence. Teachers could place and replace the notes on
the lesson notecards. Thus, the customization activity helped participants make their thinking visible by moving
their ideas  from   conceptualization     to paper,   making   their   ideas  available   for evaluation    and   revision   by
themselves   and others.     The activities  also  helped   make   learning   the KI    framework   accessible    to teachers,
thereby  providing   teachers    and  researchers   with  a  common     pedagogical     lens  with  which    to  evaluate   and
customize curriculum.

Supporting sustainable customization practices
After the workshop, teachers and researchers partnered to implement the customized WISE units. The two cases
presented in this paper, highlight the power of the professional development activities to promote sustainable
curriculum   customization     practices.    In  one  case,    the   teacher  (Mr.   Vega)    implemented       a customized
Photosynthesis WISE unit which he did not work on during the workshop. During implementation he applied
the   KI framework      to   effectively   interleave   his  existing   curriculum    activities   into  the    digital  WISE
Photosynthesis   unit   to support    his primarily  English   Language      Learner  students   in developing     a coherent
understanding of the targeted performance expectations. Similarly, the other teacher (Mr. Harrison) customized
the WISE Photosynthesis unit to supplement his existing curriculum. He recognized that his existing curriculum
did not support students to distinguish their ideas, a critical step in the KI process. He used WISE activities to
do  so. Both  teachers   noted   that the structure  of  the WISE     units, namely   a series  of  related  yet  independent
lessons targeted to specific NGSS performance expectations that engage students in each step of the KI process,
made customization feasible and effective. Rather than viewing the WISE units as a product of research efforts

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        486                                                         © ISLS
that needed  to remain    unedited, both  teachers   viewed  the   units as their own     and  acted  accordingly.  The
workshop developed teacher agency around curriculum customization thereby allowing the customized WISE
unit to be the product of a partnership between education experts, experts of theory and experts of practice.

Conclusion
The outcomes and associated principles presented in this paper illustrate the promise of the KI professional
development activities to support the alignment of existing curriculum with NGSS. Analysis of the activities
suggest three design principles that echo the KI tenets: learning from others, making thinking visible, making
learning accessible, and promoting autonomous learning (Linn & Eylon, 2011). The principles were developed
in the context of STEM curriculum customization; however, they should also be tested in other contexts, such as
developing culturally-relevant curricula. The findings also illustrate the value of logging student activities and
using student  work  to   support customization.   Incorporating    learning analytics    into the  WISE    units  could
potentially allow teachers to use evidence of student learning in real-time to make curriculum customization that
support the KI process. This is an application of these findings that we are actively investigating.

Make customization accessible
The  diagrammed    version of the   WISE  units  and the workshop     activities provided   a  prototype  for an  online
customization   and implementation    interface. This  interface   makes    the customization   process   accessible  to
teachers. Teachers  commented     that the   diagrammed     WISE    unit  provided   the  ideal  amount    and  type  of
information  they  needed  to  gain  a working    knowledge     of  a unit. They     also valued the   intuitiveness  of
customizing units with activity-level sticky notes color-coded for the KI process. Using these experiences, the
researchers and WISE technology team designed a customization and implementation interface on the WISE
platform. When teachers view a WISE unit from the interface they will see a pop-out window with the same
information that was on the notecards. Upon selecting the unit for implementation, the unit will be displayed at
the activity level with each activity tagged for the KI step that it targets. Teachers can add specific activities
from  other WISE    units or  from  their own   resources.  In  the future,  we  anticipate   integrating  with   Google
Classroom so that teachers can seamlessly combine their existing curriculum with WISE lessons or activities.
Additional analysis of the final customized unit will help ensure that teachers have a customized curriculum that
engages their students in compete KI cycles. The interface will allow teachers and researchers to continually
benefit from each other's respective expertise and sustain their curriculum customization partnership.

Next steps
Based  on  the  successful implementation    of  the customized     WISE    Photosynthesis    unit, we   will study  the
implementation   of  all  the customized     WISE    units. These   findings    will allow  us   to  refine   the online
customization and implementation interface and the workshop design.

References
Gerard, L. F., Varma, K., Corliss, S. B., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Professional Development for Technology-
          Enhanced    Inquiry       Science.    Review      of     Educational       Research,      81(3),    408­448.
          https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654311415121
Lave,  J.  (1996).  Teaching,   as   Learning,    in  Practice.  Mind,    Culture,    and   Activity,  3(3),  149­164.
          https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327884mca0303_2
Linn, M.  C.,  &  Eylon,  B.-S. (2011).   Science  learning  and   instruction:  Taking   advantage   of technology   to
          promote knowledge integration. New York: Routledge.
NGSS Lead States. 2013. Next generation science standards: For states, by states. (2013).
Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B., Yamaguchi, R., & Gallagher, L. P. (2007). What makes professional development
          effective? Strategies that foster curriculum implementation. American Education Research Journal, 44,
          921­958.
Penuel, W. R., & Gallagher, L. P. (2009). Preparing teachers to design instruction for deep understanding in
          middle-school earth science. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 461­508.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    487                                                      © ISLS
