    The Affordable Touchy Feely Classroom: Textbooks Embedded
With Manipulable Vectors and Lesson Plans Augment Imagination,
                            Extend Teaching-Learning Practices
               Durgaprasad Karnam, Harshit Agrawal, Priyanka Borar, and Sanjay Chandrasekharan
              karnamdpdurga@gmail.com, harshitagrawal.iitr@gmail.com, priyankaborar@gmail.com,
                                                sanjay@hbcse.tifr.res.in
     Learning Sciences Research Group, Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education, TIFR, Mumbai-India

          Abstract: Computational media for mathematics and science education have been around for
          forty years, but teaching and learning practices are still centered surrounding the textbooks in
          the developing world, mainly due to their affordability. Teachers thus organise their thinking,
          workflow   and   classroom  interactions  using  textbooks.   However,    text media   limit students'
          ability to imagine the dynamics embedded in mathematics and science formalisms, such as
          vectors. We outline an affordable design that augments textbooks, to: allow all students to
          imagine   such  dynamics;   help  teachers  reorganize  their   thinking   and  workflow;    make  all
          classrooms   highly   collaborative.  The   design   consists  of  a  'touchy-feely   vector'  system
          (smartphone-based manipulation of vectors), a 'virtual lesson plan' (manipulable simulations
          that extend textbook figures), and a 'mixed-media' textbook (QR codes pasted next to figures,
          linked to manipulable simulations). We discuss how this integrated design changed learning
          and  teaching    practices, based  on    an   ethnographic  study    of experimental     and   control
          classrooms.

Introduction
Interactive media for making concepts and formal structures in mathematics and science easier to understand
(Balacheff & Kaput, 1996) have been around for close to forty years (Papert, 1980, 1994). But these media have
not changed classroom practices significantly, as teaching and learning processes and teacher training are still
centred around textbooks, particularly in the developing world. This is because textbooks are cheap and widely
available,  and  they thus   play an   artifactual role in teaching   practice,   helping  organise  teachers'   thinking,
workflow and classroom interaction. The textbook is thus the dominant media in education, but text and figures
are limited in conveying the dynamic nature of mathematics and science content, particularly formal structures
such as   vectors, which   are critical for developing   model-based    reasoning,   a  key skill needed   for practising
science (Hestenes, 2010; Magnani, Nersessian, & Thagard, 2012; Nersessian, 1999). Teachers struggle to enact
or  'act out' in the classroom    the dynamic   nature  of such   formal  structures,   and students   have a  hard  time
imagining the dynamic nature based on the teacher's gestures, words and enaction and dropout physically or
cognitively from the classroom learning.

Our design TFV-2
To  address   this problem  for teaching/learning   vectors  (Barniol   & Zavala,    2014;  Dorier &   Sierpinska,  2002;
Hillel, 2000), we developed a multi-pronged design (including cognitive, practice and access factors) to make
the dynamic nature of formal structures (geometrical ones in vectors) available to all students, particularly in the
developing world.
          Cognitive: A simulation system was developed, which allows by touching and manipulating them on
any smartphone (Touchy Feely Vectors-2: TFV-2: bit.ly/tfv-2) using embodied interactions, for creating (by
simple double-consecutive taps), adding (drag one vector over other and double-consecutive taps), and resolving
(pinching  away    gesture) (Fig.1).  This  makes   the formal  entities  tangible,  dynamics   visible, and   the modes
coherent. An earlier version of TFV-2 was tested to be promising in helping students understand and imagine
the  dynamics      better  (Karnam,     Agrawal,   Mishra,   &    Chandrasekharan,       2016;  Karnam,     Agrawal,   &
Chandrasekharan, 2018).
          Practice:  Teacher   adoption  and   usage  of digital  resources  in  the  classroom   has  not  been   smooth
(Bingimlas,   2009).  In  our experience   too, teachers  were hesitant   to use  it in  their teaching. To  address  the
integration   with teachers'  current  textbook-based   practice, particularly  their  thinking   about  vectors and  the
sequencing of the lessons, we decided to design tasks that could be planned for organised classroom activities.
As an exercise, a 'virtual lesson plan' (VLP) was created, in collaboration with teachers, where this manipulable
system can be used to extend their existing teaching lesson plans.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      488                                                     © ISLS
         Access: These  VLPs  were   embedded    in the  textbooks   through QR     codes (Uluyol &  Agca,  2012)
augmenting the figures and tasks in the textbook, as well as teacher thinking and practices based on them. This
makes the introduction of new artefacts into the classrooms smooth and less abrupt as it builds on the already
existing artefacts (textbooks), without replacing them.

Figure 1. Gesture for creating vector, and for deleting a vector; An active vector, changing magnitude, direction
    (row-1); Pinching away gesture for resolution and gesture for reversing the resolution of vector (row-2).

         We report a study involving classroom teaching using TFV-2 and the changes in teaching and learning
practices, based on data from an ethnographic analysis of experimental and control classrooms.

The classroom study
To test whether this design actually meets the design requirements, we did a classroom study (grade 11), with
three experimental classrooms where the integrated system was deployed, and three control classrooms where
the standard  textbook teaching method    was used. We     worked with  5 physics   teachers (T1-T5), in  3 junior
colleges (C1-C3)  (pre-university   level  high  schools)   in Mumbai,    India. All  the  teachers  were   trained
postgraduates in Physics and had about 20 years of experience teaching at this level. Each school had multiple
classrooms (divisions/sections) of grade 11. We observed two grade 11 classrooms (Control group - CG, and
Experimental  group -  EG) in each   college  (a total  of 6 classrooms). In  CG,   the teachers  taught using the
conventional method. In EG, the teacher used tablets with the TFV-2 deployed.

Table 1: Colleges and classrooms, and corresponding teacher codes. NCERT - national, MH - a provincial
(Maharashtra) textbook. * T3 & T5 taught in C2 and C3 due to inter-school transfers (could not be controlled)

                            College (type,Curriculum)Classroom  Teacher       No. ofstudents
                                                  EG1             T1             73
                           C1 (Private, MH)       CG1             T2          70-75

                                                  EG2             T3           ~49
                           C2 (Public, MH)
                                                  CG2          T3 & T5*       ~ 41

                              C3 (Public,         EG3             T4             45
                              NCERT)              CG3          T5 & T3*          45

Methodology and data collection
See figure-2. A  brief introduction to the research study    and the TFV-2   system   was  given to the  respective
college managements and the teachers to get their consent for the study. To get some initial familiarity with the
system, the teachers were requested to do some exploration of a few tasks (not mandatory) on an earlier (mouse-
control) version of the vector system. All the teachers except T5 attended a Lesson Planning Workshop (LPW)
for ~3 hours. In the workshop, the teachers based on their already existing lesson plans, together discussed and
arrived at a virtual lesson plan with tasks on TFV-2, to be used in their teaching. We video recorded all the
classroom sessions (both in CG and EG for 5-8 teaching sessions of 35/40 minutes each in different colleges). In
CG classrooms, the teacher was given no inputs by the researchers. In EG classrooms, as per the VLP, a 1-2
page worksheet with pre-determined tasks (developed during the LPW) was prepared, depending on the topics
the teacher planned to teach in the class (one worksheet per student). About 25-30 6" Android tablets (SWIPE)

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   489                                                  © ISLS
with the necessary files and QR reading applications pre-installed were taken to the classrooms. The classroom
was split into groups of 2-3 students (depending on the total strength) and each group was given one tablet. The
tasks are available over the web and can be accessed directly. But the colleges didn't have reliable internet
connectivity, so the necessary files were copied to each tablet, and they were accessed locally using QR codes
generated for the file paths. In the EG session, the teacher led the class, discussing the day's topics. The students
in the groups   interacted with   the  tablet-based   system,  as directed   by  the teachers  and   facilitated by   the
researchers (fig.3). They  also   completed  related  worksheets.  The    researchers' roles were   primarily   logistics
related to the tablets, technical support (for the teacher as well as the students), facilitating activity based on
TFV, and recording the classroom proceedings. After about 1-3 weeks, students in all the 6 classrooms were
given a questionnaire, which included questions that sought to captured students conceptual understanding and
reasoning approaches in the context of vectors.

Figure 2. The flow of the study and the sample. Figure 3. Students scanning the QR code in an EG Classroom.

Analysis and findings
Given the space constraints, we confine to reporting here the analysis of qualitative changes, both in students'
learning  (particularly imagination)  and   teachers' teaching   practices in the   classroom  setting. The main     data
sources for the current analysis were video recordings, which were analysed to understand the differences in:
classroom dynamics (CG and EG), interactions between teachers and the students, and interactions with various
artefacts (textbook, blackboard,     notebooks  and  worksheets,   the tablet).  For this, the video  recordings   were
analyzed   using two    broad  lenses  ­  differences   in learning,   particularly  imagination,  and  differences    in
teacher/teaching  related  practices.  This  is not   a rigid  and  complete     framework   (like situated frames    of
instrumental genesis    (Artigue, 2002)  or socio-mathematical    norms    (Yackel  &  Cobb,   1996) etc)  yet,  but, we
expect that iteratively useful holistic frames could emerge to analyse the new mixed media based classroom
artefacts perhaps enhancing the existing frames incorporating embodied indicators of imagination like gestures.

Learning practices
The  main  differences  in the  learning  process,  particularly  related to  imagination,  between  the  CG     and  EG
classrooms were in terms of the use of gestures, trajectories, collaboration and flow of learning.

Gestures: Active and meaningful engagement with content

 Figure 4. Student in CG using gestures to remotely access the content on the board (left). Student in EG using
                     gestures to explain to the peer in the context of an activity on TFV (right).

As one of our key design objectives was to help students imagine the vector in geometric terms, we examined
the gestures students made in the two classrooms, as these indicate geometric thinking (Kim, Roth, & Thom,
2011). In the CG classroom, students were passive spectators most of the time, except for a few episodes where
they took  note  of  what  was    on the blackboard.    Activity, when    rarely present,  was limited  to  nodding    in
agreement or tracing pens over the diagrams seen on the board (fig. 4 left). Gestures of this kind suggest a very
limited engagement with the geometric content of vectors. The teacher's enaction of the textbook figures, which
is the sole source for triggering the imagination of dynamic operations, is not resonated by the students. In the
EG classrooms, more active and meaningful engagement with the content was observed. This was reflected in

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      490                                                    © ISLS
more  sustained   gestures, along  with   discussions   between    students, which     indicate conceptually    deeper
engagement with the geometric operations (fig. 4 right). These gestures were usually situated in conversation,
where one student was actively trying to explain his imagination to another. The gestures indicate the possibility
of students  resonating  with the   teacher's  writings (equations)   or  drawings     (diagrams)   and  meaningfully
engagement with content.

Multiple trajectories for learning
In the CG classroom, the learning opportunities were only when the teachers enacted a concept, and most of the
activity in the classroom   involved  taking  notes, which   followed   the  teacher's description  of  the topic  and
solutions to problems. In the EG classroom, the exploratory and open-ended nature of tasks led to a surprising
number of problem-solving trajectories. The diversity of approaches indicate the high imagination and learning
potential provided by the TFV-2. To illustrate, in one of the tasks, students had to create two vectors, whose
resultant is a given vector with magnitude 60 and a direction of 40°. The following approaches were seen.
         Trial and error (the most common approach, where students manipulate the magnitude and direction of
         vectors randomly). Some students found some patterns of change as they kept interacting.
         Estimating  the  rectangular components     along x   and y-axes   and  creating  them  as  the  two vectors.
         However,   these students  struggled  when   asked  to  create another  set   of vectors.  Here  the students
         explicitly applied the interconnections between resolution into rectangular components and addition.
         Creating two vectors with magnitude 30 at 20° from the x-axis and then adding to find resultant of
         magnitude 60 at 20° instead of at 40°. This combination provides the opportunity for students to realise
         that magnitudes and directions (represented as angles) cannot be algebraically added directly.
         Creating the vector of magnitude 60 at 40° from the x-axis, and arguing that the other vector is a zero
         vector. This particular group of students tried out this task for a long time using trial and error method,
         and eventually applied the idea of zero vector quiet intelligently.

Collaboration
In the CG classroom, there is very limited scope for students to engage in discussions with peers. The only
conversations recorded between students involved asking for an extra pen or pencil, or to show some part of
his/her notes for clarification, or giggles with playing (disinterested in the content of the lesson).
         In the EG classroom, the very nature of the lesson plan involved making groups of 2 or 3 students, who
worked   together on the  tablet. This inherently  made    the class collaborative.  In   addition, there  were many
episodes (similar to fig.5) where students naturally started interacting across groups. The nature of collaboration
was grounded in the tasks they were performing on the tablets. Collaboration is not necessarily an indicator of
an effective classroom, as there could be a lot of social and cognitive loafing (O'Donnell & O'Kelly, 1994),
which could   have  happened  in  the  EG classroom   as   well. However,    as  the students   were   involved in the
collaborative activity using the TFV-2, the teacher could monitor student progress, to start discussions.

     Figure 5. Students in EGs collaborating within their designated groups as well as beyond their groups.

Control on the flow of learning
In CG classrooms, most of the time was spent on the teacher delivering content in the lecturing mode. The
teacher thus had full control over the flow of knowledge and learning in the classroom. There was very little
scope for students to intervene in the flow and build their own knowledge. Further, the teacher decided when
students could  take notes, when   to  listen to him/her,  which   book was   to be  taken,  who    should respond  to
questions etc. This authority stance is central to the conventional classroom in developing countries, and this is
required to some extent for smooth classroom management. However, this power structure often makes students
intimidated, and they thus seldom interact with the teacher. Students tend to overcome this fear using chorus
responses. The teacher wielded further control by appreciating (saying words like very good, interesting) or
dismissing (ignoring or not attending to) student responses.
         EG students actively participated in the enaction process along with the teacher, and this transferred
agency to the students, who had more power in directing the flow of learning than in a normal classroom. This
was reflected in the free interactions among students, the change in the nature of teacher-student interactions,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    491                                                    © ISLS
and also students' emotional connections with the tasks. The students were active participants with the teacher,
and their interaction with  the content  was active and    meaningful   (see  fig.6) as can be  seen in the  nature of
gestures  used.  Based  on  these interactions,  along   with questions    and discussions   with   the teacher, they
controlled the flow of learning, and hence constructed their own knowledge. The teacher was no longer the sole
controller of the flow of knowledge. Students generated knowledge during their interactions with their peers
mediated by artfeacts like TFV-2, and knowledge flowed horizontally through collaborative work. Moreover, as
suggested by the teachers, if tasks could be designed for students to do at home (thus flipping the classroom),
the flow of learning could become even more student-centred.

Figure 6. Students in a CG taking notes in their notebooks (1,2) Students in EG interacting with the tablet (3,4)
                                   and taking note of it in the worksheet (5,6).

Other observations
The CG classrooms were very calm, and there were never any emotionally charged moments. In contrast, in the
EG classroom had a charged feel, and there were numerous moments of excitement and disappointment. There
were multiple instances where EG students asked for similar systems for other topics in the curriculum. Students
were very excited to see the tablets on the first day. By day 3 and 4, they started engaging with the TFV-2 in a
more serious way and were not just excited due to the presence of the tablet.

Teacher/Teaching practices
The introduction of the TFV-2 into the classrooms was not fully and easily embraced by the teachers, though
there  were  changes  that  indicated  possible  integration  eventually.   Here we     discuss some    of the central
differences (and lack of changes) captured in the video data. We start with a discussion of practice elements
resistant to change.

Resistant teacher practice
Three out of 5 EG teachers (T1,T2,T5) used the same diagram for teaching parallelogram law of vector addition,
where the angle is less acute, even though the vectors used in triangle law, shown simultaneously on the board,
were quite different (See fig.7). This drawing closely follows the textbook one and indicates the deep and subtle
influence of the textbooks, where the teachers are conditioned by the textbook representation to such an extent
that the diagrams seep into their practice without explicit awareness. While the TFV-2 has changed the way
teachers present the content (as discussed in later subsections), there were such subtle aspects that were still
driven by   the textbook representations.  We    present this result first to indicate  how  deeply    the textbook is
integrated into teaching practice. This conditioning by textbooks extended to the way content was presented. In
the EG classroom, where teachers had the possibility of widening the scope of discussions (like emphasizing
and discussing the patterns of changes in the algebraic expressions through geometric manipulations, or the
nature of the x and y components being interconnected by the circle). Such topics were not initiated by the
teacher, and the  scope  of the  class was still within  the  limits of the  topics  presented  in the textbook. This
reaffirms the conditioning role played by textbooks in setting classroom practices.

 Figure 7. Teachers making parallelograms very similar to the one given in their textbook (right) with almost
                         90°angle while teaching parallelogram law of vector addition.

         In the  CG   classroom,  the  teaching  narrative usually   took the form   of a lecture, where   the teacher
introduced the definition or the statement of a law, explained it using some examples, and then drew diagrams.
The teacher used some gestures to enact the diagram. The students took written notes based on these practice
elements. When some extra time was available before the end of the session, the teachers solved some numerical
problems. The flow of the lesson was very linear and monotonic. In the EG classroom, the narrative was similar
in the beginning (introduction to the definitions or statements, making diagrams). It then changed to describe the
tasks the students needed to do using the system. But once students started interacting with TFV-2, this was

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    492                                                    © ISLS
altered. Interestingly, there was a tendency for both CG and EG teachers to follow a set question and answer
template for discussion (especially when stating the definitions or the laws of additions), as this helps students in
standard assessment. In later discussions, T1, who has taught in an EG class, noted that despite the teachers
being given the flexibility to use new modes of teaching, there is a lot of emphasis on examination results and
time limitations. This emphasis comes from the way the education system in India is structured around exams,
which restricts the possible narratives in the classroom.

Practice elements that changed
A central change was the nature of teacher talk in EG classrooms, from mere description of static diagrams (like
one arrow and another arrow forming two sides of a triangle, and the third side being the resultant, in triangle
law of   vector addition), to a more    dynamic  enaction,  where    teachers described  the addition process. For
instance, the teacher used the gestures in the TFV-2 to explain the process of adding two vectors saying "now
you know how to take vectors, just bring this vector (2nd vector) and attach here (head of 1st vector), then you
will have to press your thumb (at the tail of 1st vector) and other finger here (head of 2nd vector), you will get
the resultant". Teachers in both CG and EG tended to use many gestures and bodily actions when explaining
content using diagrams. However, there were differences in the gestures used by CG and EG teachers. In CG,
teachers tended to use iconic gestures (like drawing an arrow in the air or using an opened palm to represent a
vector) which are linked to diagrams on the board. Some were metaphorical (Roth, 2001) gestures (such as hand
movements   to   show the  splitting of vectors  during resolution). In the   EG classroom,  teachers used similar
gestures as a CG teacher during lecturing. However, they also incorporated gestures used in the TFV-2. For
example, T4 and T3 used gestures influenced by the system when explaining triangle law of vector addition (see
quote above). These gestures signify a dynamatisation of the vector operations, based on interactions in TFV-2
.

  Figure 8. (Left) Teacher in CG using iconic gestures to show a vector, which is still a diagram. (Right) Teacher
                  in EG using a picking action, reflecting that the vector is a touchable entity.

         In the CG classroom, the teacher stayed near the blackboard (as seen in many figures). As the TFV-2
allowed all EG students to enact vector operations, the teacher did not need to demonstrate the enaction in the
class, and she thus had a lot of time available to move around in the class and engage in discussions with the
students. The role of the TFV-2 in generating this behaviour is clear from the contrasting behaviour of T3 (only
teacher  present in both   EG and    CG)  in the CG  and   EG  classrooms.    The discussions  involved  clarifying
conceptual doubts   and  questions.  This allowed  the    teacher to also get  real-time feedback  about students'
understanding of vector concepts, and initiate discussion with individual groups or the entire classroom.

    Figure 9. (Left and Center) Teachers engaging in discussion with student groups in EG. (Right) Teacher
   showing a group's work on the tablet to the entire classroom (a potential space for initiating a discussion).

           Figure 10. Teachers in CG calling students to the board to answer or solve some questions.

         Usually, teachers ask questions to check for understanding (Rosenshine, 1983), or when students are
not attentive. In the CG classroom, the monologue of the teacher was often interspersed by questions, where the
teacher explained a concept or a problem and asked one of the students to stand or come to the board and solve
or answer a similar problem (Fig.10). There were some such episodes in the CG classroom, where the teacher
called a student to perform   subtraction of  two vectors,  or derivation of  expression  of parallelogram law   by
simple substitution, or to solve a numerical problem similar to the one the teacher had just solved. Irrespective

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   493                                                  © ISLS
of the purpose of asking the question, they were close-ended questions with a unique answer.
          In contrast, in the EG classroom, the teacher spoke to the entire classroom only in the beginning. The
rest of the time was spent answering questions from students. The nature of the questions was open-ended (with
no single answer) and exploratory, following the exploratory nature of TFV tasks. Besides the above changes, a
few other episodes indicate significant changes in teacher thinking and practice, induced by the TFV-2.
          As teachers started discussing possible lesson plans during LPW, they immediately suggested that we
could design tasks for students to do at home (as they get more time to engage with the TFV-2) and then discuss
their findings and responses in the classroom next day, which was aking to flip-classrooms. After one of the
lessons, T3 said - "besides helping the students in visualising and understanding the concepts, it (TVF-2) has
clarified and made imagination easier for topics for me too". This shows how systems like TFV-2 could also
help  teachers  understand   complex    concepts   better, and  also   help develop    pedagogical  content  knowledge
(Shulman, 1986), particularly given the acute shortage of good teacher trainers and programs in the developing
world. The teachers highly appreciated the TFV-2 when it was first shown to them. As discussed, some of the
teachers were not comfortable using it in their teaching. However, after a few classes based on teaching using
the system, the teachers became more comfortable and confident. Teachers have repeatedly requested extensions
to the TFV-2, particularly to include 3D vectors, and also products of vectors, as well as waves. This is because
it is difficult to draw and explain these using the blackboard. A physics teacher who was not part of the study sat
through an entire classroom session, to see how the system was being used by students. Also, T5, who could not
be part of the LPW, and who taught only in the CG classroom, repeatedly requested deployment of the system in
the CG classroom. These indicate a shift to a motivation to use technology from an initial hesitation in teachers.

Discussion
The TFV-2 provides a new model to address the problem of augmenting science and mathematics teaching and
learning practices, particularly in the developing world. The focus on smoothly extending textbooks and related
practices, rather than replacing them, makes our approach different from other similar approaches to integrating
multiple external representations (Bodemer, Ploetzner, Feuerlein, & Spada, 2004), such as GeoGebra. Also, the
high  scaling  possibilities provided  by  the  teacher-driven  QR-based     augmentation    of  textbooks  offer a   new
approach  to  address  key   resource  limitations in  developing   world   classrooms,   in terms  of  both technology
access and training costs. The QR-based approach also provides a way for educational research institutions to
curate good    learning resources    (such   as  videos and    problem     banks), and   include  these periodically   as
annotations to current textbooks, without waiting for the lengthy and bureaucratic process of textbook revision.
          We could see a transformation of the classroom space for the students and situations and practices for
their  learning  emerged   in   them   smoothly.  Among      teachers, we   see they    could  adapt  the   technological
intervention  smoothly, but   the  changes   in their practices were   far  subtler, as we  see  indicators of them   still
anchored to textbooks. It is here, a key insight emerges about the central role textbooks play in directing teacher
practice, and how building on the textbook could lead to rapid changes in teaching practices, particularly in
terms of the way teachers direct/control the flow of knowledge in the classroom. The augmentation of textbooks
could also help in swiftly upgrading teacher thinking and pedagogical knowledge of science and mathematics
concepts, which is a critical issue in the developing world. Such an upgrade of pedagogical content knowledge
(Van Driel, Verloop, & de Vos, 1998) could be better facilitated by QR augmentations that support flipping the
classroom, as this feature would raise the number of potential questions from students, and in turn, motivate
teachers to come prepared to answer these questions.
          The  narrow  scope    of our vector   application, which   seeks  to just  seed   imagination of  geometry,  is
different from   most other   interactive systems  for  learning vectors    (such  as  PHeT),   which  are  scoped  more
widely. This scoping makes such systems unsuitable while trying to extend teachers' current textbook-based
practices, which tend to be very modular. The touchable and manipulable vector also potentially creates a new
and embodied way of understanding vectors and related concepts for learners, as has been argued in the case of
touchable  numbers    (Sinclair   & de  Freitas, 2014).    The  embodied    interaction  with  vectors  also makes    our
approach different from augmented reality approaches, which focus more on the visual component.
          More broadly, our mixed media design stance -- based on an integration of cognitive, practice, and
access factors   -- treats textbooks   as a  very  useful  resource    for advancing    technology-based    solutions for
education, particularly in the developing world. This approach seeks to create a bridge from current practice to
future practice, where  digital    platforms such  as  NetLogo   could  support    the  learning of cognitive  skills not
supported by textbooks, such as computational thinking (Dickes, Sengupta, Farris, & Basu, 2016).
          However,   we    take a  more careful  design    approach  towards   this  shift, analysing  the  positive  role
textbooks could play, through their ability to promote working memory based operations such as mental rotation
and modelling, particularly by limiting dynamic interaction. We believe this reflective stance, and the specific

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      494                                                     © ISLS
design  instantiation of  this stance   outlined   here provides  a way    to reevaluate  key  assumptions    underlying
educational technologies for learning science and mathematics.

References
Artigue,  M.  (2002).  Learning      Mathematics   in   a CAS   Environment:     The  Genesis    of a  Reflection about
         Instrumentation and the Dialectics between Technical and Conceptual Work. International Journal of
         Computers for Mathematical Learning, 7(3), 245.
Balacheff, N., & Kaput, J. J. (1996). Computer-Based Learning Environments in Mathematics. In International
         Handbook of Mathematics Education (pp. 469­501). Springer Netherlands.
Barniol, P., & Zavala, G. (2014). Test of understanding of vectors: A reliable multiple-choice vector concept
         test. Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research, 10(1), 010121.
Bingimlas, K. A. (2009). Barriers to the successful integration of ICT in teaching and learning environments: A
         review of the literature. Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 5(3).
Bodemer,  D.,   Ploetzner, R.,   Feuerlein,  I., & Spada,  H.   (2004). The   active integration of  information  during
         learning with dynamic and interactive visualisations. Learning and Instruction, 14(3), 325­341.
Dickes,  A.  C., Sengupta,   P., Farris,  A. V.,  & Basu,   S.  (2016). Development    of  Mechanistic  Reasoning   and
         Multilevel Explanations of Ecology in Third Grade Using Agent-Based Models. Science Education,
         100(4), 734­776.
Dorier, J.L., & Sierpinska, A. (2002). Research into the Teaching and Learning of Linear Algebra. In D. Holton,
         M. Artigue, U. Kirchgräber, J. Hillel, M. Niss, & A. Schoenfeld (Eds.), The Teaching and Learning of
         Mathematics at University Level: An ICMI Study (pp. 255­273). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
Hestenes, D.  (2010).  Modeling      Theory  for  Math  and  Science   Education. In  R.  Lesh,  P. L. Galbraith, C. R.
         Haines, & A. Hurford (Eds.), Modeling Students' Mathematical Modeling Competencies (pp. 13­41).
         Springer US.
Hillel, J. (2000). Modes of Description and the Problem of Representation in Linear Algebra. In J.-L. Dorier
         (Ed.), On the Teaching of Linear Algebra (pp. 191­207). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
Karnam,   D., Agrawal,    H.,  Mishra,   D., &   Chandrasekharan,   S.   (2016).  Interactive vectors  for model-based
         reasoning. In Chen, W. et al. (Eds.), TheWorkshop Proceedings of the 24th International Conference
         on Computers in Education,India: Asia-Pacific Society for Computers in Education, 401­406.
Karnam,   D.,   Agrawal,   H.,   &   Chandrasekharan,     S.   (2018).  "Touchy   Feely   Vectors"    changes  students'
         understanding and modes of reasoning. InYang, J. C. et al. (Eds.), The 26th International Conference
         on Computers in Education. Philippines: Asia-Pacific Society for Computers in Education.
Kim, M.,  Roth,   W.  M.,  &   Thom,   J. (2011).  Children's   gestures and  the embodied    knowledge    of geometry.
         Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 9(1).
Magnani, L., Nersessian, N., & Thagard, P. (2012). Model-based reasoning in scientific discovery. Springer
         Science & Business Media.
Nersessian,  N.  J.  (1999).   Model-Based       Reasoning  in  Conceptual    Change.  In Model-Based      Reasoning in
         Scientific Discovery (pp. 5­22). Springer US.
O'Donnell,   A.  M.,  &   O'Kelly,   J.  (1994).   Learning  from   peers: Beyond     the rhetoric  of positive  results.
         Educational Psychology Review, 6(4), 321­349.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas. NY, USA: Basic Books, Inc.
Papert, S. (1994). The children's machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. Basic books.
Rosenshine, B. (1983). Teaching functions in instructional programs. The Elementary School Journal, 83(4),
         335­351.
Roth, W. M. (2001). Gestures: Their Role in Teaching and Learning. Review of Educational Research, 71(3),
         365­392.
Shulman,  L.  S.  (1986).  Those   Who    Understand:     Knowledge    Growth  in Teaching.   Educational   Researcher,
         15(2), 4­14.
Sinclair, N., & de Freitas, E. (2014). The haptic nature of gesture: Rethinking gesture with new multitouch
         digital technologies. Gesture, 14(3), 351­374.
Uluyol, C., & Agca, R. K. (2012). Integrating mobile multimedia into textbooks: 2D barcodes. Computers &
         Education, 59(4), 1192­1198.
Van  Driel,  J.  H., Verloop,    N., &   de  Vos,  W.   (1998).  Developing    science teachers'    pedagogical  content
         knowledge. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(6), 673­695.
Yackel,  E., &   Cobb, P.  (1996).   Sociomathematical     Norms,   Argumentation,    and  Autonomy    in  Mathematics.
         Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27(4), 458­477.
Young, E. &. (2016). Future of Digital Content Consumption in India. EY.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       495                                                   © ISLS
