       The Lifespan and Impact of Students' Ideas Shared During
                                  Classroom Science Inquiry
                            Camillia Matuk, New York University, cmatuk@nyu.edu
                      Wanjing (Anya) Ma, University of Pennsylvania, wm821@nyu.edu
                        Garima Sharma, New York University, garimasharma@nyu.edu
                    Marcia C. Linn, University of California, Berkeley, mclinn@berkeley.edu

         Abstract: Sharing ideas can strengthen students' science explanations. Yet, how to guide uses
         of peers'  ideas, and   what the  impacts  of those   ideas  are on students'   learning, are  open
         questions. We   implemented   a  web-based    cell biology  unit  with 116   grade 7  students, and
         explored how peers' ideas are used during explanation building, and how prompts to draw on
         peers to either diversify or reinforce existing ideas impacted the quality of students' written
         explanations. Among other findings, exchanging ideas with peers led to all students improving
         their explanation quality upon revision; and students prompted to diversify their ideas showed
         greater learning gains by the end of the unit, while students prompted to reinforce ideas, who
         used more  peer-generated    ideas in preparation  to write  their explanations,   produced  higher
         quality explanations. This study builds our understanding of the influence of peer ideas on
         learning, and offers insight into supporting students in engaging effectively with peers' ideas.

The role of peer ideas in knowledge integration
Because scientific knowledge is socially constructed (Latour & Woolgar, 1979; Lemke, 1990), the ability for
science learners to engage productively with one another's ideas is critical to develop, as is their ability to refine
explanations and arguments in light of new ideas (NGSS Lead States, 2013; Kuhn, 2012). Nurturing a culture
around sharing and improving collective understanding can position students as creators, rather than just readers
of knowledge (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). However, research is mixed on the best ways to support students'
encounters with others' ideas (De Jonge, 2018). For example, one study documented how the ideas that middle
school students collected   during their  inquiry   investigations related  to  the quality of  their  later scientific
explanations. Specifically, students' tendencies to find ideas that reinforce, as opposed to diversify their existing
repertoire of ideas before writing an explanation, and their tendencies to self-generate those ideas rather than to
use peer-generated ideas, also resulted in them writing stronger scientific explanations (Matuk & Linn, 2018).
Another study suggests that diversifying rather than reinforcing ideas is a more successful strategy for students
of higher prior knowledge than it is for students of lower prior knowledge (Matuk & Linn, under review). These
findings begin to suggest how different ways of engaging with peers' ideas can support students' own thinking;
and for whom these ways may be more or less productive.
         Our  research  is guided  by  the  Knowledge    Integration  (KI)   framework   (Linn   &    Eylon, 2011),   a
perspective based in research in the learning sciences, and that views learners as constructing understanding by
distinguishing among various new and existing ideas. KI instruction supports learning by eliciting students'
existing ideas, assisting them in distinguishing these from newly encountered ideas, and organizing these into a
coherent understanding.    However,   the role of peers in   knowledge    integration is less  clear. Little work has
focused, for example, on the lifespan of shared ideas in a classroom. That is, when students share ideas, which
types of ideas are taken up and used throughout the course of students' inquiry? How do these shared ideas
support students in constructing sound explanations? Moreover, what strategies for using these ideas might be
more or less effective?
         This study extends prior research by exploring the kinds of ideas that students exchange during inquiry,
and ultimately incorporate into their explanations. It also explores the value of different strategies for using
peers' ideas on the quality of their explanations, and on their overall learning outcomes.

Research questions
We implemented a web-based science inquiry unit in a middle school classroom, which features a tool that
supports students in sharing ideas with classmates as they work toward constructing scientific explanations. Our
specific research questions are:
   1.    What  overall  impact   does the   unit have  on   students' conceptual    learning?  How    does   prompting
         students to seek similar vs. different ideas from peers impact their overall learning?
   2.    How  does  prompting    students  to  seek similar  vs. different  ideas from   peers impact  the   quality of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    49                                                     © ISLS
         students' explanations?
    3.   What is the trajectory of ideas across students' explanation building process? That is, how did students
         take up and incorporate their peers' shared ideas? Which kinds of ideas were more popular? How did
         peers' ideas impact the quality of students' explanations?

Methods

WISE and the Idea Manager
The Web-based      Inquiry Science  Environment,  or WISE    (wise.berkeley.edu) is a  free, open-source  platform
created  to design  and  deliver classroom-based  science   inquiry curriculum (Slotta &   Linn, 2009).   The Idea
Manager is a tool integrated into WISE to support students in collecting, distinguishing, and organizing their
ideas into coherent science explanations during their inquiry investigations (Matuk et al., 2016). Following the
KI framework, the Idea Manager offers a persistent space called the Private Idea Basket, within which students
can document their existing and new ideas in brief entries; sort and distinguish among these ideas using a visual
organizer   called the Explanation  Builder; and refer to their organized  ideas to integrate them   into a written
explanation  (Figure   1). Students can  choose  to  add  any of  their idea entries  to a   Public Basket,  which
anonymously lists all ideas shared by students in the same class. Students can select publicly shared ideas to
"copy" into their own Private Baskets. Thus, peer-generated ideas become available for use alongside students'
self-generated ideas.

    Figure 1. Foreground: An idea entry dialog box. Background: the Explanation Builder, in which students
    organize ideas, then refer to them to write an explanation (by clicking the "Ready to Explain" button).

The Mitosis unit
The unit, What makes a good cancer medicine?: Observing mitosis and cell processes (Mitosis), introduced
students  to the   process of cell division  and its relationship to  cancer and  cancer   treatment. Animations,
diagrams, and narrative explanations introduced students to the phases of normal cell division, and to the notion
that cancer is a disease in which cells have lost the mechanism that controls their division. An effective cancer
treatment must thus stop cancerous cells from dividing, but this does not occur without side effects.
         Students   then compared   the effectiveness  of three potential, plant-derived cancer  medicines.   They
viewed animations of dividing cells that were treated by each medicine, and noted their observations in their
Private Idea Baskets. Following this, they organized their ideas in the Explanation Builder to sort pros and cons
for each medicine, and then referred to these ideas to write an explanation for the medicine they recommended.
         Students were then asked to make public the ideas they used in their recommendations, and to select
public ideas from their peers to add to their own Idea Baskets. They then reorganized their previously and newly

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    50                                                  © ISLS
added ideas within the Explanation Builder and referred to these to revise their recommendations (Figure 2).

                          Figure 2. The Mitosis activity sequence and study design.

Participants and study design
Participants were 144  grade 7 students    across 5 class  periods of  one   teacher, from a  diverse public middle
school on the West coast of the United States. Students worked on the unit in pairs at their own pace during
class time for 10 consecutive school days. The teacher, who had 5+ years of experience teaching with WISE,
circulated to assist students, led occasional whole class discussions to address common conceptual challenges,
and offered guidance on upcoming unit activities. Collaboration occurred at different levels: First, by working
on  shared computers,  student partners   had to  come  to  consensus   through    discussion over their responses.
Second, the teacher regularly reminded students to document and share their ideas with others in class, such as
by pointing out good ideas during her conversations with partners, and encouraging them to add these to the
Public Basket.
        Students individually completed a pre and posttest on the first and last days of the study. One of the
three items on this pre/posttest addressed students' understanding of the order and importance of the phases of
cell division. A second item tested their ability to apply this understanding to reason about the action of an
effective cancer medicine. A third item asked students to select ideas from fictional peers that would help them
to write an explanation for the role of spindle fibers during cell division.
        To investigate the value of different strategies for using peers' ideas, students were divided into two
conditions. In the Reinforce condition (N=66 students, 36 workgroups), students were prompted to collect peer
ideas that were similar to their own ideas. In the Diversify condition (N=50 students, 27 workgroups), they were
prompted to collect peer ideas that differed from their own. We excluded from our analysis students who had
not completed the pre/posttest, nor submitted both initial and revised recommendations. The total number of
students in our dataset was therefore 116.

Data and analysis
Data consisted of each workgroup's individual ideas, including information on which ideas they kept private
and which they made public, which public ideas were copied by which workgroups, and which ideas were used
in students' Explanation Builders. We also collected students' initial and revised written recommendations and
their responses to the pre/posttest.
        To determine differences between conditions in the overall impact of the unit on students' learning
outcomes (RQ1), we scored students' pre and posttests based on previously developed KI rubrics, which give
credit to responses that integrate key ideas (Matuk & Linn, 2018). Two independent raters achieved high inter-
rater reliability across the three items (=0.91, 0.83 and 0.71). We summed scores across items to obtain a total
score for each student, and used a t-test to detect differences in mean total scores between conditions.
        To compare the effects on students' recommendations of prompts to seek peer ideas that differed and
that resembled their own (RQ2), we scored students' initial and revised recommendations. One rubric identified
the presence of Key Concepts (Table 1) and another rated the Argument Structure (Table 2), while the sum of
the scores   on these two criteria   produced an   overall  score  out of    10 of the  explanation's quality. Two
independent raters scored 20­30 student responses at a time, and resolved disagreements through discussion

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    51                                                   © ISLS
until inter-rater reliability had been achieved (Key Concepts =0.83; Argument Structure =0.96). We used t-
tests to detect   differences    in students'     gains on the  individual    Key  Concepts     and    Argument        Structure
dimensions, and on their overall explanation quality, between workgroups' initial and revised recommendations,
and between the Reinforce and Diversify conditions.

Table 1: Rubric for identifying Key Concepts in students' initial and revised recommendations

Key Concepts
·     Org: Identifies a cell organelle to be affected by the medicine (e.g., chromosomes, spindle fibers).
·     Process: Explains the manner by which the medicine will disrupt the organelle's function (e.g., will prevent
      chromosomes from dividing).
·     Need: Mentions that the medicine must stop cell division/cancer growth in order to treat cancer.
Score  Criteria                   Examples
 0/1   No Answer/Offtask or       (Blank)/I don't know.
       uninterpretable
 2     Irrelevant, incorrect or   We think plant A will work the best because it kills off the cell without leaving with empty
       ambiguous                  cells that clog the body which is what cancer does as well.
 3     Any ONE of the three       I think that the best cancer medicine is plant A, because it will stop the cell from
       key ideas is correctly     undergoing mitosis [Need]. It will stop the the [sic] cell from ever doing mitosis, but the
       explained.                 cell might still be able to survive.
 4     Any TWO of the three       We will recommend plant A because it stopped the spindle fibers [Org] from working
       key ideas are correctly    before a new cell was created therefore it stopped mitosis [Need].
       explained.
 5     All THREE key ideas        Plant A because it is the most effective at stopping mitosis [Need]. The pros to this plant is
       are correctly explained.   that the spindle fibers [Org] don't go all the way so mitosis isn't complete. So if the spindle
                                  fibers don't go all the way [Fxn/Process] through then the chromosomes [Org] won't line
                                  up [Process]. The cons are that their will be side effects from the medicine.

Table 2: Rubric for evaluating the Argument Structure of students' initial and revised recommendations

Score  Criteria                                      Examples
 0/1   No Answer/Offtask or uninterpretable          (Blank)/I don't know.
 2     Claims stated with no supporting evidence.    I think Plant A is most effective.
 3     Interpretation given that includes a claim    we think that the most effective cancer medicine is plant A due to the
       supported by evidence, which may or may       fact that it stopped the spindle fibers from growing and the spindle
       not properly align. No counter-arguments      fibers will not grow to redirect the chromosomes [supported
       are given.                                    interpretation]
 4     Interpretation given that includes a claim    Plant A because it is the most effective at stopping mitosis [supported
       aligned with supporting evidence. Offers      interpretation]. The pros to this plant is that the spindle fibers don't go
       unelaborated counter-arguments (e.g.          all the way so mitosis isn't complete. So if the spindle fibers don't go all
       pros/cons, side effects, comparison to        the way through then the chromosomes won't line up. The cons are that
       alternatives).                                their will be side effects from the medicine [unelaborated
                                                     counterargument].
 5     Interpretation given that includes a claim    We think that medicine A is the best because it stops the cell from
       aligned with supporting evidence. Offers at   dividing, which would work the best [valid interpretation]. Medicine B
       least one elaborated counter-argument (e.g.   only destroys the second pair of chromosomes, which means when the
       pros/cons, side effects, or comparison).      medicine wears off, the cell can split again. Medicine C only destroys
                                                     the cells' membranes which means that the cells might still be able to
                                                     split [elaborated counterargument].

         To track the trajectory of ideas (RQ3), we gave each idea a unique "private idea ID" that indicated the
workgroup that had generated it; and each copied idea a unique "copied idea ID" that indicated the workgroup
that copied it. These IDs allowed us to identify the trajectory of each idea from its origin, to its sharing in the
Public Basket, and to its use in an Explanation Builder step. Finally, we used these IDs to note which ideas were

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        52                                                           © ISLS
present  in students' written     recommendations.  We  used         t-tests  to detect significant differences   in students'
engagement     with ideas  across  the unit. We  also tested       how   the  proportion  of peer-  vs.  self-generated ideas
impacted the quality of students' revised recommendations.
          Because students were collecting ideas to construct arguments for the medicines they recommended,
we characterized    the  ideas  in  terms of  three main  components             of an argument: Claim,   Observation,         and
Interpretation  (Table  3).   These categories  are based         on theories    of argument  structure, which   describe      the
function of argument to be in creating links between claims and evidence (Burleson, 1979; Kneupper, 1979;
Toulmin, 2003). Two independent raters scored 20 ideas at a time until they had achieved Cohen's kappa values
of 0.83, 0.90, and 0.83 on Claim, Observation, and Interpretation, respectively. One coder then categorized the
rest of the ideas. We excluded from our analyses nine of the ideas that were irrelevant to the task of constructing
a recommendation (e.g., "Three plant idea").
          We determined the relative popularity of ideas by the number of times these were copied by other
workgroups. We then used an ANOVA to uncover associations between the kinds of ideas and their popularity.

Table 3: Scoring rubrics for distinguishing ideas as Claim, Observation, and Interpretation

Type           Description                                                    Example
Claim          Declarative, factual statements not supported by evidence      Cancer is the overgrowth of cells. It can travel
               from the unit.                                                 down the body in the blood stream.
Observation    Descriptions, without accompanying inferences, of              The treated cell's spindle fibers stopped. They
               information from the unit (e.g., of animations).               didn't grab the chromosomes. They're also green.
Interpretation Causal/explanatory statements or inferences that integrate     The mitosis is not prevented but slowed down
               ideas that are not otherwise explicit in the unit.             because the daughter cells wont be able to divide.

Findings

RQ1: How did the unit impact students' learning overall?
The unit as a whole appeared to positively impact students' conceptual learning. All students showed significant
gains   between  the pre   and posttest (N=116;  M=3.16;          SD=2.27;    t(115)=15.00,  p<.001,  d=1.63).    Prompts      for
students to use peers' ideas to diversify their own ideas seemed to be particularly beneficial, as students in the
Diversify condition (N=50; M=3.74; SD=2.26) showed significantly greater gains than students in the Reinforce
condition (N=66, M=2.73, SD=2.20), t(114)=-2.43, p=.017, d=.45).

RQ2: How did exchanging ideas impact students' written explanations?
Students' overall recommendations improved significantly upon revision following their exchange of ideas with
their peers (M=1.14; SD=1.80; t(62)=5.05, p<.001, d=.75). In both conditions, students' final recommendations
reflected more   key  concepts    (M=0.57,   SD=1.04,  t(62)=4.35,        p<.001,     d=.58) and better  argument    structure
(M=0.57;    SD=0.14;  t(62)=4.11,   p<.001,  d=.65)  than their       initial recommendations.   There    was    no significant
difference in the overall explanation quality between the Reinforce condition (M=8.94, SD=1.59, N=36) and the
Diversify condition (M=8.78, SD=1.37, N=27), t(61)=0.438, p=.663, d=.108. There were also no significant
differences in gains between the Key Concepts and Argument Structure criteria within nor between conditions.
These findings suggest that exchanging ideas generally had a positive impact on students' revisions, regardless
of the manner by which students were prompted use their peers' ideas.

RQ3: What was the trajectory of ideas across the unit?

How did students take up and incorporate their peers' ideas into their explanations?
To understand the overall trajectory of self- and peer-generated ideas, we graphed the average number of ideas
at six time points (Figure 3). These included the ideas before and leading up to the initial recommendation,
specifically, the ideas (1) generated in students' Private Baskets (Reinforce, M=7.33; Diversify, M=8.66); (2)
organized in the Explanation Builder (Reinforce, M=5.02; Diversify, M=5.22); and (3) incorporated into the
initial written recommendations      (Reinforce, M=2.22;          Diversify,  M=2.55).   Following   students'   exchange       of
ideas with their peers, we tracked (4) the copied ideas that students added to their Private Baskets (Reinforce,
M=3.86; Diversify, M=3.33); as well as the additional private ideas generated at this point (Reinforce, M=7.58;
Diversify,  M=8.99);    (5)   the private ideas re-organized         in their Explanation    Builders   (Reinforce,  M=4.61;
Diversify, M=4.88); and the copied ideas organized alongside them (Reinforce, M=2.08; Diversify, M=2.33).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      53                                                           © ISLS
Finally, we  noted  (6) which   self-generated   ideas (Reinforce, M=3.16;     Diversify, M=3), and  which    peer-
generated   ideas  students incorporated  into their  revised recommendations    (Reinforce,  M=1.69;  Diversify,
M=1.18).

         Figure 3. Trajectory of ideas generated by students (N=63 workgroups) across both conditions.
                                           (EB=Explanation Builder)

         Figure 3 shows that across conditions, students generated more ideas (M=7.9) than they organized in
their Explanation Builders (M=5.11), and used in their initial recommendations (M=2.38). This same pattern is
seen in students' uses of their peers' ideas. Specifically, students copied more of their peers' ideas (M=3.77)
than  they  organized    in  their  Explanation   Builders    (M=2.19),    and  incorporated  into  their  revised
recommendations (M=1.47). Notably, students also generated more (M=8.18), and incorporated more of their
own  ideas, as opposed   to  their peers' ideas, into  their revised recommendations      (M=3.09) following  their
exchange with their peers.
         Compared to students' uses of ideas leading up to their initial recommendations, students added more
ideas to their Private Baskets (N=63; M=4.06; SD=3.33; t(62)=6.70, p<.001, d=.88), organized more ideas in
their Explanation Builders (N=63; M= 1.81; SD=1.87; t(62)=7.70, p<.001, d=.72), and incorporated more ideas
into their  final recommendations    (N=63;  M=2.21;    SD=0.25;   t(62)=8.68;  p<.001,   d=1.01)  following  their
exchange of ideas with peers. Students also used significantly more self-generated than peer-generated ideas in
their revised Explanation Builders (N=63; M=2.54; SD=2.75; t(62)=7.43, p<.001, d=1.29) as well as in their
revised recommendations (N=63; M=1.62; SD=2.22; t(62)=5.80, p<.001, d=0.99) compared to the steps leading
up to their initial recommendations.
         These patterns suggest that students were discerning in the ideas they chose to incorporate into their
explanations, a finding that supports the knowledge integration process of distinguishing and sorting among
ideas to find the most relevant ones. They also suggest that students used their peers' ideas to complement,
rather than to supplant, their own ideas, which attests to the success of the Idea Manager in enabling students to
draw upon their peers as supports, rather than being reliant upon them in building explanations.

Which ideas were most popular?
Across both conditions, Observations was the most frequently generated kind of idea (73% Reinforce; 63%
Diversify), followed  by Interpretations  (15%   Reinforce;   28%  Diversify)  then Claims  (12%   Reinforce; 18%
Diversify). Observations was also the most highly copied kind of idea (Reinforce, M=2.08; Diversify, M=1.93),
and  significantly more  so  than  either Interpretations    (Reinforce, M=2.00;  Diversify,  M=1.18)  or  Claims
(Reinforce, M=0.50; Diversify, M=0.59), (F(2,186)=3.99; p=.020) (Figure 4).
         It may be that students found observations to be the most persuasive, and Claims to be the least robust
kinds of peer ideas. For example, the most popular Claim across our dataset, copied just 4 times, was "there
would be only half as many cells." This idea, which refers to the effect of one of the three medicines on cell
division, offers neither supporting evidence, nor an explanation of the consequences of having "half as many
cells." Students may thus have regarded it as being of little use for strengthening their own explanations. In
contrast, students may have viewed Interpretations, particularly from their peers, to not be as trustworthy as a
teacher's explanation, for example. For instance, the most popular Interpretation, copied 8 times, was "Plant A
is good because it stops mitosis before it reaches anaphase." This idea offers an explanation, albeit a limited
one, for why Plant A is the favored medicine. However, it also offers little detailed evidence, such that students

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    54                                                  © ISLS
might be required to trust it at face value. Meanwhile, students may have found observations to be most easily
grasped because they could verify these themselves by examining evidence in the unit. For example, the most
popular Observation, copied 21 times, was "the plant chemicals don't stop the division of the cell. the chemicals
get rid  of the copy   of the  chromosome    so   the daughter   cell has no chromosomes."     This   idea articulates
observable  events  from  the  animations,   which   may  either offer students   new  language to  rearticulate their
existing observations, or highlight details that they might have initially overlooked.

 Figure 4. Totals of each kind of idea shared within the Public Idea Manager, and the proportion of ideas that
                          were copied vs. not copied by students across both conditions.

How did peers' ideas impact the quality of students' explanations?
Students in the Reinforce condition who organized a greater proportion of peer- vs. self-generated ideas in the
Explanation Builder tended to produce higher quality recommendations, that is, recommendations with scores of
9 or more out of 10, t(35)=-2.18, p=.036, d=.78. For students in the Diversify condition, however, the relative
proportion of peer- vs. self-generated ideas did not have a significant impact on the quality of their explanations
(t(26)=1.00, p=.327, d=.38). This finding suggests a benefit of organizing peer ideas that reinforced students'
existing ideas.
         However, there was no relationship between the proportion of self-generated and peer-generated ideas
used  in students'  recommendations   and    the quality  of  those recommendations.   This  suggests    that students'
improved recommendations were not simply because of access to their peers' ideas, but more likely because of
the effort they put into integrating their own and their peers' ideas into their explanations.
Figure 5 shows two examples of how students in each condition used their peers' ideas to improve their
recommendations. In both cases, peers' ideas helped to elaborate recommendations with evidence and to
strengthen arguments with counter-arguments.

      Figure 5. Examples of students' self-generated ideas, ideas chosen from peers, and initial and revised
                    recommendations. (Left: Workgroup 119924; Right: Workgroup 119945)

Discussion and significance
Whereas   the unit  benefited  all students' learning  overall,  students prompted  to   diversify their ideas  gained
significantly more. Meanwhile, students prompted to reinforce ideas, and who relied more so on peer-generated
ideas than on self-generated ideas, produced higher quality in-unit explanations. These findings resonate with
prior mixed   research on  the relative value    of diversifying vs.  reinforcing ideas. For example,    encountering
diverse ideas can improve conceptual learning (e.g., Asterhan & Schwarz, 2009; Matuk & Linn, 2018). At the
same time, encountering one's own ideas rearticulated by others can prompt students to revise and improve their
own   ideas (e.g., Matuk  & Linn,   2008;  Edge,    2006; Hayes,  2004).  Other   work suggests  that the  benefits of
reinforcing and diversifying ideas may differ for students with high vs. low prior knowledge (e.g., Matuk &

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      55                                                    © ISLS
Linn, under  review). Findings    from  this study  suggest   that in addition to  different students benefiting  from
different prompts, students may also benefit at different times while building explanations.
         Continued analyses might investigate whether there were pre-existing differences between conditions
(e.g., prior knowledge) that would offer alternative explanations for our findings, and also whether students
actually followed prompts to choose either diversifying or reinforcing ideas. Further research might explore how
different students (e.g., high vs. low prior knowledge) benefit from different prompts to use their peers' ideas;
and how   various   strategies (e.g., collecting  mostly interpretations  vs.  observations)   impact their success  in
explanation building.
         Visualizing the trajectory of peers' ideas throughout the unit offered insights into the kinds of ideas that
students  were more   or less  likely  to  copy.  Importantly,  prompts   to diversify or   to reinforce ideas  had  no
apparent  effect  on the ways     that students   used  ideas  throughout    their inquiry.  Continued   analyses  will
investigate how the kinds of ideas generated, organized, and used, impact the quality of students' explanations.
Future research might also explore other ways to characterize ideas besides in terms of the components of the
argument. For instance, we might explore which science concepts are more or less challenging for students to
identify at different stages of explanation (cf. McElhaney et al., 2012). Finally, we might examine the role of the
teacher in conjunction with technology, in supporting students' productive interactions with peers.
         In all, exchanging ideas with peers appeared to positively impact both students' written explanations
and their overall learning outcomes. This study adds nuance to the literature on learning from peers. It moreover
has implications for technology-rich knowledge sharing supports in classroom-based science inquiry.

References
Asterhan, C.S.C. & Schwarz, B.B. (2009). Argumentation and explanation in conceptual change: Indications
         from protocol analyses of peer-to-peer dialog. Cognitive Science, 33, 374-400.
Burleson, B. R. (1979). On the foundations of rationality: Toulmin, Habermas, and the a priori of reason. The
         Journal of the American Forensic Association, 16(2), 112-127.
De  Jonge,  K. M.,   Rietzschel,   E.  F., &   Van  Yperen,   N.   W. (2018).  Stimulated    by novelty?  The   role of
         psychological needs and perceived creativity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin.
Edge,  J.   (2006).  Computer-mediated       cooperative   development:      Non-judgemental     discourse  in   online
         environments. Language Teaching Research, 10(2), 205-227.
Hayes J.R. (2004) What Triggers Revision?. In: Allal L., Chanquoy L., Largy P. (eds), Revision Cognitive and
         Instructional Processes. Studies in Writing, Vol 13. Springer, Dordrecht
Kneupper,   C. W.   (1979).  Paradigms     and problems:   Alternative  constructivist/interactionist implications   for
         argumentation theory. The Journal of the American Forensic Association, 15(4), 220-227.
Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory life: The social construction of scientific facts. Beverly Hills:
         Sage.
Lemke,   J. L. (1990).   Talking   science:  Language,   learning,    and values.  Norwood,     NJ: Ablex   Publishing
         Corporation.
Linn, M.  C.,  &  Eylon, B.    S. (2011).  Science  learning  and  instruction: Taking  advantage     of technology  to
         promote knowledge integration. New York: Routledge.
Matuk,   C. &  Linn, M.  C.    (2018). Why   and  how   do middle   school   students exchange   ideas   during science
         inquiry? International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 13(3), 263-299.
Matuk, C.,  McElhaney,   K.,   King   Chen,  J., Lim-Breitbart,  Kirkpatrick,  D.  &  Linn,  M. C.  (2016). Iteratively
         refining a  science   explanation  tool through classroom    implementation   and   stakeholder  partnerships.
         International Journal of Designs for Learning, 7(2), 93-110. DOI: 10.14434/ijdl.v7i2.20203
McElhaney, K., Miller, D., Matuk, C., & Linn, M. C. (2012). Using the Idea Manager to promote coherent
         understanding of inquiry investigations. In ICLS'12: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference
         for the Learning Sciences, (Vol. 1, pp. 323-330). Sydney: Intl Society of the Learning Sciences.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, and
         technology.  Cambridge       Handbook   of the  Learning   Sciences,  pp.  397-417.   Cambridge:   Cambridge
         University Press.
Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE science: Web-based inquiry in the classroom. New York: Teachers
         College Press.
Toulmin, S. E. (2003). The uses of argument. Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgments
We thank the students and teachers who participated in our study. We also acknowledge funding from the
National Science Foundation (Award No. 1119670) and from New York University.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      56                                                    © ISLS
