The Effectiveness of Publicly vs. Privately Assigned Group Leaders
                   Among Learners in Rural Villages in Tanzania
          Judith Uchidiuno, Evelyn Yarzebinski, Emilio Vargas-Vite, Ken Koedinger, and Amy Ogan
    jio@andrew.cmu.edu, eey2@andrew.cmu.edu, evargasv@andrew.cmu.edu, koedinger@andrew.cmu.edu,
                                                aeo@andrew.cmu.edu
                                            Carnegie Mellon University

         Abstract: Research studies show that teachers increase the success of education technologies
         in rural settings by supporting students via technology support, domain-relevant explanations,
         enforcing  discipline, and maintaining     student  engagement.    However,    a  teacher's    presence
         hinders student collaboration in some cultural contexts, and some students may not have a
         teacher or knowledgeable adult who can provide this support. We conducted an experiment
         with K-1 students (N=36) in a rural Tanzanian village, where we trained students to provide
         technology   support for  their peers  under  different experimental    conditions.    We  found  that
         with basic technical training and social awareness of the assigned leaders, students can indeed
         provide peer support in the absence of a teacher, and additionally enable collaboration. We
         challenge  the  popularly held    notion that natural leaders   will emerge   and  support     students'
         technology and learning needs without adequate training, and discuss the implications of our
         findings in the deployment of technologies in similar socio-cultural contexts.

Introduction
The number of out-of-school children in rural and urban regions of Sub-Saharan Africa is increasing at rates that
traditional schooling infrastructures cannot accommodate. Current estimates by UNESCO report that there are
over 63 million out-of-school children, with over 50% of those children living in Sub-Saharan Africa (1). Those
estimates have been increasing over the last few years despite government commitments to address the issue. Of
the children enrolled   in school,  less   than   20%  score  above minimum      proficiency     on  math    and  reading
assessments  (2).  Popular initiatives  to address  this challenge  involve   deploying    educational   technologies  to
students in and out of schools, particularly as hiring the large quantity of necessary qualified teachers is difficult
(Buchele & Owusu-Aning, 2007). However, such wide-scale initiatives have mostly been unsuccessful due to a
lack of understanding of the local context of the end users, as well as a lack of technical infrastructure and
support for these initiatives (Therias, Bird, & Marshall, 2015; Warschauer & Ames, 2010).
         Despite  the failure of these   large-scale,  one-size-fits-all initiatives, several   studies have shown   that
when deployed using a bottom-up approach, where the social, cultural, and infrastructural needs of the end users
are prioritized, educational technologies can indeed lead to positive learning gains (Hollow & Masperi, 2009;
Therias et al., 2015).  These   studies  emphasize  that  providing support    for    students, including  technical and
domain knowledge support, is critical to the success of education technologies in under-resourced communities.
Other types of support needed by students include help navigating learning applications, scaffolding their lack
of basic digital literacy, and maintaining engagement while learning with technology (Uchidiuno et al., 2018).
         A  number    of these   large-scale  education   technology     initiatives  have been    developed   with   the
expectation that natural leaders will emerge among peers and provide this much needed support, without the
need for a knowledgeable adult (Mitra et al., 2005; Papert, 2006). Some prior CSCL research has investigated
the emergence of leaders among collaborating groups (Sun, Jackson, Burns, & Anderson, 2017), including peer-
nomination and self-perceived leadership qualities (Xie, Sun, & Lu, 2015). In our study, we observed groups of
K-1 students in a rural village in Tanzania using an Android tablet-based literacy and numeracy curriculum
without the support of a teacher. As our own recent work has indicated that emergent leadership is rare in this
context, in this study we build on prior work by exploring the effects of assigning leaders within a group of
learners, under two conditions that differentially bestow authority on these leaders: a publicly assigned group
leader; and a privately assigned group leader (in which the leader is assigned, but not publicized to the rest of
the group). Based on scores from an administered pretest, we trained selected leaders on how to navigate the
tablet application and  perform  basic   troubleshooting.  We  investigate    students' help-seeking     and help-giving
behaviors in these different conditions and provide insights on how to better foster peer support for educational
technology in the absence of a teacher or knowledgeable adult.

Literature review

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     504                                                       © ISLS
The  classroom    is an   organized   system   of   social  interactions with   institutional and   socio-cultural norms
influencing students and teachers behaviors (Ädel, 2011). These norms influence help-seeking and help-giving
behaviors, and may affect the efficacy of educational interventions if unaccounted for. For example, in certain
contexts,  teachers  encourage    children  to collaborate     freely with  one  another   (Halloluwa, Vyas,   Usoof,  &
Hewagamage, 2018; Mann, Hinrichs, Read, & Quigley, 2016), while in others, collaboration in the presence of
a teacher  is regarded  as cheating   (Uchidiuno    et al., 2018).    Peers have been found    to support each   other by
engaging in discourse that can bring about positive learning gains, including "modelling, assisting, directing,
tutoring, negotiating,  affirming,  and  contradicting  each    other"  (Stone  &  Christie,  1996). Without  training in
meaningful help-giving behaviors, students are likely to provide just the answers to their peers' questions rather
than elaborated, domain knowledge explanations (Roscoe & Chi, 2008). The quality of this discourse depends
on students' prior knowledge and self-efficacy, as well as their personal relationships with one another (Parr &
Townsend, 2002).     Prior studies also provide evidence that the quality of help peers provide for one another
depends on the closeness of their friendships (Graesser & Person, 1994; Webb & Mastergeorge, 2003).
          The  support    that students  offer  one    another   becomes     even  more    important  when   educational
technologies are deployed in unsupervised settings, where children have to rely on each other to navigate and
learn from such systems. Some research studies have reported positive outcomes from such scenarios, reporting
an increase in student curiosity (Mitra & Dangwal, 2010), and even marginal learning gains (Breazeal, Morris,
Gottwald, Galyean, & Wolf, 2016), but do not provide any insights on the social interactions that lead to such
outcomes. For instance, Kumar et al. provide rich insights from conducting an unsupervised learning research
study using a mobile phone in rural parts of India (Kumar et al., 2010). They found that beyond infrastructural
issues  such  as inconsistent  electricity, factors  such   as gender,   caste, and time   of day  significantly affected
mobile usage of learning content. Children learned on average three new words per week for 9 weeks. The
authors report that children learned to support their peers from watching the experimenters navigate the devices
but provide few details on how this transfer of knowledge occurred.
          While these studies expected (and in some cases did observe) natural leaders to emerge amongst the
group, other research studies have provided insights on how peers interact when they are explicitly assigned to
offer support in learning contexts. Fantuzzo et al. examined the efficacy of reciprocal tutoring, where students
take turns providing support for their peers, and fixed-role tutor assignments (Fantuzzo, King, & Heller, 1992).
Reciprocal tutoring was found to have more benefits over fixed-role assignments, however, is impractical for
contexts such as our target demographic where most students are learning using a technology medium that is
foreign to them. Group leaders tend to provide domain knowledge support in primarily two ways - providing
answers only or stating facts (knowledge-telling) and giving reflective and elaborated explanations (knowledge-
building). These  types   of  support  differ not only  in  the quality  of  feedback a  help-seeker   receives, but also
benefit the   help-giver  differently  - peer-tutors   who     provide  knowledge-building     support score  higher   on
posttests as they organize their knowledge and monitor their understanding better (Roscoe & Chi, 2007). When
students are not trained to provide constructive and knowledge-building feedback to their peers, they may likely
provide knowledge-telling feedback, but studies show that deeper questions from help-seekers can elicit more
elaborate, knowledge-building responses (Duran & Monereo, 2005).
          Research such as (Kumar et al., 2010) has provided limited evidence that when children are equipped
with technical skills, they can naturally emerge as leaders and provide support for their peers, without having an
official assignment as a group leader. Other studies show that behaviors differ when leaders are assigned rather
than emergent (Wickham & Walther, 2009) We investigate whether this finding applies in a different cultural
context by equipping children with basic technical knowledge, and asking them to support groups where they
are officially   assigned  as  the group    leader. We     deployed   an Android    tablet-based  learning   system  with
unsupervised   groups  consisting   of a child  with   domain    knowledge    and  technical  competency,    their closest
friends, and randomly assigned peers. We vary the experiment conditions by publicly assigning a leader in some
groups, and not in others. We use these observations to answer the following research questions:
          To what extent do knowledgeable children take on the role of a leader within a group of learners, when
          either privately or publicly assigned the authority to do so?
          What   kinds of  support  (knowledge-telling      vs knowledge-building)    do   assigned  leaders offer across
          social factors such as gender and close friendships in this cultural context?

Methodology
This study   was  conducted    in partnership  with  a Swahili-speaking,     rural village in a Northwestern   region  of
Tanzania. Members of our research team have conducted research in the region over the last three years. The
village was limited in physical and technical infrastructure with inadequate power or clean water. Three mobile

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       505                                                     © ISLS
network providers serviced the village. Throughout our stay (and in previous visits), we observed families with
mostly  feature phones   without  internet  connectivity,    however,  a   few school    teachers  owned    basic Android
smartphones. We did not observe any tablets in the village homes, schools, or public settings throughout our
stay. Consent   (in  Swahili)   and    approvals  were    obtained    from   students,   parents/guardians,   the  school
administration, and the village council with help from a native Swahili speaker.
         The Swahili    learning  application   focused    on  the   following  areas:   literacy  (letter and  phonemic
awareness, writing, stories curated from the African Storybook Project - http://www.africanstorybook.org/), and
math  (number   identification, number     writing, addition   and  subtraction).  Most   system   interactions   involved
tapping on the screen, although some require tracing, writing, or speaking to engage, with a speech recognition
engine  validated in various   African  contexts  (Mills-Tettey    et al., 2009),  and  video  tutorials with  continuous
finger placement scaffolds to support children's' digital literacy . The Swahili audio prompts and instruction
were recorded by a Kenyan Professor of Swahili, who has taught Swahili from kindergarten to university levels.
The Swahili video application tutorials were recorded by a Tanzanian instructor of Swahili, who grew up in a
region about 10 hours away from the village where the study was conducted. All communications with the
children were translated by a native Swahili speaker who lived in the same village and was well-known to the
children. More details about the learning application can be found in (Uchidiuno et al., 2018).
         To ensure that we observed a sufficiently broad sample across experimental conditions, we structured
our observations into 24 discrete sessions during which six groups of six children each engaged with the tablet
software. Each observation lasted about 1 hour. In these sessions we observed a total of 36 unique children; this
included 18 girls and 18 boys from grades K-1, ages 5 to 10 depending on year of entering school. Before the
sessions began,   we gave  all  the children a  paper    pre-test covering  letter and   number    recognition, letter and
number   writing, simple  word  problems,    and  listening   comprehension.   These     pre-tests were  administered   by
Swahili speakers who read the questions one by one to each child, and recorded their responses. We noted down
the students who scored the highest, and distributed them equally among the groups. Following the pretest, we
ran a baseline session with each group, allowing students' natural interaction patterns to emerge. We selected
six children who performed well on the pre-test and quickly learned to navigate the tablet application without
adult assistance. We   selected the  highest-scoring     children as  leaders just in   case their peers   needed  domain
knowledge   support  in  addition   to technical  support,   and  assigned    them   as  leaders   for each group   in  the
experiment scenarios. We started forming the groups by asking each leader to select two of their best friends
from the class - each group was comprised of a leader, the leader's selection of their two best friends, and a
random   assignment  of  three  other  children  from    the class, balancing  each   group   by   gender.  After forming
groups, we informed the leaders privately that they performed the best in the pre-test and with navigating the
system, and were now responsible for supporting their group. We conducted a training session with all six group
leaders to reinforce practices  of  navigating  each  application     without assistance, as  well  as   performing basic
troubleshooting tasks e.g. helping a peer return to the learning application if they exit accidentally. After the
training, all leaders could navigate the tablet and application without assistance.

Table 1: Group Information with Summary of Pre-Test Scores, the leader's Score, and Experiment Condition

  Group #   Age Range     Score Mean     Score SD    Score Range      Leader's Score     Leader Condition
  1         5-10          34%            23%         8-72%            72%                Privately Assigned Leader
  2         5-7           46%            14%         42-60%           60%                Privately Assigned Leader
  3         5-7           46%            12%         32-62%           62%                Privately Assigned Leader
  4         6-9           72%            14%         52 - 90%         90%                Publicly Assigned Leader
  5         6-8           79%            11%         65-93%           90%                Publicly Assigned Leader
  6         6-8           71%            13%         55-88%           88%                Publicly Assigned Leader

         Before the start of the sessions, we reminded the leader of their job to help their peers, as no adults
would be around. For 3 groups, we shared this privately with the leader so other group members did not know
the group  had  a leader  (privately   assigned leader   condition),  however,  in   the other 3   groups,  we  made   this
announcement    publicly, informing    the group    that the leader   would   answer  all questions    they had   (publicly
assigned leader condition). All groups completed 4 sessions each - 1 initial baseline session without a leader
assigned and 3 sessions with an assigned leader. Following the baseline, we conducted two periods of classroom
observation to  better contextualize   each  leader's natural  peer   interactions.  leaders  are  summarized     below as
"L#"; the number corresponds with their group:
         L1: 6 y/o girl - Quiet. Answers all questions correctly, does not interact much with her peers.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      506                                                      © ISLS
          L2: 7 y/o boy - Energetic, sometimes disruptive. Tries to answer all questions asked by teacher before
          others can, so the teacher sits him in the back, and never calls on him to answer questions. Once when
          the teacher left, he ran to the front and pretended to teach the classroom.
          L3: 6 y/o girl - Usually answers correctly when called on. Observed mouthing an answer to a boy
          called to answer question when he did not know the answer. Usually sits with her friends in the front,
          who all wait for her to write an answer on a worksheet, and then then copy her for in-class activities.
          L4: 9 y/o boy - Quiet in class. Does not speak except when directly asked a question, does not disrupt.
          L5: 8 y/o girl - Quiet but engages in occasional banter with friends even when the teacher is present.
          L6: 7 y/o girl - Quiet but also engages in occasional banter with her friends.
          No researcher or adult was present in the room with the students during the study sessions. Instead,
these unsupervised sessions were video recorded from multiple angles to capture natural student interactions.
The   team  analyzed   the  data from    all group    sessions,    recording  qualitative observations    of the  student
interactions with the tablet and each other. Next, the team reviewed the videos, notes, and observation logs and
identified emergent   themes  related to  the types   of help-seeking     and help-giving   behaviors   surrounding each
group leader following a grounded theory approach (Corbin & Strauss, 2008). Six themes of student behaviors
emerged: 1) student distracting the group, 2) leader addresses student distraction, 3) student asks leader for help,
4) student asks leader to help a peer, 5) student (not leader) helps another non-adjacent student, and 6) leader
helps a non-adjacent   peer.  Next,  we   split   the sessions   equally  among   2  team   members   for categorization
according to the 6 themes. A third team member reviewed and coded all 24 sessions to validate the categories
created by  the other  team  members,    breaking     each session   into 30  second intervals and  adopting   a  partial-
interval recording method (Hintze, Volpe, & Shapiro, 2002). Finally, we triangulated all observations related to
these themes   with   logs captured  by  researchers   in  the  field,  debrief recordings,  follow-up  interviews  with
teachers,  and photographs   captured    on  site to  ensure   that all evidence  were mutually   supportive.  After  all
sessions were categorized, all members of the team each reviewed the findings for all 24 sessions, discussed all
areas of disagreement, and re-categorized findings as agreed upon by the entire team. We worked with native
Swahili   speakers  from   Tanzania  to  help translate    interactions,  as well as provide   insights  on  the cultural
underpinnings   of  those  interactions. This   study  design    and data  analysis  methodology   has   been  used  and
validated in previous CSCL research studies e.g. (Pauw et al., 2015).

Findings

Baseline student behavior
As soon as the sessions started and the adults left the room, the children smiled at each other, looked around
briefly, and then started interacting without prompting. These interactions included sharing new activity types
with their adjacent peers, sharing a funny activity, celebrating their accomplishments, singing nursery rhymes
together, and even repeating spoken tablet instructions in unison. We observed lots of play (and real) fighting in
the room   as  they encroached   on each    other's   tablets, and  children  intentionally distracting each  other from
staying on task. If an adult re-entered the room for any reason (forgot an item, child in the session called for
their help, end of session, etc), the children stopped all interactions and focused on their tablets.
          Without an assigned leader, students generally provided help when all of the following conditions were
true: 1) they noticed a peer struggling or the peer asked them for help, 2) the peer is sitting adjacent to them, 3)
they are not engrossed in their own work, and 4) they knew how to help            (vs trying to find a solution to a new
problem).   In general, their behavior mirrored the classroom observations - quiet students kept to themselves
even when other children tried to interact with them uninvited, and talkative students were the most vocal (and
disruptive) in  their sessions.  The  students    connected    the  learning  application to what they    learned in the
classrooms - on several occasions, we observed children bringing out their notebooks from their bags to double
check answers before they selected answers on the tablet. They primarily communicated with their adjacent
peers, and those whose screens they could easily see. Across all six groups, we observed only two instances
where a student helped a non-adjacent peer. Figure 1 shows the student seating arrangement in the classroom.
Students sat in a row, all facing the same direction, allowing them to interact with their peers and see their work.
There were no observable differences in how girls interacted with other girls vs boys (and vice versa), although
friends seemed more likely to share funny stories and new activities with each other.
          In all interactions observed under this condition, students provided knowledge-telling support to their
peers either voluntarily or when solicited; they either selected the answers for their adjacent peers or told them
what answer to tap without any elaboration. We observed one instance of student collaboration in this condition

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      507                                                     © ISLS
(and another  in   the publicly   assigned  leader condition)   when   knowledge-telling    was insufficient. In   one
interaction with L5, an adjacent peer was struggling with a tracing task. After she asked L5 for help, L5 said
"andika" [Swahili for "write"]. The girl followed L5's instruction, but her answer was still not accepted because
she wrote  beside  (rather than   over) the trace outline. Then    L5 reached  in to  help but also  wrote  beside the
outline, resulting in  a rejected response.  They  looked   for a  teacher, but no  one  was  close  by, so they  tried
different strategies until they learn the correct way to trace on the tablet.

                           Figure 1. Typical seating arrangement in experiment sessions.

Student behavior in privately assigned leader condition
Students  in this  condition behaved    similarly  to  the baseline  condition.  L1   remained  quiet throughout   her
sessions, only interacting with adjacent peers, and volunteered help when she noticed a struggling adjacent peer.
Since she was not revealed as the group leader, non-adjacent students did not ask her for help. When engrossed
in her tablet, she ignored most requests for help even from adjacent students. This observation was consistent in
all of L3's sessions as well. She freely chatted with adjacent peers, but also ignored their requests for help when
engrossed in her own work. On the occasions where L1 and L3 helped their adjacent peers, they showed very
little persistence and routinely abandoned them if their attempt was not a quick fix on the first or second try.
         There were clear negative consequences when a student needed help but didn't receive it. In Group 1, a
boy struggled with basic application navigation, and could hardly complete a single learning activity in all three
sessions despite sitting next to L1 in one session. Also in a session with L1, a student gave up and left the
session after trying for 30 minutes to start a learning activity (including asking her for help twice), while another
started to wipe tears from her eyes after repeated unsuccessful attempts at getting herself back on task. Figure 2
shows a boy in Group 3 who needed help, and his reaction when he finally learns to navigate the application
after receiving help from the girl right beside him (not L3).
         L2's behavior as a privately assigned leader was quite different from L1 and L3. In the first session, he
interacted mostly with one of his best friends similar to his behavior in the baseline condition. After privately
reminding him of his responsibilities prior to the next session, he spent most of his time walking around the
room and helping every struggling student (similar to how his teacher behaved in his classroom), without paying
much attention to his own tablet. He was only asked for help 4 times from his adjacent friends throughout the
session, but volunteered help to 18 additional non-adjacent peers. When his peers noticed that he was providing
this help, they called on him to help other struggling peers, and he continued to hover around their tablets to
review their progress. If a peer paused briefly, he ran over to solve the problem even if they did not ask for help.
Some did not welcome the constant, unsolicited help - near the end of one session where L2 "helped" a girl
constantly, she shoved him away when he walked over to her. His monitoring also quickly turned into behavior
enforcement. One of the activities in the learning application involved a racecar that made screeching sounds.
Students  quickly  figured out  how  to  exploit  this sound   and  enjoyed   producing  an almost-constant   screech,
therefore distracting the whole group. In the first session, L2 and his adjacent peer engaged in this distraction,
but  by  the second    session, he monitored   and    turned   off students'  tablets if they  tried the exploit.  His
enforcement tactics became progressively stronger in each session, and he started hitting kids on the head and
addressing the whole group sternly when he thought they were not paying attention. Although some children
had problems with his style of help-giving, overall it had positive effects on the group. Most children stayed on
task, students started calling him for help for themselves and for others, and others started to emulate him by
standing up and walking around to help as well.       Figure 3 shows L2 addressing a student who was distracting
the group. On the average, L1 and L3 ignored 79% of help requests overall (and all requests from their friends),
while L2 ignored only 33% of his requests for help (13% from his friends).

      Figure 2 (L-R). Struggling boy; peer notices and helps; excitement when he gets questions correct.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      508                                                  © ISLS
                      Figure 3. L2 addressing a student who was distracting the entire group.

Student behavior in publicly assigned condition
Publicly assigned leaders had fewer help-giving restrictions; they generally provided help either if they were
asked or if they noticed a peer struggling. Unlike L2, none of the leaders in this condition (L4, L5, L6) hovered
around the entire group. Despite their working steadily and constantly on their tablets, they responded to most
requests for help. The other children in the groups chatted with their adjacent peers about new activities and
funny stories, and even attempted to help each other first before calling on the leader. On the average, leaders in
this condition responded  to  requests   for help  75%   of the time  (77%    from their friends). They were  able to
discern when they were called for non-help requests such as discovering new application activities. L5 was even
able to tell when   she placed someone     in   an application  that was  too easy  for  them.  She restarted a boy's
application, and placed him in an alphabet song. Immediately, she exited the application, and switched it to a
more difficult story for him to read. Although the leaders were called upon frequently in the first session, the
help requests decreased in subsequent sessions, suggesting that students became more proficient at navigating
the tablets without the leader. By the 3rd session, the publicly assigned leaders got the same number of requests
from the whole group as the privately assigned leaders from their adjacent peers. Figure 4 shows a chart of the
average number of times the leaders were called upon as the sessions progressed per condition.
        The   biggest  difference between    the   help offered by   publicly vs privately  assigned leaders  was  the
degree of leader persistence. We did not observe any cases where the leader abandoned a student even when
they could not figure out a solution. One student in Group 4 accidentally exited the application but could not
open a new instance. She asked L4 for help, but he could not figure out a solution after several attempts. He
started to walk back to his seat but changed his mind, knelt beside her, and kept trying. After much trial and
error, she found the application switcher button and selected the learning application. Instead of returning to his
seat after this success, he reproduced the problem, so he could practice the solution she discovered. Following
that, he returned to his seat. Similarly, L5 spent over 5 minutes trying to help a girl with a technical issue with
constant application crashes. After several unsuccessful tries, L5 left the session to seek a help. The application
had to be reinstalled to fix the error.
        Finally, the leaders helped to maintain engagement with the learning applications. All students enjoyed
exploiting the racecar game's screeches. Unfortunately, the noise distracted everyone in the group and increased
off-task behavior. It caused students who were trying hard to focus to start tapping the tablet without regard for
the current activity, or scribbling furiously in writing activities. Unlike the privately assigned leader condition,
the publicly assigned leaders initially joined the fun, but quickly worked to establish order in the groups. L4
warned the students to stop misusing the application; L5 and L6 resorted to turning off students' tablets if it
distracted their group, and in one incident, L6 even seized a peer's tablet. Other members of the group began to
call for the leader when someone was bothering them individually, and the leaders routinely intervened. This
was  an unexpected    but welcome       benefit of having   publicly assigned  leaders   in the group  because  these
interventions minimized the time that students were off task compared to the other leadership conditions.

       Figure 4. Average Help-Seeking Requests to in Privately vs Publicly Assigned Leader Conditions.

Discussion and conclusions
Unassisted learning educational settings are becoming more popular due to the increasing demand for education
where   traditional schooling facilities  and   instructors are scarce  - our  research  contributes to the   body of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     509                                                   © ISLS
knowledge that maximizes their success. The expectation that children, without formal training or assignment,
will provide support in unassisted learning situations seems intuitive given their innate curiosity, and previous
findings from other cultural contexts. However, our research provides evidence that socio-cultural factors do not
only affect the ways that children engage with educational technologies, but also in their willingness and ability
to support one another, as well as the quality of help they provide. This is not to say that natural leaders in this
cultural context do not exist - a student like L2 demonstrated his enjoyment for teaching and proctoring both in
the classroom, and in the experiment sessions. However, in a culture like the one we studied where teachers and
adults are likely the singular source of authority, this kind of behavior may be punished similar to seating L2 at
the back of the class, and refusing to call on him or answer any of his questions. We also provide evidence that
children who show natural helping tendencies in the classroom (like L3 whose classmates depend on her for
answers), even when trained, do not automatically emerge as leaders for their peers at the expense of their own
interest. Our research shows that in this cultural context (and similar), help-giving did not vary by friendships or
even gender, and students provided the best quality of support when they were trained to help and when there
was a social expectation of them providing such support. Leaders did not just naturally emerge similar to other
studies exploring unassisted learning situations e.g. (Kumar et al., 2010) and (Mitra et al., 2005). Rather than
expecting children to naturally provide support for their peers, such unassisted learning programs should train
and educate children on who, how, and when to ask for support to maximize their success.
         Publicly assigning the role of a leader conferred significant benefits to all students (leaders included).
Group members, regardless of their proximity to the group leader received much needed help with the learning
application, and we observed no incidents of children frustrated, abandoning the sessions, or going multiple
sessions without engaging with the learning application (unlike the privately assigned leader condition). Leaders
showed that they could regulate their learning and that of their peers, deciphering when a student really needed
help vs when they could figure it out for themselves, and leaders became more persistent and provided better
support by practicing more nuanced ways to bail their peers out of trouble, improving the collective knowledge
of  the entire group. These results are  in accordance  to  previous findings  that show  that   students' ability       to
influence and adjust their own cognitive and help-giving behaviors and that of others is optimal for learning and
working   together  (Zimmerman    &  Schunk,  2011). Another   unexpected  but   very   positive effect of  publicly
assigning  leaders was  how much    the  leader helped  to  control disruptions to  the group.   In our experiment
sessions, when one student started causing disruptions, the whole group (including those who were trying hard
to  stay focused)  got distracted as well.  Having   students who    automatically  took  the  responsibility upon
themselves  to  manage  disruptions  was important  for maintaining   student  engagement.  Finally,  our   research
provides evidence that in a cultural context where collaboration is often discouraged by teachers e.g. (Uchidiuno
et al., 2018), carefully designing unassisted learning environments can foster collaborative behaviors even for
simple writing tasks. Further research is required to investigate how these behaviors change as the tasks become
more complex, or when the students are explicitly engaged in collaborative tasks.
         Our study is limited in several ways - the lack of in-depth explanations provided by students may be a
factor of their age and developmental level, as well as the domain area not requiring much explanation (early
math, letter identification, and early reading). Future studies should investigate these help-seeking and help-
giving behaviors among older students in domain areas that require more explanations such as math and science
targeted at later grades. Also, the only training children received was related to technology support. They were
not trained on how to properly give domain knowledge feedback to their peers. Although, our study provides
evidence that untrained students do not provide knowledge-building naturally, further investigation is required
to determine the help-giving behaviors of students who are trained to give proper feedback. Finally, in our study
we qualitatively observed a small group of high performing leaders across multiple sessions - these insights may
be different in a larger scale study, or with students with lower achievement.

Endnotes
(1)  http://uis.unesco.org/sites/default/files/documents/fs48-one-five-children-adolescents-youth-out-school-2018-en.pdf
(2)  https://www.brookings.edu/blog/africa-in-focus/2017/10/06/figures-of-the-week-africa-education-world-development-
     report-2018/

References
Ädel, A. (2011). Rapport building in student group work. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(12), 2932­2947.
Breazeal, C., Morris, R., Gottwald, S., Galyean, T., & Wolf, M. (2016). Mobile devices for early literacy intervention
         and research with global reach. In Proceedings of the Third (2016) ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale
         (pp. 11­20). ACM.
Buchele, S. F., & Owusu-Aning, R. (2007). The one laptop per child (OLPC) project and its applicability to Ghana. In

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   510                                                   © ISLS
        Proceedings of the 2007 international conference on adaptive science and technology (pp. 113­118).
Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developing grounded
        theory. Thousand Oaks.
Duran, D.,  &   Monereo,  C. (2005). Styles  and  sequences   of cooperative  interaction in fixed  and reciprocal   peer
        tutoring. Learning and Instruction, 15(3), 179­199.
Fantuzzo, J. W., King, J. A., & Heller, L. R. (1992). Effects of reciprocal peer tutoring on mathematics and school
        adjustment: A component analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84(3), 331.
Graesser, A. C., & Person, N. K. (1994). Question asking during tutoring. American Educational Research Journal,
        31(1), 104­137.
Halloluwa,  T., Vyas, D.,  Usoof,   H.,  & Hewagamage,     K.  P.   (2018). Gamification  for development:      a case  of
        collaborative learning in Sri Lankan primary schools. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 22(2), 391­407.
Hintze, J. M., Volpe, R. J., & Shapiro, E. S. (2002). Best practices in the systematic direct observation of student
        behavior. Best Practices in School Psychology, 4, 993­1006.
Hollow, D., & Masperi, P. (2009). An evaluation of the use of ICT within primary education in Malawi. In ICTD (pp.
        27­34). Citeseer.
Kumar,  A., Tewari,   A., Shroff,   G., Chittamuru,  D.,  Kam,   M.,  &  Canny,  J.  (2010).  An    exploratory   study of
        unsupervised mobile learning in rural India. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
        Computing Systems (pp. 743­752). ACM.
Mann, A.-M., Hinrichs, U., Read, J. C., & Quigley, A. (2016). Facilitator, functionary, friend or foe?: Studying the
        role of iPads within learning activities across a school year. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on
        Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1833­1845). ACM.
Mills-Tettey, G. A., Mostow, J., Dias, M. B., Sweet, T. M., Belousov, S. M., Dias, M. F., & Gong, H. (2009).
        Improving   child  literacy in  Africa: experiments   with   an  automated  reading  tutor. In Information   and
        Communication Technologies and Development (ICTD), 2009 International Conference on (pp. 129­138).
        IEEE.
Mitra, S., & Dangwal, R. (2010). Limits to self-organising systems of learning--the Kalikuppam experiment. British
        Journal of Educational Technology, 41(5), 672­688.
Mitra, S., Dangwal, R., Chatterjee, S., Jha, S., Bisht, R. S., & Kapur, P. (2005). Acquisition of computing literacy on
        shared   public  computers:  Children   and  the" hole   in  the wall". Australasian  Journal   of Educational
        Technology, 21(3).
Papert, S. (2006). Digital development: How the $100 laptop could change education. USINFO Webchat, via OLPC
        Talks.
Parr, J. M., & Townsend, M. A. (2002). Environments, processes, and mechanisms in peer learning. International
        Journal of Educational Research, 37(5), 403­423.
Pauw, D., Clegg, T., Ahn, J., Bonsignore, E., Yip, J. C., & Uchidiuno, J. (2015). Navigating connected inquiry
        learning with ScienceKit. International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.[ISLS].
Roscoe, R. D., & Chi, M. T. (2007). Understanding tutor learning: Knowledge-building and knowledge-telling in peer
        tutors' explanations and questions. Review of Educational Research, 77(4), 534­574.
Roscoe, R. D., & Chi, M. T. (2008). Tutor learning: The role of explaining and responding to questions. Instructional
        Science, 36(4), 321­350.
Stone, S. J., & Christie, J. F. (1996). Collaborative literacy learning during sociodramatic play in a multiage (K-2)
        primary classroom. Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 10(2), 123­133.
Sun, J., Jackson, J., Burns, M., & Anderson, R. C. (2017). Children's Emergent Leadership and Relational Thinking
        in Collaborative Learning. Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Therias, E., Bird, J., & Marshall, P. (2015). Más Tecnologia, Más Cambio?: Investigating an Educational Technology
        Project in Rural Peru. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
        Systems (pp. 447­456). ACM.
Uchidiuno,  J., Yarzebinski,  E., Madaio,   M.,  Maheshwari,     N., Koedinger,  K., &    Ogan,  A.  (2018). Designing
        Appropriate   Learning    Technologies   for School   vs  Home    Settings  in Tanzanian    Rural  Villages.    In
        Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies (p. 9). ACM.
Warschauer, M., & Ames, M. (2010). Can One Laptop per Child save the world's poor? Journal of International
        Affairs, 33­51.
Webb, N. M., & Mastergeorge, A. (2003). Promoting effective helping behavior in peer-directed groups. International
        Journal of Educational Research, 39(1­2), 73­97.
Wickham, K. R., & Walther, J. B. (2009). Perceived Behaviors of Emergent and Assigned Leaders in Virtual Groups.
Xie, K., Sun, Z., & Lu, L. (2015). The Role of Time, Engagement, and Self-Perceived Leadership on Peer-Nominated
        Emergent Leadership in Small Group Online Collaborative Learning. International Society of the Learning
        Sciences, Inc.[ISLS].
Zimmerman, B. J., & Schunk, D. H. (2011). Self-regulated learning and performance. Handbook of Self-Regulation of
        Learning and Performance, 1­12.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     511                                                      © ISLS
