        Understanding the Effect of Group Variance on Learning
 Sinan Yavuz, Michael Forkner, Dana Gnesdilow, Catherine L. Dornfeld Tissenbaum, Jee-Seon Kim, Sadhana
                                                       Puntambekar
  syavuz@wisc.edu, forkner@wisc.edu, gnesdilow@wisc.edu, catdoti@illinois.edu, jeeseonkim@wisc.edu,
                                         puntambekar@education.wisc.edu
                   Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison

         Abstract:  Given     that group    composition    is  a key  factor  that   affects learning   in CSCL
         environments,    it is   important  to  study    how    students in  groups    with  homogeneous     or
         heterogeneous    levels  of  prior knowledge     collaborate.  This  study  investigated   the potential
         differences in students' learning outcomes from participating in a 13-week design-based unit.
         We   used the   pre-   and   post-test data   from   361  eighth  grade   students   (102  groups)  and
         performed a hierarchical linear model analysis to examine how the convergence or divergence
         in the students' level of prior knowledge affected students' learning outcomes. We found that
         students  in   homogenous     groups    with    similar levels   of initial prior   knowledge     scored
         significantly higher on their post-test when their pre-test was used as a covariate, than students
         in heterogeneous groups. Implications of these findings are discussed along with directions for
         future research.

Introduction
Group composition is a key factor affecting learning in CSCL (Puntambekar & Young, 2003). Often, group
members   come    with  different    levels of  prior    knowledge,   bringing  convergence     or  divergence    of ideas
(Weinberger,   Stegmann,     Fischer,  2007).    It   is therefore  important   to   study   how    student  groups   with
homogeneous    or heterogeneous     levels  of  prior  knowledge   collaborate. Vygotsky's     (1978)   Zone  of Proximal
Development (ZPD) framework assumes that there is a "more capable other" who can scaffold a learner to
accomplish more with assistance than alone. The ZPD therefore implies that for peers to support and scaffold
learning in group interactions, there has to be an inherent asymmetry in the group's knowledge. Stahl (2004)
also suggested that divergent ideas are an essential mechanism for the exploration of ideas and negotiation of
knowledge during group collaborations.
         However,   in  classrooms,    groups    are   often  composed    of  students   with  more   homogeneous     than
heterogeneous    levels of   prior   knowledge.     It   may  also be   the  case  that  heterogeneous     groups    mimic
homogeneous    groups,  as   the  more capable   other    does not  actually  provide   the  proper support   to the other
members. Because of the homogeneous nature of these groups, multiple students may collectively scaffold each
other, rather than only   the more    capable   peer   providing  the scaffolding.   For example,   Fernández,    Wegerif,
Mercer and Rojas-Drummond (2001) found that students' dialogue during collaboration in symmetrical (i.e.,
homogeneous)     groups  provided     enough    support   to help  students  solve   problems,  and   thus  argued   for a
reconceptualization of the relationship described by Vygotsky's ZPD. Further, other researchers have claimed
that peers may not intentionally try to scaffold each other; but, by working together, peers can solve a problem
or complete a task that they could not accomplish when working alone (Wells, 1999; Zuckerman, 2003).
         Prior research that examined homogeneous and heterogeneous group composition identified learning
benefits when students were placed in heterogeneous groups (Csanadi, Kollar, & Fischer, 2016; Gijilers & De
Jong, 2005; Patchan, Hawk, Stevens, & Schunn, 2013; Wiedmann, Leach, Rummel, & Wiley, 2012; Zhao et al.,
2018). These benefits may be due to the processes that occur as students work together during collaborative
knowledge-building    activities,  as peers  with   greater  knowledge    bring important    issues and  resources,  while
peers with less knowledge play an important role by raising questions and asking for clarifications, which the
peers with greater knowledge may address (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994).
         Yet other researchers have found that, in some cases, homogeneous group composition is preferable.
Webb, Nemer, and Zuniga (2002) found that high-ability students performed better in homogeneous groups,
whereas low-ability students performed better when they had a more capable other in their heterogeneous group.
Along these lines, Lou et al. (1996) found that high-ability students benefited equally from both homogeneous
and heterogeneous groups, while medium-ability students benefited most from homogeneous groups, and low-
ability students benefited most from heterogeneous groups. Other research has identified that same-ability dyads
were   better at  metacognitively     regulating    their  collaborative  process    to  reach  their   goals  than   their
heterogeneous partners (Zillmer & Kuhn, 2018).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        520                                                     © ISLS
         To  further understand    the relationship between    groups  with  similar  or  different  levels   of prior
knowledge, our study examined 102 groups of middle-school students learning science over 13 weeks. Students
worked  with   the same  group as   they  engaged  in  CSCL    tasks each  school day,   which   gave  us the unique
opportunity  to examine   how  group    composition,    based  on  levels of prior   knowledge,   affected  students'
conceptual learning outcomes, using a larger sample over a longer time frame than many prior studies.

Methods

Participants and instructional context
This study took place during the 2016-2017 academic year, with seven science teachers and their 515 eighth-
grade students (229 female and 286 male). All students and teachers were from one of three middle schools in
the same urban school district in the U.S. Midwest. This district served about 2,066 middle school students, with
about 53% of them identified as being economically disadvantaged. Students in all classes participated in a
design-based unit called "Make Your Own Compost!". The curriculum challenged students to create a compost
that would break down quickly and contain nutrients while minimizing landfill waste and other negative effects
of conventional fertilizers on the environment. Students collaborated in the same group of three to six students
(mean group size is 3.54) to learn about ecosystems, energy transformations, matter cycling, and human impacts
over the entire 13 weeks of the unit. Students participated in a variety of science activities, such as experiments,
and worked   collaboratively  using  computers  to  conduct  research  using an  online  digital text. They   also  ran
multiple compost simulations to help them to build the necessary knowledge to solve the challenge over the
course of the unit. All activities in the unit were designed to help students to solve the challenge and write a
final report to their principal to propose their design of a composting program for the school. For this study, we
examined the pre- and post-tests from 150 groups of students. However, due to missing data and varying group
sizes, we only included groups for which we had both pre- and post-test information from at least three students
in a group. The results of this study are based on data from 102 groups (361 students), who were assigned by the
teacher. Each student took the pre-test prior to being introduced to unit content and activities. Students took the
post-test after finishing the unit. Groups were categorized as homogeneous, medium, and heterogeneous based
on their pre-test score variances.

Data sources and analysis

Pre- and post-test measures
The "Make    Your   Own   Compost!"    unit focused   on   helping students to  build science   understanding    about
ecosystems  and  humans'   impact   on them.   The test was   designed by   the research team    and consisted   of 24
questions that assessed students' understanding of concepts and relationships related to biotic and abiotic factors
in ecosystems; organisms' roles and relationships in ecosystems; the flow of energy and cycling of matter in
ecosystems;  and   human  impacts   on ecosystems.  Four    of the  24 questions  were   open-ended    items, and   20
questions were in a multiple choice (MC) format. Three of the 24 questions had multiple parts. Overall test
reliability was calculated using Cronbach's alpha. We found the test to be reliable with alpha values of .863 for
the pre-test and .874 for the post-test. After analysis of the open-ended items, a conflict was determined between
the pre- and post-test scores due to incomplete responses on the post-test. Therefore, we only included MC
items in our analyses. The maximum score students could earn on the MC items was 23.

Hierarchical Linear Models
In this study,  students were nested   in groups,  and  we  could  not assume   that  students'  learning gains  were
independent, as the intervention was applied in a group setting. Thus, students' learning gains within the cluster
were expected to be correlated, and the dependency between students needed to be considered (Kim, Anderson,
&  Keller, 2013).  Therefore, using  classical statistical methods,  such as linear  regression  or  ANOVA     on   the
student-level data, while ignoring the group clustering effect, would lead to inaccurate results and interpretation.
By using hierarchical linear models (HLM), we could represent each level by its own submodel (Raudenbush &
Bryk, 2002) to consider the multilevel nature of the data. We performed all the analyses using R software (R
Core Team, 2017) and used the lme4 package (Bates, Mächler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015) for HLM and ggplot2
for producing graphs (Wickham, 2009). We considered student level as level-1 and group level as level-2.

Results

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    521                                                   © ISLS
Since we were interested in investigating group variability, we only analyzed groups with three to six students
who completed both the pre- and post-test. After eliminating groups that did not fit our criteria, we were left
with 361 students who were nested in 102 groups. As mentioned before, we only analyzed the students' total
score for the MC questions. Descriptive statistics of students' pre- and post-test item scores are shown in Table
1.

Table 1: Level-1 Variables (N = 361 Students)

                 Variable              N           Mean     Std Dev  Median       Max. Poss.
                 Pre-Test Scores       361         15.05    4.43     15.5         23
                 Post-Test Scores      361         19.46    3.82     21           23

We divided the student groups into three group types based on their pre-test score variance, which ranged from
0.25 to 72.58. Thirty-three percent of the groups with the lowest variance were classified as homogenous; the
middle 34% were classified as medium; and 33% of the groups with the highest variance were classified as
heterogenous. The variance of within-group prior knowledge distribution is shown in Figure 1. The descriptive
statistics of the groups are shown in Table 2.

                      Figure 1. The histogram of within group prior knowledge variance.

Table 2: Level-2 Variables (N = 102 Groups)

             Variable             Levels                 N        Mean     Std Dev      Median
             Pre-Test Scores      Homogeneous            34       15.21    3.31         15.19
                                  Medium                 33       15.82    2.70         16.33
                                  Heterogeneous          35       14.07    2.08         14.42
             Post-Test Scores     Homogeneous            34       19.97    2.53         20.35
                                  Medium                 33       19.87    2.05         19.94
                                  Heterogeneous          35       18.60    2.02         18.12

Figure 2a shows student-level pre- and post-test scores based on their group variability. From this graph, we can
see that students whose groups we designated as homogeneous showed a steeper line from pre- to post-test,
meaning they had the highest learning gains of all three group types. Figure 2b shows group level means for
homogeneous, medium,     and heterogeneous       groups. Again,  we  see  that   the homogenous   groups have
comparatively steeper lines, showing they had higher average learning gains than the other two groups. These
differences were found to be statistically significant, which we describe below.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   522                                                 © ISLS
               Figure 2 a & b. Student- (left) and group- (right) level pre- and post-test scores.

HLM analyses
We ran    HLM  analyses  to investigate  whether  being    in a homogenous,     medium,   or  heterogenous  prior
knowledge group at the start of the unit affected students' learning gains. We used students' pre-test scores as a
covariate and post-test scores  as an outcome  variable.   Then we  added   group variability as   an independent
variable to the model so that we could investigate whether being in a homogenous, medium, or heterogenous
prior knowledge group affected students' learning gains.

Table 3: HLM Model coefficients, standard errors

               Fixed Effect                  Coefficient (SE)      t (df)               p
               (Intercept) - 00              10.28 (0.54)          19.17 (309)          0.0000
               PreScore - 10                 0.64 (0.03)           20.76 (355.45)       0.0000
               Medium - 20                   -0.58 (0.36)          -1.58 (100.48)       0.1163
               Heterogenous - 30             -0.72 (0.36)          -1.99 (99.96)        0.0495
               Variance Components           Estimate
               Residual ­ 2                  6.01
               (Intercept) ­ 02              0.49

In this model, we added groups' homogeneity level as an independent variable, using dummy coding. The
model can be written as follows:

      Level-1:           PostScoreij = 0 + 1PreScoreij + 2Medium + 3Heterogeneous + Rij
      Level-2:           0 = 00 + U0j
                         1 = 10
                         2 = 20
                         3 = 30
      Mixed Model:       PostScoreij = 00 + 10PreScoreij + 2Medium + 3Heterogeneous + Rij + U0j

Based on the results in Table 3, we rewrote the model equation as:

                   PostScoreij =10.28+ 0.64PreScoreij -0.57Medium -0.72Heterogeneous

After controlling for pre-test scores, the average adjusted post-test score for students in homogeneous groups
was 10.28. Additionally, students' average adjusted post-test score in the medium and heterogeneous groups
were 9.70 and 9.56 respectively. We found that students in homogeneous group performed significantly better
on the post-test than the students in the heterogeneous group (t(99.96) = -1.99, p = 0.0495), but not the medium
group (t(100.48) = -1.58, p = 0.1163). Analysis shows intraclass correlation as .08, which means that group
membership explains 8% of the variance in the post-test scores.
       Because we were interested in knowing whether students with lower levels versus higher levels of prior
knowledge  benefitted similarly  from being in a homogenous     group, we   ran further analyses   to examine the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  523                                                  © ISLS
difference within the homogeneous group. To do this, we examined the range of all students' pretest scores and
then divided the homogenous groups into thirds to make three pre-test score categories: low (n = 11 groups),
medium (n = 11 groups), and high (n = 12 groups). The adjusted average post-test scores of the students in
these three categories were 10.11, 10.30, and 10.07 respectively. After running linear regression analyses, we
found no significant differences between the three categories of students within the homogeneous group, when
controlling for pre-test scores.

Discussion
We conducted a quantitative study to explore students' learning based on whether they differed in their levels of
prior knowledge, in order to understand whether group composition based on students' prior knowledge was a
factor affecting collaboration (Puntambekar & Young, 2003; Weinberger, Stegmann, &Fischer, 2007). Based on
Vygotsky's conceptualization of the ZPD, many educators have historically believed that students should be
placed in heterogeneous groups so that more capable students are able to support their less capable peers. More
capable students in heterogeneous groups can provide knowledge and resources and address questions that less
capable peers raise (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994). However, we found that students in similar-prior knowledge
groups   (i.e., homogeneous)    had  significantly higher  learning  gains  than  students  in  mixed-prior  knowledge
groups (i.e., heterogeneous) after working together during a design-based unit over 13 weeks. These findings
contrast with those of other researchers who have found that students in heterogeneous groups showed greater
learning outcomes than students in homogeneous groups (e.g., Csanadi et al., 2016; Gijilers & De Jong, 2005;
Patchan et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2018).
          Yet, our findings also indicated benefits for students working in homogenous groups. We found that
students  in    homogenous      groups with  low,   medium,    or high     prior knowledge     benefited   equally from
collaborating with similar level peers. These results differ from both Webb, Nemer, and Zuniga (2002) and Lou
et al. (1996), who found that low prior knowledge students performed better in heterogeneous groups, while
high prior knowledge students performed better, or equally as well, in homogenous groups. However, we only
analyzed students' pre- and post-test scores on a content test in our study. In the absence of analysis of the
discourse  among     group   members,   we  cannot    explain why    these results occurred.    However,    one  possible
explanation, based on Zillmer and Kuhn's (2018) findings, is that students with similar prior knowledge levels
may be more capable of providing metacognitive support to their peers, switching roles dynamically as needed.
Zillmer and Kuhn (2018) also pointed out that students with similar levels of prior knowledge may have been
better at metacognitively scaffolding one another because they worked together for a greater amount of time,
which helped them establish greater intersubjectivity. In our study, students worked in groups for 13 weeks,
which is a relatively long period of time. It could be the case that students in homogenous groups were better
able to establish intersubjectivity earlier and maintain it as they collaborated throughout the unit.
          Another possible explanation is that the more capable peers often do not intentionally scaffold other
group members (Wells, 1999; Zuckerman, 2003). Analysis of students' discourse will help us understand the
extent to which students in homogeneous and heterogeneous groups provided scaffolding, or not. Our findings
lend   support   to Fernández    and colleagues'   (2001)  argument   that  Vygotsky's    ZPD   framework     should   be
reconceptualized to capture the kinds of scaffolding that occur in symmetrical groups. For example, different
types  of dialogue   can provide    support for  symmetrical   groups, which     may help   them    to pool  the groups'
intellectual resources and establish a common context to collaboratively solve a problem that they would not be
able  to  solve  individually.  In  symmetrical   groups,  different group   members      might provide    scaffolding at
different times, in a continuously unfolding, reciprocal, and ever-changing process, as participants discursively
contribute to the collaboration.

Future research
We plan on analyzing students' discourse from the video and audio data collected during the 13-week unit. This
will help us to understand the types of contributions and support that students provided each other within their
groups and try to determine why homogenous groups had higher learning gains than the heterogeneous groups
in our study. Further, Zillmer and Kuhn (2018) suggested that the length of time students spend collaborating
impacts the quality of their interactions. While we collected data over a longer time period than many previous
studies, future research could also examine how the length of collaboration, a few sessions to weeks or months
of collaboration,    affects students'   learning  outcomes    based  on   whether   they   are  in  a  homogenous     or
heterogenous prior knowledge group. Finally, future research could also examine how student's learning gains
differ within   the groups   at the end of  the unit. This would  help  us  to   identify the extent   to which  students
starting out with different levels of prior knowledge are benefitting from participating in each type of group and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      524                                                     © ISLS
whether students' understanding becomes more convergent over time. Information from each of these lines of
research could provide practical guidance to teachers as they are strategically forming groups in the classroom.

References
Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4.
         Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1-48.
Csanadi, A., Kollar, I., & Fischer, F. (2016). Scientific Reasoning and Problem Solving in a Practical Domain:
         Are Two Heads Better Than One?. Singapore: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Fernández, M., Wegerif, R., Mercer, N., & Rojas-Drummond, S. (2001). Re-conceptualizing "scaffolding" and
         the zone of proximal development in the context of symmetrical collaborative learning. The Journal of
         Classroom Interaction, 40-54.
Gijlers, H., & De Jong, T. (2005). The relation between prior knowledge and students' collaborative discovery
         learning processes. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(3), 264-282.
Kim, J. S., Anderson, C. J., & Keller, B. (2013). Multilevel analysis of assessment data. Rutkowski, L. von
         Davier, M., & Rutkowski, D. (Eds.), Handbook of international large-scale assessment: Background,
         technical issues, and methods of data analysis, 389-425.
Long, J. D. (2012). Longitudinal data analysis for the behavioral sciences using R. London, England: Sage
         Publication.
Lou, Y.,   Abrami,   P. C.,   Spence,   J. C.,  Poulsen,   C., Chambers,   B., &     d'Apollonia,  S. (1996).   Within-class
         grouping: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 66(4), 423-458.
Patchan,   M.  M.,  Hawk,      B., Stevens,   C. A.,   &   Schunn,   C.  D.  (2013).    The  effects  of skill  diversity on
         commenting and revisions. Instructional Science, 41(2), 381-405.
Puntambekar, S. & Young, M. F. (2003). Moving toward a theory of CSCL. In U. Hoppe, B. Wasson, & S.
         Ludvigson,     (Eds.)  Computer      Supported    Collaborative    Learning     2003:  Designing   for  change    in
         networked learning. pp. 503-512. IOS Press: Amsterdam. [Presented in the closing plenary session at
         CSCL 2003].
R Core     Team    (2017). R:  A   language     and environment      for statistical computing    [Computer    software].  R
         Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/.
Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data analysis methods
         (Vol. 1). (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.Sage Publication.
Rogoff,  B.    (1990). Apprenticeship      in thinking:   Cognitive  development     in social context.  Oxford,  England:
         Oxford University Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The journal of
         the learning sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Stahl, G. (2004). Building collaborative knowing. In J.W. Strijbos, P.A. Kirschner, & R.L. Martens (Eds.), What
         we know about CSCL (pp. 53-85). Springer, Dordrecht.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher mental process.
Webb,   N.  M.,    Nemer,  K.   M.,    & Zuniga,    S. (2002).  Short    circuits or  superconductors?    Effects of group
         composition     on   high-achieving    students'   science   assessment     performance.   American    Educational
         Research Journal, 39(4), 943-989.
Weinberger,    A.,  Stegmann,      K., &   Fischer,  F.   (2007).  Knowledge      convergence   in  collaborative learning:
         Concepts and assessment. Learning and Instruction, 17(4), 416-426.
Wells, G.   (1999).  Dialogic   inquiry:   Towards     a  socio-cultural  practice   and theory  of  education. Cambridge
         University Press.
Wickham, H. (2009). ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis Springer-Verlag New York.
Wiedmann,      M., Leach,  R.  C.,  Rummel,     N., &   Wiley,  J. (2012).  Does   group  composition    affect learning  by
         invention?. Instructional Science, 40(4), 711-730
Zillmer,   N., &   Kuhn,   D.  (2018).   Do   similar-ability  peers regulate one    another in  a  collaborative discourse
         activity?. Cognitive Development, 45, 68-76.
Zhao,  J., Lin, L., Sun,   J., Zheng,    X.,  & Yin,   J. (2018).  Students' engagement     in a science  classroom:  Does
         knowledge diversity matter?. The Journal of Educational Research, 1-8.
Zuckerman, G. (2003). The developmental path toward reflection. In A. Kouzulin, B. Gindis, V,S. Ageyev, &
         S.M. Miller (Eds.), Vygotsky's educational theory in cultural context, 177. Cambridge.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this study is supported by a NSF-DRL grant (#1418044) to the last author. We thank
all of the teachers and students who participated in this study.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         525                                                     © ISLS
