      Arguing about Synthetic Biology in 140 Characters or Less:
           Affordances of Microblogging for High School Students
                          Discussions of Socio-Scientific Issues

                              Mia S. Shaw, Justice T. Walker, and Yasmin B. Kafai
                       mshaw12@gse.upenn.edu, justicew@gse.upenn.edu, kafai@upenn.edu
                                               University of Pennsylvania

         Abstract: As synthetic biology becomes more prevalent, there is a call to critically and
         publicly evaluate the benefits and risks of such technologies. Microblogs like Twitter have the
         potential for engaging citizens in civic discourse about such issues but also pose challenges
         due to partisan behaviors and length limitations. Given the saliency of social media in young
         people's lives, we examined in an exploratory study whether integrating a 140-character limit
         within  an audience   response    system    supported  high   school  students'   argumentation   about
         socioscientific   issues   during   a  synthetic   biology  workshop.      After  analyzing   students'
         anonymous online responses, worksheets, and observations, we found that students generated
         diverse  evaluative  claims  as   well as   used argument-based     rationales   and weighed   counter
         arguments when assessing their peers' claims. In our discussion, we address the affordances
         and   constraints of microblogging       in supporting   students'  argumentation    of socioscientific
         issues about synthetic biology.

Introduction
Biotechnologies   such  as synthetic  biology   have   increasingly  moved    out  of research   labs and  are now   more
prevalent  in our everyday    lives and   in industries  that impact   medical,  environmental    and  textile industries.
Understood as an engineering discipline, synthetic biology builds complex biological systems from standard,
interchangeable   biological  parts   (Cheng    &    Lu,  2012).  In   other  words,   synthetic  biology   involves  the
manipulation and design of organisms and/or their outputs. Given the myriad impacts synthetic biology has on
society and the environment, a variety of stakeholders including experts, policymakers, and citizens have made
evaluating the potential benefits and risks of these applications more salient (Gutmann, 2011). Within a similar
vein, there is a  call for science  education   to   provide  opportunities  for students  to engage   in  argumentation
around claims developing scientific fields assert in order to simulate the discursive practices observed within
scientific communities    and in  the world    at-large  (Driver, Newton,    &  Osborne,   2000).  As  synthetic   biology
technologies  emerge   in  K-12   education,   students  will need  to be able   to engage  in   argumentation  as  future
decision-makers and citizens. To this end, they will need to also consider the potential benefits and risks of these
emergent technologies and their impact on humans, nonhumans, and the environment.
         Microblogs--online platforms where users share and respond to brief 140-200-character messages--
and other social media have influenced public awareness about science-related matters and their risks (Auer,
Zhang, & Lee, 2014). Even though scientists have criticized using microblogs (e.g., Twitter) for communicating
with the public (Shäfer, 2012), these platforms afford discourse wherein individuals witness and participate in
diverse conversations they otherwise may not have before (Yardi & boyd, 2010). As Twitter use among young
people becomes more and more prominent (Greenhow & Gleason, 2012), research has pointed to the potential
for microblogs to serve as platforms for socioscientific (SSI) argumentation skill development among students
(Greenhow,    Gibbons,   &  Menzer,   2015).   A   distinguishing  feature   of  microblogs   is that as  messages   (e.g.
"tweets" on Twitter) from different individuals aggregate, their collective whole can form a coherent text where
narratives emerge   (Murphy,   2013).  Considering     that wording    choices  on  microblogs   can  shape  how   readers
process  and  share information,    there  exists an  opportunity   to explore   how  microblogs   promote     (or inhibit)
science-based  discourse   (Brossard,  2013).     Furthermore,   given  the  character  limitation of  microblogs,   it is
important  to  consider whether   or  not  argumentation    of  complex   SSIs  can   take place on   such a   constrained
setting.
         In this exploratory study, we examine the various ways high school students in a synthetic biology-
based  workshop   discuss   SSIs    surrounding   the   field's applications   within  a   microblogging   context.  In a
weeklong summer science workshop, students genetically transformed yeast cells to produce beta-carotene and
used this new genetically-modified yeast to produce vitamin-enriched cakes (hereafter, referred to as Biocakes).
Following, we facilitated a class-wide discussion about three different synthetic biology applications in the food,
medicine, and textiles industries using Mentimeter, a free and existing commercial audience response system

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       526                                                     © ISLS
(ARS)   that polled   and   displayed    students'  anonymous     responses.  Due    to the  140-character    limitation  on
Mentimeter responses, students critically examined these synthetic biology applications in ways that mimicked
microblog    discourse.   We  were   interested in  examining   the   following  research    questions:  How    do  students
respond to specific synthetic biology applications when limited to 140 characters in a microblog environment?
How   do   students respond     to peer's   perspectives toward   synthetic  biology    that were  formed     within such  a
constrained online setting?

Background

Socioscientific argumentation in science education
The  Presidential  Commission      for the  Study   of Bioethical  Issues   recently released  its first report calling   for
experts and policy makers to actively engage in public dialogue about the benefits and risks of synthetic biology
in order for citizens to understand these effects on their fellow humans, nonhumans, and the environment as well
as to share perspectives about the burgeoning field (Gutmann, 2011). As scientific knowledge is constructed by
developing fields like synthetic biology, dispute and controversy emerge, so scientists engage in practices such
as argumentation to resolve controversies and to reaffirm valid scientific claims. According to Driver, Newton,
and Osborne (2000), new scientific knowledge does not become public knowledge until it has been vetted by the
scientific community, and argument plays a crucial role in the practice of critical, public scrutiny. Similarly, the
goals of science education are for students to develop the ability to evaluate the aims and results of those who
produce scientific knowledge (Patronis, Potari, & Spiliotopoulous, 1999; Yoon, 2008a). Therefore, if science
education is introducing students to claims produced by developing scientific fields, it should provide students
opportunities to engage in the real-world argumentation practices carried out by scientists (Driver, Newton, and
Osborne, 2000).
          However, challenges associated with engaging students with contemporary SSIs have stemmed from
the depiction   of science   as an  uncontested    and unproblematic    body  of    knowledge    that is free from   critique
(Driver,   Leach,   Millar,  &    Scott,  1996; Yoon,     2008b).   Furthermore,     while   there   have  been   curricular
interventions that have improved students' abilities to evaluate SSIs, many have involved students interacting
with texts and problem scenarios or their teachers (Sadler, 2004; Yoon, 2008b)--as opposed to experiencing
these technologies first-hand. Incorporating synthetic biology into science education represents a paradigmatic
shift from traditional science instruction. Instead of receiving scientific knowledge about bacteria or genetic
engineering from an instructor, students genetically modify organisms and experience the field first-hand. As
synthetic biology technologies move from university and corporate labs into K-12 education (Kafai et al., 2017),
students   will need  to  consider   the  benefits  and  risks of  such   biotechnologies,    especially  as  they   actively
participate  in  a  cutting-edge   field  that  continues   to evolve.  In   addition   to  providing    hands-on   learning
opportunities,  promoting     discourse  in  which  students   share  their ideas,  negotiate  multiple   perspectives   and
claims, and evaluate new ideas enriches their learning (Yoon, 2008b). Given that students will participate in
design  through    synthetic  biology    and engage    with claims   about  this advancing    field,  classroom    activities
supporting their civic discourse through argumentation are much needed areas of education research.

Microblogging, discourse and educational uses
Microblogs   like  Twitter    are  primarily  used  for  everydayconversations,      sharing  information,    and  reporting
current  news   (Java,  Song,   Finin,   &  Tseng,  2007).  Due   to  the   ability of  posts to   achieve   high  levels of
interactivity and virality without geographical constraints, microblogs serve as significant platforms for various
forms  of  communication,     including   political discourse  (Colleoni,   Rozza,   &  Arvidsson,    2014).  However,    the
nature of such discourse on Twitter has been found to be highly partisan and worsening, necessitating a need to
understand   the   social and   technological   dynamics    central  to this  issue  (Conover,     Ratkiewicz,    Francisco,
Gonçalves, Flammini, & Menczer, 2011). Furthermore, even though Twitter exposes individuals to multiple,
diverse  perspectives,  as  a medium     it may be   insufficient for rational discourse     and debate,  as  users  tend to
affiliate with views similar to their own (Yardi & boyd, 2010; Colleoni, Rozza, & Arvidsson, 2014). Therefore,
there is a critical need to mitigate the limitations of discourse found in microblogs; one of the ways to do so is
by examining the ways in which individuals engage in discourse through argument when microblogging about
synthetic biology.
          In educational    contexts,    microblogging   can   promote    collaborative    learning,  encourage    real-time
reflective  thinking,  and  increase   student  participation  and  engagement      (Gao,   Luo, &    Zhang,  2012).  When
student  microblogging    occurred   concurrently    with classwide   discussion    at  the  college  level, microblogging
afforded new opportunities for discourse (Elavsky, Mislan, & Elavsky, 2011). However, the character limitation
can impose constraints on students' critical thinking and self-reflection (Kassens-Noor, 2012). This limitation

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       527                                                       © ISLS
can also affect the tone of the post, which can alter how readers perceive the post's content. Given that readers'
interpretations of the potential risks of an emerging technology can be affected by a post's tone (Brossard &
Scheufele, 2013), students need to be prepared to critically examine potential online claims about emerging
technologies like synthetic biology by developing their skills in argumentation. While social networking sites
have provided informal opportunities for students to engage in argument about SSIs (Greenhow, Gibbons, &
Menzer, 2015), less research has attended to understanding how students engage in argument about synthetic
biology on microblogging platforms.
         In this study, we utilized an existing, commercial ARS called Mentimeter within our synthetic biology-
based workshop that mimics the microblogging features of Twitter to support students' civic discourse through
argumentation. Similar to Twitter, Mentimeter constrains responses to 140 characters. However, Mentimeter
responses  are anonymized     and users are unable  to interact with each other's posts by @-ing  or  retweeting.
Students were responsible for evaluating multiple, anonymous perspectives and claims from their peers about
specific synthetic biology applications. By facilitating a face-to-face discussion about these perspectives, we
scaffold student engagement in the discursive practices of argumentation. Given that the discursive practices
found in social media can inform students' collaborative discourse (Greenhow, Robelia, & Hughes, 2009), we
examine how students form and evaluate claims about synthetic biology in a way that is relevant to their online
communication.

Methods

Participants, context, and workshop
The SSI argumentation activity took place on the second day of a five-day, summer workshop that was part of a
STEM program at a local science museum. The workshop participants included ten high school students who
self-selected  to participate in  this workshop;  however,   nine students participated in this exploratory  SSI
workshop activity. Participants included five boys and four girls. The first two authors were both researchers
and facilitators of the workshop, and both have had previously implemented and researched synthetic biology
workshops with high school students (Kafai et al., 2017; Walker, Shaw, Kafai, & Lui, 2018).
         The objective of the workshop was for participants to learn about and engage with synthetic biology.
The workshop consisted of four main parts: 1) a wet lab where participants genetically transformed yeast, 2)
mold design where participants had two opportunities to design molds for their cakes using silicone and various
shapes, 3) recipe design where participants had two opportunities to bake their vitamin-enriched cakes using
their own recipes, and 4) a pitch where participants presented their cakes to a panel of biologists and science
educators. In addition to the laboratory and design activities, participants took part in an SSI argumentation
activity where    they discussed  three different synthetic  biology applications and the  associated impact on
humans, nonhumans, and the environment. The goal of the activity was to create an environment for students to
share and evaluate multiple perspectives and claims about the applications. In particular, participants engaged in
discourse about these applications using Mentimeter. A snapshot of the interface and responses are displayed in
Figure 1.

                    Figure 1. Screenshot of Mentimeter page displaying participant responses.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    528                                                 © ISLS
        The entire microblogging activity took place for approximately 50 minutes. Participants read prompts
explaining the benefits and risks of Golden Rice, CAR T-cell therapy, and Adidas Biofabric (see Table 1 for
descriptions  of each  synthetic   biology application  and  excerpts  from the  prompts). Using their individual
computers, participants anonymously shared their initial reactions to each of the synthetic biology applications,
which were immediately displayed for the entire class on the front screen to generate discussion. After reading
everyone's reactions, students reflected individually in response to two prompts: (1) After seeing the results,
what do you find most interesting? Why? and (2) Find an argument that is most similar to yours and provide a
possible counterargument. Lastly, participants engaged in a class-wide, face-to-face discussion based on their
reflections.

Table 1: Synthetic biology application

   Application                  Description                                  Prompt excerpts
      (type)

   Golden Rice         Rice is genetically-engineered   "...Although Golden Rice has been available for some
 (plant microbial)     to contain high levels of the    time now, it is unclear whether it has had the lasting
                       vitamin-A-precursor, beta-       benefits everyone expected. This is largely because
                       carotene                         Golden Rice tends to be more expensive to make than
                                                        traditional rice. ..."

   CAR T-cell          Newly developed cancer           "...Many experts in the field are calling this genetic
     therapy           treatment that uses parts of     engineering approach a new "pillar" of therapy because
     (human)           the HIV virus to genetically     it does not involve rigorous chemotherapies or invasive
                       modify white blood cells to      surgeries...."
                       recognize and destroy cancer
                       cells

 Adidas Biofabric      Shoes designed using             "...While this approach seems to be entirely beneficial,
   (microbial)         synthetic spider silk            some critics have suggested that this will generate even
                                                        more waste into the globe's oceans, which are already
                                                        plagued with record levels of plastic pollution..."

Data collection and analysis
Data collected   for   this  study included   the   participants' anonymized    Mentimeter  responses, individual
worksheets participants used to reflect on peer responses, and video observations and fieldnotes. The first author
began analysis by watching an excerpt of the video data of participant discussion of Golden Rice in order to
observe how participants engaged in argumentation using Mentimeter. Through grounded analysis (Charmaz,
2002), the author noted and grouped participants' discussion quotes in order to develop emergent, preliminary
codes representing participants' discursive practices when recording their initial evaluations about Golden Rice
and critically examining their peers' evaluations. These codes were evaluated and clarified through memoing
and feedback from the second author. After we applied the codes to the remainder of the video observations and
participant Mentimeter and worksheet responses, new themes emerged across the three data points. However,
given that the focus of this is on the affordances of microblogging for engaging in argumentation, we decided to
focus the remainder of the analysis on the Mentimeter and worksheet responses. Both authors revised the codes
until consensus was reached and applied focused coding to the Mentimeter and worksheet responses by using
the most significant and frequent codes.      There were two categories of codes: among the initial Mentimeter
responses, codes focused on participants' attitudes toward each of the applications (e.g., not accept, balanced,
accept, and unclear), and among the worksheet responses, codes focused on how participants evaluated peer
claims (e.g. consensus, critiquing argument, justifying argument, etc.).    Lastly, the authors drew relationships
between these    codes into  themes  that  reflected how participant  argumentation about  synthetic biology    was
supported through the use of Mentimeter.

Findings

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    529                                                   © ISLS
Finding 1: Participants' evaluative claims depending on application type include a
myriad of considerations
We  begin   by  reporting  on  participants' anonymous       Mentimeter    responses to   three synthetic  biology-based
applications. We found that when participants were asked to describe their initial reactions toward the three
applications using Mentimeter, they not only made evaluative claims but when their responses were aggregated
and displayed to the whole class, two main narratives emerged. First, the type of application (e.g., microbial,
human,   and  plant) influenced  whether     or not participants'   claims  expressed    support, lack  of support, or  a
balanced  perspective   regarding   the   applications.  Overall,   the  majority   of participants  found    exclusively
microbial applications acceptable (6 out of 8) while the majority of participants found human (6 out of 8) and
plant applications (4 out of 8) unacceptable (see Table 2). Participants also made claims that were balanced, that
is, neutral toward a microbial application overall. The following anonymous Mentimeter response reflects this
as the participant noted, "it depends because there are benefits, but at the same time we are unsure of how it will
be disposed and the negative disruption of food webs." In making their claim, this participant did not express
support or lack of support for Adidas Biofabric; instead, the student acknowledged the application's benefits and
risks. However,  two    participant responses     were unclear but  for  disparate  reasons. When    evaluating   Adidas
Biofabric, it was challenging to determine one participant's attitude toward the application as they explained,
"there is no proof that 7tthis would cause global warming, but I like the idea of not using real spiders." This
participant's use of the conjunction "but" makes it difficult to determine the tone of their claim. In addition,
even   though  participants were   tasked  with   writing one  reaction,   there was   one extra   anonymous     response
displayed that stated, "There is no proof that this will happen." It is unclear what "this" the participant was
referring to or if this response was intended as a continuation for their previous claim. These unclear examples
allude to a potentially negative influence that a 140-character limitation can have on the tone of an argument, as
well as how extraneous posts can distract from the coherent narratives found within a microblog's feed.

Table 2: Range of attitudes found participants' evaluative claims

              Application Type               Support      Not Support       Balanced       Unclear        Total
                                                (N)            (N)              (N)          (N)           (N)

         Microbial - Adidas Biofabric           6               -                1              2           9

             Plant - Golden Rice                2               4                2              -           8

            Human - CAR T-Cell                  1               6                1              -           8

The  second   narrative illustrates that  in making    their  evaluative claims,   participants   made  a  wide  range of
considerations  regarding   the impacts   of the  synthetic   biology  application.  When   making   their claims  about
Adidas Biofabric, participants frequently considered the specific impact of the microbial application on multiple
contexts: humans,    non-humans,    and/or   the  environment.    This  is exampled    in one   anonymous    Mentimeter
response as the participant explained, "I think this is good idea. It doesn't hurt anybody and keep animal safe.
There's no evidence that anything will happen to ocean so who cares." They not only expressed support for the
Adidas Biofabric but considered the impact of the microbial application on humans ("anybody"), non-humans
("animal"),  and the  environment     ("ocean").   This was   the only   response   that  considered the   impact  of  the
application  on all  three  contexts.  When   making    their claims   about Golden    Rice  and   CAR    T-cell therapy,
participants considered    the impact  of  the  plant-microbial   and  human    applications in   broad terms   and/or to
humans in particular. This point was illustrated when an anonymous Mentimeter response disapproved of CAR
T-cell therapy as the participant noted, "NO! It could easily attack other tissues and foreign thing that could be
good for you. It could be very dangerous if it gets out of control." This participant cautioned that the potential
impact on humans makes this application of synthetic biology unacceptable. However, another participant made
broad considerations when evaluating Golden Rice, declaring, "My initial reaction was rather between the two
arguments. There is the chance of both negative and positive outcomes, so anything can happen." Even though
their claim was of a balanced perspective, it lacks specific considerations of Golden Rice's impact, making it a
challenge to  determine    whether  or not   this participant fully understood   the   application's benefits  and  risks.
Finally, participants also  based   their considerations  on   benefits, costs,  and usefulness   of the  application. In

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      530                                                     © ISLS
response to Golden Rice, an anonymous Mentimeter response asserted, "in between. It is very expensive to
make and it could be harder to harvest. However most communities that are Vitiam A deficient could use."
Here, the participant explained that costs and usefulness are central considerations in their overall claim, which
is balanced. These findings suggest that microblogging has the potential of supporting students' critical thinking
regarding the impacts of synthetic biology applications.

Finding 2: Participants' argument-based rationales evaluate other perspectives.
After displaying all of the participants' 140-character, anonymous Mentimeter responses, participants answered
the following question on individual worksheets: "After seeing the results, what do you find most interesting?
Why?" We found that when participants read all of their peers' perspectives on Mentimeter, they engaged a
claim in terms of whether or not it aligned with their own and evaluated it according to the rationale presented in
the claim. Regarding the three synthetic biology applications, participants frequently asserted agreement with a
given rationale: microbial applications (4 of 8 responses), plant-microbial applications (4 of 7 responses), and
human applications (4 of 8 responses). This was exampled in responses like Natalie's when she explained, "the
most interesting reasoning is the one that speaks about the [effects] on the environment but also the potential
good things that come out of it. This is because it [exhibits] the potential outcome on both sides." Like several
participants, Natalie asserted her agreement with this claim regarding Adidas Biofabric based on the fact that the
rationale is balanced    and   in consideration of  two viewpoints.  In  addition   to  asserting  agreement,  argument
building was reflected in moments when students indicated they agreed with a given claim and advanced the
rationale by asserting additional ideas in support of the given perspective. This was evident in Edward's point
when he explained, "I found the `sold at higher' price one intresting I say this because you can't simply sell
something that you aren't at complete assurance of it being harmless." Here, Edward adds to a peer's lack of
support towards Golden Rice being sold at higher prices without knowing the benefits by asserting the need for
assurance that the application is harmless. The frequent asserting of agreement and argument building alludes to
the potential of microblogging in reinforcing participants affiliating with peers who share their views.
          Participants   also  asserted critiques towards   given  claims  and    their rationales.  When  participants
considered microbial-based perspectives that were contrary to their own, their evaluations were also rationale-
based  and included    a critique  of the  opposing  perspective.  This was   illustrated in participant  responses  like
Michael's who explained, "I think the response that says that we should use it because we already damage the
environment is interesting. The reasoning is kind of dumb. It's like saying if a car is broke, you should break it
some more." Michael pointed out that the rationale to use synthetic biology-based applications on plants despite
the potential environmental effects because the environment is already polluted is erroneous and uses an analogy
to underscore   his  point. Even   though  only two   participants critiqued  their peers'   claims  and rationales, this
demonstrates the potential of participants being able to critically evaluate claims about synthetic biology they
may be exposed to in microblogging platforms.
          Instances  when     participants pointed  to  a  perspective  and   its rationale    as illuminating occurred
infrequently. These perspectives reflect times when students found a perspective and rationale different from
their own, but interesting nonetheless as Carla noted, "I found the fact that other people mentioning the price
was interesting because I personally didn't consider the price." As Carla explained, the rationale advanced by
one of her peers was a perspective she had not considered previously but was something she found notable. This
supports the potential of microblogs in exposing participants to perspectives and discussions they may not have
been witnessed before.

Finding 3: Participants weigh counter arguments in relation to their own
Lastly, when answering the worksheet question: "Find an argument that is most similar to yours and provide a
possible COUNTER ARGUMENT," participants were able to develop counter arguments to claims aligned with
their own    as displayed   on    Mentimeter.   This  occurred  across  synthetic   biology-based    contexts  including
microbial  applications     (3 of  7  responses),  plant-microbial  applications    (4  of   7 responses), and   human
applications (3 of 7 responses). For instance, when Heather considered her own claim about using synthetic
biology on microbes, she noted, "although there are many benefits there is a possibility to hurt food webs which
is a major issue." Heather weighed the potential benefits that guided her overall counter argument against the
potential impacts   the  technology   could  have  on  the environment.  With     regard  to plants, a similar outcome
occurred as illustrated in Leah's point that "golden rice... tastes good and has enough Vitamin A; although, no
one knows the impact which could be a bad thing." Here, Leah broadly considered the potential for adverse
outcomes when using synthetic biology in plant-based applications.
          Similarly, students     weighed  counterarguments    against  their own   perspectives    about  human-based
synthetic biology applications.     This is exampled in Edward's response as he explained, "I'm going to use the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      531                                                     © ISLS
point from earlier. The counter argument could be: you have to give it a chance, because you could say the same
thing about most inventions. You don't know the risks but you have to take it." Here, Edward noted that despite
the potential harm that could arise from using synthetic biology on human cells--a perspective that aligns with
his own--there are risks associated with most technological advances, making this not a unique situation as well
as a necessary part of making progress. Participants' ability to construct counter arguments based on their peer's
140-character   claims   alludes    to the   potential of   considering    perspectives  they may    be   exposed    to  on
microblogging platforms that conflict with their own.

Discussion
In this study, we facilitated a discussion about synthetic biology by using an online microblogging platform
which,  like Twitter,  limits responses    to 140   characters  and by  observing   how   students   engage   in argument
through such constraints. Despite the character limitation, students were able to construct concise yet diverse
evaluations  of   the three   different  applications   based   on  a range    of considerations   (impact    on  humans,
environment,    and   animals    and   their  usefulness).  In  addition,  students   were   able  to  form   and    weigh
counterarguments    against   their own  initial arguments.    Previous  research   suggests  that Twitter can   foster  an
increased creating and sharing of ideas beyond the classroom due to the automatic tracking of tweets by day and
time, supporting continuous participation of users (Kassens-Noor, 2012). Even though Mentimeter lacks this
ability to track responses across time, our findings suggest that such platforms can foster combined knowledge
within  the  classroom    due  to   participants'   ability to  examine    and  draw    arguments    from  multiple  peer
perspectives.  Furthermore,    even    though  Twitter  provides    identifying   information about    users, Mentimeter
anonymizes users. Given that anonymity can improve discussion participation (Hsi & Hoadley, 1997), its use
may have    mitigated  the social   influence  effects  found  on   social media,   allowing  more   students'   evaluative
claims to be drawn upon.
         However,     considering   that most  students   did  not  make   considerations  about   the synthetic  biology
applications simultaneously across humans, nonhumans, and the environment, the 140-character limitation may
have constrained their ability to do so. When presenting the scenario for each application, we provided potential
impacts of the application on humans, nonhumans, and the environment. Nonetheless, participants' arguments
tended to be based on impacts that were either broad or concerning just one or two of the three impacts we
provided. Considering that evaluating the impacts across all these categories is a quintessential part of being a
steward of humans, nonhumans, and the environment as a whole (Gutmann, 2011), this observation illustrates a
potential limitation of microblogging in that 140 characters may have forced participants to focus on a topic
without  allowing   them   to express    complex  thoughts    (Junco, Heiberger,    &  Loken,  2011).  In  addition,  it is
interesting that in evaluating their peers' perspectives, the majority of students expressed agreement with their
peers' arguments. Given the complexity of the issues surrounding synthetic biology, it is possible students may
be drawn    to perspectives   that  are  similar to their   own,   reinforcing an   echo chamber    (Colleoni,   Rozza,  &
Arvidsson, 2014) of their own bias and solidifying them on these platforms.
         While this study was exploratory in nature, it did illuminate some interesting phenomenon that should
be explored in further research. An element of SNSs that was not present in our discussion was the ability for
students to  respond   to  their peers'  perspectives   online   as well   as  read each  other's  response.   Given    that
microblogging can document learning processes in real-time, students themselves could better understand their
own  and    their peers'  argumentation      process   given   the  proper  scaffolds.   This  documentation      of their
argumentation could be utilized to highlight the complexity of synthetic biology. This study provides a start to
exploring the affordances and constraints of microblogging features such as character limitations in engaging
student in argumentation surrounding synthetic biology and other SSIs.

References
Auer, M., Zhang, Y. & Lee, P. (2014). The potential of microblogs for the study of public perceptions of climate
         change. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(3), 291-296.
Brossard, D. (2013). New media landscapes and the science information consumer. Proceedings of the National
         Academy of Sciences, 110(3), 14096-14101.
Brossard, D. & Scheufele, D. (2013). Science, new media, and the public. Science, 339(6115), 40-41.
Charmaz, K. (2002). Stories and silences: Disclosures and self in chronic illness. Qualitative Inquiry, 8(3), 302-
         328.
Cheng   A.   &  Lu,   T. (2012).    Synthetic  biology:    An  emerging    engineering   discipline.  Annual   Review    of
         Biomedical Engineering, 16(14), 158-178.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       532                                                     © ISLS
Colleoni, E., Rozza, A. & Arvidsson, A. (2014). Echo chamber or public sphere? Predicting political orientation
          and measuring political homophily in Twitter using big data. Journal of Communication, 64(2), 317-
          332.
Conover,  M.D.,  Ratkiewicz,    J., Francisco, M., Gonçalves,   B., Flammini,  A.  &  Menczer,  F.(2011).  Political
          polarization on Twitter. In Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
          Social Media (p. 89-96). Barcelona, Spain: AAAI.
Driver, R., Leach, J., Millar, R., & Scott, P. (1996). Young people's images of science. Philadelphia, PA: Open
          University Press.
Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms.
          Science Education, 84, 287­312.
Elavsky, C., Mislan, C., & Elavsky, S. (2011). When talking less is more:Exploring outcomes of Twitter usage
          in the large-lecture hall. Learning, Media, and Technology, 36(3), 215-233.
Gao, F., Luo, T. & Zhang, K. (2012). Tweeting for learning: A critical analysis of research on microblogging in
          education published in 2008-2011. British Journal of Educational Technology, 43(5), 783-801.
Greenhow, C., Robelia, B., & Hughes, J. (2009). Learning, teaching, and scholarship in a digital age: Web 2.0
          and classroom research: What path should we take now? Educational Researcher, 38(4), 233-245.
Greenhow, C. & Gleason, B. (2012). Twitteracy: Tweeting as a new literacy practice. The Educational Forum,
          76(4), 464-478.
Greenhow,   C., Gibbins,   T.,  & Menzer,  M.  M.  (2015). Re-thinking  scientific literacy out-of-school: Arguing
          science issues in a niche Facebook application. Computers in Human Behavior, 53, 593-604.
Gutmann,   A.  (2011).    The  ethics of synthetic biology:  Guiding  principles  for emerging  technologies.  The
          Hastings Center Report, 41(4), 17-22.
Hsi, S. & Hoadley, C. (1997). Productive discussion in science: Gender equity through electronic discourse.
          Journal of Science Education and Technology, 6(1), 23-36.
Java, A., Song, X., Finin, T. & Tseng, B. (2007). Why we Twitter: Understanding microblogging usage and
          communities.
Junco, R., Heiberger, G., & Loken, E. (2011). The effect of Twitter on college student engagement and grades.
          Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27(2), 119-132.
Kafai, Y., Telhan, O., Hogan, K., Lui, D., Anderson, E., Walker, J., & Hanna, S. (2017). Growing designs with
          biomakerlab in high school classrooms. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design
          and Children (pp. 503-508). New York, NY: ACM.
Kassens-Noor,   E.  (2012).   Twitter as a teaching   practice to enhance active  and  informal learning in  higher
          education: The case of sustainable tweets. Active Learning in Higher Education, 13(1), 9-21.
Murphy, D. (2013). Twitter: Digital Media and Society Series. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Patronis, T.,  Potari, D., Spiliotopoulous, V.  (1999). Students'   argumentation  in decision-making   on a socio-
          scientific issue: Implications for teaching. International Journal of Science Education, 21(7), 699­702.
Shäfer, M. (2012). Online communication on climate change and climate politics: a literature review. WIREs
          Climate Change, 3(1), 527-543.
Walker, J., Shaw, M., Kafai, Y., & Lui, D. (2018). Biohacking food: A case study of science inquiry and design
          reflections  about  a synthetic  biology  high   school   workshop. In   Proceedings  of  the  Thirteenth
          International Conference of the Learning Sciences (p.1559). London, UK: ISLS.
Yardi, S. & boyd, D. (2010). Dynamic debates: An analysis of group polarization over time on Twitter. Bulletin
          of Science, Technology & Society, 30(5), 316-327.
Yoon, S.   (2008a).    An  evolutionary  approach  to harnessing   complex systems    thinking  in the science and
          technology classroom. International Journal of Science Education, 30(1), 1-32.
Yoon, S. (2008b). Using memes and memetic processes to explain social and conceptual influences on student
          understanding about complex socio-scientific issues. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 45(8),
          900-921.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant (#1623018) from the National Science Foundation to Yasmin Kafai and
Orkan Telhan. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or the University of
Pennsylvania. The authors wish to thank Debora Lui, Gayithri Jayathirtha, and Joyce Yu for their help with
developing and supporting workshop activities.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    533                                                  © ISLS
