    Developing Productive Discourse Through Collective Inquiry of
                                  Knowledge-Building Principles
                      Yuyao Tong, The University of Hong Kong, tongyuyao2016@gmail.com
                         Carol K. K. Chan, The University of Hong Kong, ckkchan@hku.hk

         Abstract: This study investigates how secondary school students inquired into knowledge-
         building principles and engaged in meta-talk for productive knowledge building. The study
         involved a class of Grade 10 students in Hong Kong, working on collective inquiry in Art and
         Design using Knowledge Forum® (KF), and reflecting on their discourse, using knowledge-
         building principles. A key design involved students writing on KF inquiring into knowledge-
         building principles and meta-talk on the processes. Results indicated that the students engaged
         in productive    online  discourse   on  both  domain   and   discourse  understanding    progressively.
         Classroom analyses suggested how students engaged in meta-talk and inquiry into principles
         with corresponding change in the knowledge about discourse. The implications of scaffolding
         students' inquiry of principles in a knowledge-building environment are discussed.

Introduction
Dialogue, as a talk that combines the sharing of ideas with meaning making, acts as a medium for developing
students' learning and thinking (Mercer & Littleton, 2007) and specifically important for improving ideas and
creating new   knowledge     (Bereiter   & Scardamalia,    2016). It   provides a theoretical   framework   for  computer-
supported collaborative learning (CSCL) (Stahl, Cress, Ludvigsen, & Law, 2014). Knowledge building (KB), as
a CSCL model, aims to advance community collective knowledge via idea-centered discourse (Scardamalia &
Bereiter, 2014). Scardamalia and Bereiter (2014) argued that knowledge building will fail if knowledge-building
dialogue   fails; therefore,  the  essential  goal in  a knowledge-building      environment    is  to help   students  take
collective responsibility    for developing   knowledge-building     dialogue.  To  support   such  dialogue,   Knowledge
Forum® (KF) has been designed as a collaborative discourse space in which students can develop discourse
from a knowledge-building perspective, with the aid of its various technological functions (e.g., build-on others'
ideas, linking    and rise-above    ideas, and   revise  ideas,  etc.) and  metacognitive     scaffolds  (e.g., "I need  to
understand",   "My    theory",   "A better   theory").  Further,  Scardamalia    (2002) proposed    twelve    principles to
characterize knowledge building and to guide teachers and students to engage in a principle-based instead of
procedure-based learning environment; these principles include epistemic agency, improvable ideas, community
knowledge, idea diversity and so forth that are the essential themes of knowledge building. While it is a taken-
for-granted theme     but limited   systematic   study  of what   such   understanding  of    principles would     influence
students' productive discourse engagement and how to scaffold such understanding is not well examined. Many
KB studies assert the importance of principles (van Aalst & Chan, 2007; Zhang et al., 2018), but this is one of
the few  to develop    a  systematic   design  focusing   on  students'   understanding  and    collective inquiry  of  KB
principles based on their authentic practice and work thereon rather on their their declarative knowledge of a list
of principles.
         Examining principles as conceptual and epistemic artefacts for inquiry is critical for knowledge work
as they are the epistemic criteria for knowledge generation. Many studies have been analyzed and scaffolded
productive KF discourse (Chan, Lam, & Leung, 2012; Niu & van Aalst, 2009; Zhang, Scardamalia, Lamon,
Messina, & Reeve, 2007), but how students understand the nature of discourse and specifically, how it needs to
be  linked  to KB    principles   and its  influence  on  students'    productive discourse   engagement    has    not been
understood. In related research, Wegerif (2001) developed dialogic pedagogy for teaching of dialogic skills and
ground   rules (e.g., all relevant    information  is  shared),  to  help  students develop     meaningful    discourse  for
problem solving. Similar to the teaching of ground rules to provide students' explicit knowledge about dialogue,
we  propose    that  students  need   to  have an  understanding     of the  nature  of discourse;     students' epistemic
understanding     of knowledge     building   and  principles   would   be important    in   students'  creative work    for
productive discourse. This study addresses this issue, as part of a large study that examining the design, process,
and roles of a meta-talk computer-supported knowledge-building environment for students' understanding of
discourse and knowledge advance. In a preliminary study, we reported that students' understanding of discourse
could influence their taking collective responsibility in the community discussion. This study examines further
on how students' collective inquiry of principles can be scaffold and its relation to knowledge-building dialogue
engagement,    especially  for   low-achieving   students  who   might  have    difficulties in engaging   in   higher-order
thinking skills   (Zohar  et al., 2001)   and have  less opportunity    to take responsibility   to engage  in   productive

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       534                                                      © ISLS
discourse as teachers believe that low-achieving students need more direct instruction (Zohar & Dori, 2003).
Overall,  this study designed   an  environment  and    examined  the role of  design on students' productive  KF
discourse and increased collective responsibility; how students reflected on their discourse and engaged in meta-
talk and  build  knowledge   about  KB   principles; and   the influences  of these processes on their  subsequent
understanding on knowledge building. Specifically, three research questions were addressed: (1) Did students
engage in productive KF discourse with increasing collective cognitive responsibility over time? (2) How did
the dynamics of classroom meta-talk and processes scaffold students' collective inquiry of principles? And (3)
How was students' understanding of the nature of discourse reflected in interviews and what were its relations
to the KF knowledge-building dialogue engagement?

Methods

Design the knowledge building meta-talk environment: collective inquiry of principles
This study drawn upon the data from students' KF discourse, classroom talk, and interviews involving twenty-
one Grade 10 students from a low-performing school based on students' public examination results studying the
topic on "Green Design" participated in the study over one semester. The key design was to include different
KF views and one specifically devoted to inquiry into KB principles. Specific designs included: (1) KB Wall
and ideas development trajectory (students posted and shared their initial ideas on a wall with others' build-on,
followed by a classroom reflection) (Weeks 1-3); (2) authentic problems and KF inquiry (students proposed
authentic problems by watching videos on "design and earth environment" and group discussion, followed by
KF inquiry) (Weeks 4-6); (3) deepening inquiry through comparing discourse (students worked in groups to
generate knowledge about their prior understanding of discourse by comparing their KF discussions) (Week 7-
9);  (4) connecting  students'  understanding  and   KB  principles (students  connected and  matched   their prior
understanding on discourse with the epistemic criteria for discourse that are the KB principles) (Weeks 10-12);
and  (5) collective inquiry and reflection (students wrote portfolio notes on KF to reflect on their collective
understanding of principles) (Weeks 13-15).

Data Analysis and Results

RQ1. Examining KF engagement and inquiry into principles and domain knowledge

Students' KF engagement and change towards connectivity and collective responsibility
The first research question examined student engagement and inquiry into domain knowledge and principles
and change over time. Primarily, the key question is can students engage in productive discourse? We first
conducted   KBDeX    (Oshima    et al., 2012)  analysis to explore  how   discourse network changed  between   the
Period 1 (before classroom meta-talk on principles - Week 1 to 6) and Period 2 (after classroom meta-talk on
principles - Week 7 to 15). Students' KF notes were exported into KBDeX, which produced three networks of
analysis-students,  discourse,  and keywords-based      on the selected conceptual   keywords. We   examined   the
discourse network change.    As Figure 1 shows, the discourse network is more integrated with few fragmented
notes in Period 2 than Period 1. In Period 1 (1a and 1c), there are many separate notes (red) remained outside
the  main  cluster (yellow). In Period   2 (1b and 1d),  the discourse  network  was  more  integrated, with  fewer
fragmented notes (red). This suggests that in Period 2, students engaged in KF discourse in a more cohesive
discussion and productively with sustained collective knowledge advancement than Period 1.

 Figure 1. KF discourse network change - principles (1a&1b) and domain discussion (1c&1d) in two periods.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    535                                                 © ISLS
Inquiry thread analysis of online KF discourse
Further   to overall network     analyses, content   analysis   was    conducted   to  examine    how    students    engaged    in
productive   knowledge    building. The    KF   notes   were   parsed   into threads   based   on  the  conceptual     problems
(Zhang  et   al., 2009), with  14  such threads   being    identified  (e.g. "design   and   environmental       development").
Individual notes were coded within each inquiry thread, using a coding scheme based on a theory- and data-
driven  approach    and  including  questions   (Hakkarainen,     2003),   contributions   (Chuy     et al., 2011),   and    meta-
discourse (Table 1). As Table 2 shows, the results suggested that students asked sustained questions for deeper
inquiry, enriched and improved on ideas, and used elaboration to support those ideas; in addition, students also
engaged in meta-discourse by referring back to previous discussions to synthesize what had been discussed and
rise-above the inquiry process using reference function incorporating other community ideas. A second rater
coded  30%    of   data, and  the inter-rater  reliability was    .92  for  questioning,   .86   for  theorizing,    and  .87  for
community (Cohen's kappas).

Table 1: Coding scheme for analyzing KF discourse in inquiry threads

Codes                Sub-codes                       Description                                      Examples
Questioning         Fact-seeking    Questions on seeking factual information       What is the definition of design?
and                 Explanation-    Questions     on      seeking   open-ended     How to use design to solve environmental
Identifying           seeking       responses with explanation                     problems?
Gaps                 Sustained      Asking     further    questions   based   on   How can a design be regarded as a good
                      inquiry       previous   notes   or ideas   and  make  the   design if it cannot solve any problems? (A
                                    discussion deeper                              question asked based on a previous note).
Theorizing          Simple claim    Simple (dis)agree or repeat a statement        I agree with the idea.
and                 Proposing an    Proposing   a theory   that explain  certain   Design can improve the quality of our life.
Improvable           explanation    phenomena for the first time
Ideas               Enriching an    Enriching a theory with elaboration and        A   good   discourse  needs   to  have  a good
                     explanation    new information                                question first...The question can be solved
                                                                                   through    discussion     and  new     questions
                                                                                   would emerge...
                    Supporting an   Supporting    an   already  existing  theory   It could be or not, but we can learn new
                     explanation    proposed    by      another   student    and   knowledge     and    improve   ideas    through
                                    providing a justification                      communication.
                    Improving an    Improving    an    already  existing  theory   A good discourse refers to a community
                     explanation    through   elaboration,  specifying    details  discussion      rather    than     individuals
                                    and using new evidence                         expressing    ideas.  Students    can  build-on
                                                                                   other's   ideas...we   can    acquire  valuable
                                                                                   ideas through discussion.
                    Challenging     Challenging or disagreement an existing        What    you   mentioned    about   the  use  of
                                    ideas proposed by other students               design...but I do not think we can solve
                                                                                   all the problems by our artifacts design.
Meta-                Connection     Reference to their own or others' notes,       A   good   discourse  needs   to  have  diverse
discourse                           or  quoting   extra   sources   to   advance   ideas,  as proposed    by     ("diverse   ideas
                                    understanding                                  for  discourse"    S077)...we     also need  to
                                                                                   develop    a   productive     discourse    with
                                                                                   meaningful ideas.
                     Rise-above     Refer  back   to what  has  been   discussed   Through our discussion, we discussed the
                                    and ask   a new    question for   monitoring   idea of   design...by        ("design"  student
                                    the inquiry   process   and   advancing  the   S089)     and  design     can  be   developed
                                    discussion; or generating an explanationorevaluationtoappraisetheirownorothers' notestogether with the society by("designand development" student S005) What weneedtodiscussfurtherishowcanthe
                                                                                   design be improved?
                     Synthesize     Coordinating     and  integrating  collective       ("a   good   discourse   needs    to have
                                    ideas  from   previous  discussion   with  areflectiondiverse ideas...") by student084  ("...weneedtoqueryingothers'ideas")by
                                                                                   student011. In this discussion, they think
                                                                                   that students   need   to participate   actively
                                                                                   with diverse ideas...

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        536                                                            © ISLS
Table 2: Number of different codes in inquiry threads

 Thread     Fact   Explain   Sustain   Simple    Propose    Enrich    Support     Improve   Connect     Rise   Synthesize
 #1           0       5        7         4          18         6        1           1          3         1         0
 #2           0       4        5         4          14         5        4           3          7         2         2
 #3           1       4        8         2          5          7        3           2          3         2         0
 #4           1       2       12         2          19         7        2           0          8         1         0
 #5           0       2        9         2          5          1        3           4          4         2         4
 #6           0       4        1         1          4          0        1           0          0         0         0
 #7           0       4        3         0          5          1        2           2          2         2         2
 #8           0       3        5         3          7          4        2           4          3         0         1
 #9           0       0        1         0          4          4        9           0          0         2         3
 #10          1       0        1         0          2          1        0           1          0         0         0
 #11          0       1        5         2          9          1        0           3          1         1         1
 #12          0       2        6         0          6          9        3           4         10         2         8
 #13          0       2        3         0          1          2        2           0          0         0         0
 #14          0       3        2         0          8         10        0           1          0         0         3
 Total        3       36      68         20       106         58        33          25        41         15        24
 Mean       0.21    2.57      4.86      1.54      7.57       4.14       2.36       1.79       2.93      1.07     1.71
 SD         0.41    1.49      3.2       1.45      5.37       3.16       2.16       1.52       3.17      0.88     2.19

        To understand how students' discourse changed, the KF notes were divided into two periods-before
and after the classroom meta-talk on KB principles. We calculated the frequency of high-level discourse moves
(Table 3), and analyses were conducted to examine whether students engaged in more productive discourse
from Period 1 to Period 2. Paired sample t-test indicated that there were significant increases from Period 1 to
Period 2 in terms of sustained inquiry, t (20) = 2.597, p<.05; enriching an explanation, t (20) = 3.525, p<.01;
supporting an explanation, t (20) = 3.068, p<.01; improving an explanation, t (20) = 2.958, p<.01; connection, t
(20) = 3.118, p<.01; rise-above, t (20) = 2.366, p<.05; and synthesize, t (20) = 2.915, p<.01. The results suggest
students' discourse moves changed to a more knowledge-building approach, which the students engaged more
in supporting and improving their ideas and explanation. Further, students also engaged in a reflection approach
with collective  ideas   coordinating  and  monitoring    collective ideas    for deeper  inquiry.  Overall,   the  results
showed that students engaged in a more productive knowledge-building discourse over time.

Table 3: Frequency of high-level notes in Period 1 and Period 2

 High-level discourse                        Period 1 (Week 1 to Week 6)             Period 2 (Week 7 to Week 15)
 Explanation-seeking question                             20                                       16
 Sustained inquiry                                        29                                       39
 Enriching an explanation                                 28                                       30
 Supporting an explanation                                8                                        25
 Improving an explanation                                 2                                        23
 Challenging                                              4                                        10
 Connection                                               9                                        32
 Rise-above                                               0                                        15
 Synthesizing                                             0                                        24

RQ2. How did students engage in meta-talk for collective inquiry of principles?
This study  also analyzed   themes   identified  from  the  classroom   processes   to  investigate how    students  could
engage in productive KF discourse (RQ1). We discussed the design and examined how students engaged in
collective inquiry of principles mediated by classroom meta-talk for knowledge building.

Scaffolding principle-based understanding with KB Wall idea reflection and KF inquiry
Generating productive discourse is key to knowledge building for community knowledge advancement. In the
knowledge-building    classroom,     scaffolding is initially  used  to help   students   engage    in a principle-based
collaborative   learning  environment.   The     knowledge-building     wall  (KB    Wall)   (Fig   2a),   as a  physical
visualization of KF, provides an opportunity for students to publish their ideas by posting their questions, and to
build-on each other's ideas (the lines represent the build-on relations). Further, to scaffold students to track their
idea development on the KB Wall, students were asked to write rise-above portfolios to reflect on how their

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      537                                                      © ISLS
ideas improved with referencing the community's ideas from the KB Wall (Figures 2b and 2c). Students shared
their rise-above  portfolio and  refined their  ideas  through classroom   discussion  while   continuing   their
discussions on KF (Fig 2d), both in terms of domain knowledge and understanding of principles. KF provided a
collaborative space for improving ideas and sustaining inquiry through idea-centered discourse. This KB Wall
and rise-above portfolio writing experience might help students engage in the sense of principles of improvable
ideas, rise-above, epistemic agency, and community knowledge.

                      Figure 2. KB Wall (a) - Rise-above portfolio (b&c) -KF inquiry (d).

Comparing KF discourse for developing criteria of knowledge building discourse
Understanding the knowledge-building principles, which are the epistemic criteria for the nature of discourse
and standards of knowledge work is important for producing knowledge-building dialogue. After discussing
matters on KF for a period of time, students started to reflect on their discourse, using criteria for developing of
a good discourse. Two discourse moves that students generated in KF were provided (Fig 3a), along with a
designed prompt sheet (Fig 3b). Students drew mind map, which is one of the scaffold to help low-achieving
students to visualize their ideas, as a way to explain their comparison and understanding of the discourse moves
(Fig 3c). They shared their mind map with the class, followed by a classroom discussion. The following excerpt
illustrates how criteria for good discourse were developed by students through their KF discourse reflection.
The   discussion suggests that these students were not only  described the structures of  the threads, they also
assessed the quality of the notes (they have a summary note in the discourse move) and noted the strategies for
improving a discourse (we can make a summary to reflect...and integrate the different ideas together).

        Figure 3. Prompt sheet for criteria generating (3b) and Mind map on discourse comparison (3c).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  538                                                 © ISLS
             T(Teacher)      Can anyone explain your understanding of a good discourse based on
                             your community KF discussion comparison?
             S7(Student)     We compared two discourse moves that we proposed in KF...The
                             first discourse move was more singular with a few straight build-
                             on  lines...The  other discourse   move   was   more  diversified     with
                             spread build-on lines...their idea was getting deeper and had the
                             potential to produce a new question to sustain the inquiry...
             T               Good point! Can anyone add more?
             S7              We can make a summary to reflect on what we had discussed...
             S8              ...The "diverse" refers to the idea development...
             S9              They had a summary note in the discourse move; the "summary"
                             was one of the criteria we proposed for a good discourse...

Identifying and categorizing epistemic criteria linked to principles
Another  aspect  of scaffolding students'   understanding  of  principles is the linking   the  criteria generated by
students (learner criteria) and the knowledge-building    principles   (expert criteria). Students constructed   mind
maps that categorized the learner criteria into different groups and linked them to "expert criteria" (Fig 4). For
example,  they put  the "reference  others' idea" and    "synthesizing and reflection"    into one group.  Next,  they
started to link these learner criteria to KB principles and found some of the principles were overlapped different
groups. Different arrows are connected the criteria generated by students and the KB principles. Students were
asked to explain  the reasons   for their categorizing   and linking. The  teacher invited     students to explain the
categories and  links they  developed  and  the following    example   showed   how  students    explain   the reasons
(reflection is a type of assessment that can help us to revise and improve ideas...) and gradually engaged in a
deeper discussion in illustrating how to improve a discourse with using these principles as strategies.

            Figure 4. Criteria categorizing and principles matching and Mind map with translation.

               T            Can  anyone   explain how    the connections  you   made between     your
                            criteria and the principles?
               S1           We put the principle "improvable ideas" here because the question
                            in this discourse move made the ideas developed... ...
               S3           Yes, reflection is a type of assessment that can help us to revise
                            and improve ideas in the discussion.
               S1           For the "collective responsibility", we connected it the contribution.
               T            Can you explain a bit more?
               S4           It refers to that everyone should take the responsibility to join the
                            discussion and contribute to the community...

Collective inquiry with portfolio notes on principles understanding
Students continued to work on KF and wrote portfolio notes reflecting on their understanding on the nature of
good discourse and linking it to KB principles. Figure 5 shows an example of KF view for collective inquiry on
principles and a portfolio note using reference function using to explain their understanding.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    539                                                    © ISLS
                Figure 5. Portfolio note for reflection on understanding of discourse with translation.

RQ3. Deepening understanding of principles and relations with KF engagement
The third research question examined the role of design and processes on students' understanding of discourse
and   the shift towards   principles as epistemic criteria.  We  examined   students'  open-ended  questions      and
interviews and we also examined how their understanding was related to their productive KF discourse.

From viewing good discourse as acquiring an agreement to viewing it as improving ideas
Qualitative analysis of students' interviews showed that the changes in their understanding of discourse between
their pretest and  posttest interviews. Students initially thought the  purpose  of discourse was  only    to   get an
agreement   or  a correct answer, after the program,  their  understanding  of discourse changed   to   reflect a KB
approach. Student LYE thought the major theme of discussion was to get answers in the pretest; however, in the
posttest, she started to think that the purpose of discourse was to improve ideas through sustained discussion.

 Pretest Interview     "A good discussion is asking a question together...to get answers through discussion."
       PosttestInterview"A  good  discussion  connects   ideas  together   for deeper  discussion...The    initialquestion for this cluster of discussion was "what is design?"...The idea about designcontinued to improve through the discussion."

From viewing good discourse as a process of merely discussion to viewing it as rise-above
To engage in a productive discourse, students need to querying ideas, coordinate ideas with reflection and rise-
above for further inquiry. Interviews showed that students initially regarded discourse as a process of expressing
and accepting ideas, rather than one involving build-on, challenging, and reviewing. However, after the program,
student ZLY had an awareness of the importance of reflection and synthesizing.

 Pretest Interview     "A good discourse is expressing ideas and accepting others' ideas."
       PosttestInterview"A good discussion requires everyone to reflect and synthesize these ideas in order tosee if there any new problems emerged...We have different ideas in a discussion, andit is good to generate new questions for further discussion..."

From viewing good discourse as sharing of ideas to advancing community knowledge
To  create knowledge,   students  not only  need to  understand the sharing of  ideas, but also to distinguish      the
difference between knowledge sharing and knowledge creation. Students initially thought that discussion was
for ideas  sharing and  problem   solving only,  and had   no awareness  of creating   knowledge.  Later  on,   when
students engaged in the classroom meta-talk on principles, they started to emphasize on the difference between
"sharing" and "creation". This excerpt shows that student GLM began to distinguish the two metaphors.

 Pretest Interview     "Everyone share ideas...I am not sure whether we can create new knowledge..."
       PosttestInterview"A  good  discussion needs   to be  a continuous build-on.  We   discussed "knowledgecontributor"and"knowledgecreator"...forbuildingontoadvancecommunityknowledge...and create new knowledge through discussion..."

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    540                                                    © ISLS
         Students'  interview    responses   were  coded   into three  levels. Quantitative    analyses    indicated that
students' understanding of discourse by interview correlated with their productive KF discourse moves, in terms
of sustained   inquiry (r=.556,   p<.01),  enriching  an   explanation  (r=.722, p<.01),  supporting    an  explanation
(r=.439, p<.05),   improving   an explanation   (r=.738, p<.01),   challenging (r=.485,   p<.05), connection    (r=.633,
p<.01), rise-above (r=.467, p<.05), and synthesizing (r=.754, p<.01). The findings suggested that students with
deeper understanding of the principles also seemed more likely to be engaged in KF productive discourse.

Conclusion and implications
The study has examined how students' collective inquiry of KB principles for developing productive discourse
can  be  scaffold  and its relationship   to productive  KF    discourse.  Analysis of  KF   discourse  using   KBDeX
indicated how students' discourse became more coherent and productive in Period 2, after they inquiring on the
KB   principles in the classroom     meta-talk, reflecting on  their KF   discourse and   linking it to KB   principles.
Classroom design and processes suggested how students can engage in collective inquiry into KB principles to
support their knowledge-building work. We also characterized students' understanding of principles as it related
to their productive KF discourse engagement and examined relations between their understanding of principles
with KF    collective  inquiry.  Many   studies  have   proposed   the importance   of  KB     principles, however,   no
systematic work were conducted on students' collective inquiry into principles using both KF and classroom
discourse.   This study has shown how students authentically worked on principles that were explicitly integrated
with their KF discourse, and the possibility of changing students' understanding of the nature of discourse by
linking it with principles. In sum, this study is particularly important, as little research has focused on how
students' collective inquiry of KB principles can be scaffold to help them engage in productive discourse.

References
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2016). "Good Moves" in knowledge-creating dialogue. QWERTY, 11(2), 12-26.
Chan, C. K. K., Lam, I. C. K., & Leung, R. W. H. (2012). Can collaborative knowledge building promote both
         scientific processes and science achievement? International Journal of Educational Psychology, 1(3),
         199-227.
Chuy, M., Zhang, J., Resendes, M., Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2011). Does contributing to a knowledge
         building dialogue lead to individual advancement of knowledge. Paper presented at the CSCL2011.
Hakkarainen,    K. (2003).  Progressive   inquiry in a  computer-supported    biology   class. Journal  of  Research   in
         Science Teaching, 40(10), 1072-1088.
Mercer,  N.,   &   Littleton, K.  (2007).  Dialogue   and  development     of  children's thinking:   A    socio-cultural
         approach. London: Routledge.
Niu, H., & van Aalst, J. (2009). Participation in knowledge-building discourse: an analysis of online discussions
         in mainstream and honours social studies. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, 35(1), 1-23.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social network
         analysis   application   for knowledge     building   discourse.  Educational    Technology    Research     and
         Development, 60(5), 903-921.
Sawyer,  R.   K.   (2014). The   Cambridge     handbook    of  the learning   sciences. New    York,  NY:    Cambridge
         University Press.
Scardamalia,   M.  (2002).  Collective cognitive  responsibility   for the advancement    of   knowledge.   In B. Smith
         (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, and
         technology. In R. K. Sawyer (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed., pp.
         397-417). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, G., Cress, U., Ludvigsen, S., & Law, N. (2014). Dialogic foundations of CSCL. International Journal of
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9(2), 117-125.
van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2007). Student-directed assessment of knowledge building using electronic
         portfolios. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 175-220.
Wegerif, R. (2001). Applying a dialogical model of reason in the classroom. In Joiner, R., Faulkner, D., Miell,
         D., & Littleton, K. (Eds.) Rethinking Collaborative Learning, Free association Press.
Zhang,   J., Scardamalia,  M.,   Lamon,    M.,  Messina,   R., &   Reeve,  R.  (2007).  Socio-cognitive    dynamics   of
         knowledge     building   in  the work   of  9-  and   10-year-olds.  Educational    Technology    Research    &
         Development, 55, 117-145. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 27(3), 390-430.
Zhang, J., Tao, D., Chen, M.-H., Sun, Y., Judson, D., & Naqvi, S (2018). Co-organizing the collective journey
         of inquiry with idea thread mapper.    Journal of the Learning Sciences, 27(3), 390-430.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      541                                                    © ISLS
