                      Co-Design for Learner Help-Giving Across
                                   Physical and Digital Contexts
                                  Ishrat Ahmed, University of Pittsburgh, isa14@pitt.edu
                              Victor Girotto, Arizona State University, vaugusto@asu.edu
                              Areej Mawasi, Arizona State University, amwassi@asu.edu
                     Amanda Whitehurst, STEMteachersPHX, amanda@stemteachersphx.org
                              Ruth Wylie, Arizona State University, Ruth.Wylie@asu.edu
                                Erin Walker, University of Pittsburgh, eawalker@pitt.edu

          Abstract: With the growing integration of technology in the classrooms, learners can now
          develop collaboration skills by applying them across diverse contexts. While this represents a
          great opportunity,    it also   brings  challenges  due  to an  increased   need    to support   individual
          learners  across   multiple     learning activities. We    propose    a technology-enhanced        learning
          ecosystem called UbiCoS that supports learner help-giving during face-to-face collaboration
          and across  three     different digital  learning  environments:   an   interactive  digital  textbook,    an
          online   Q&A    forum,   and    a teachable  agent.  In  this  paper,   we  present    a first step   in  the
          development     of  UbiCoS:     five co-design    sessions  with   16   learners that    give  insight   into
          learners' perceptions    of help-giving.    The   findings  provided    us  with technology-related      and
          curriculum-related      design  opportunities   for  facilitating learner   interaction   across   multiple
          platforms.

Introduction
Computer   Supported    Collaborative       Learning  (CSCL)   is  becoming     ubiquitous    in   part due  to  the increasing
presence  of  technology     in formal    learning environments,   creating   learning  scenarios      which involve    multiple
activities distributed across physical and virtual spaces. For example, learners in a classroom may move from
having a face-to-face discussion surrounding the speed of a moving car, to watching and commenting on an
online video on the same topic, to completing a problem set at home using a digital environment. Given these
diverse contexts, Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer (2009) articulate a growing need for researchers to explore
how CSCL fits into broader pedagogical scenarios rather than designing a single CSCL experience for learners.
          Integrating multiple CSCL technologies in a classroom creates unique opportunities for understanding
and facilitating   learner   development    of   collaboration  skills. Through    interaction     via  multiple technological
platforms (e.g., discussion forums, wikis, online Q&A), learners leverage their skills in different contexts; their
collaborative interactions facilitate the development of literacies related to collaboration, problem-solving, and
the subject  domain.    However,    while   the   use of  a single CSCL     technology     in formal    education   can  lead   to
improvement     in learning   performance,     integrating   multiple   technologies   within    a single classroom     practice
comes with behavioral, pedagogical, and logistical challenges (Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2010). The same learner
might  behave    differently    when    interacting   online  rather  than   face-to-face  and     may   struggle    to transfer
knowledge    and   skills  across   platforms.    Our  research   vision  is  to  explore     how   we   can  design    multiple
technological platforms within a learner-centered classroom to facilitate collaborative skills, with a focus on
mutual help-giving.     Mutual     help-giving     involves  a collection    of   behaviors   including    sharing   resources,
explaining  concepts,   giving    feedback,  and   challenging  each    other's reasoning     (Johnson   and  Johnson,     2009).
Learners have many opportunities to engage in these behaviors as part of their schooling, ranging from brief
informal interactions while working on an assignment to discussing ideas on an extended group project.
          We  have   created    a novel   learning environment,    called   UbiCoS    (Ubiquitous      Collaboration  Support),
that includes three platforms where learners engage in help-giving surrounding ratios and proportions concepts.
The first technology platform is Modelbook, an interactive digital textbook integrated with a discussion forum
which  is intended   to be   used  synchronously      and collaboratively   with  one's  peers     (see Figure  1,  left). In the
environment, learners can see questions relevant to each page of text (posted by their classmates or teacher) and
have a single discussion in response to each question. The interactions in the textbook are intended to be similar
to face-to-face discussion in the classroom but lower the barrier for participation since all learners are expected
to make contributions, compared to a whole-class discussion where only a subset of learners might participate.
The  next  technology     platform    is  Khan    Academy,     which  we    use   for asynchronous       collaboration     with a
geographically distributed learning community (see Figure 1, right). While Khan Academy is well-known for its
instructional   videos,   it also  has    a collaborative    learning   space   where   people     participate   in  knowledge
construction by commenting on videos to ask and answer questions about the content (www.khanacademy.org;

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         545                                                          © ISLS
Taton,  2011).  We    expect  learners to  see  similar    benefits in  answering  questions   on   Khan  Academy     as on
Modelbook, although because interactions are asynchronous, learners can take time to phrase their answer to
produce   more  explicit   and thoughtful    explanations     (Wu   &   Hiltz, 2004).  However,   learners  may    feel less
connected to this platform due to its asynchronous nature and anonymous peers (Hiltz, 1998) and limit their help
giving  behavior. The   third  technology    is a speech-based      teachable  agent,  Cobi. Learners  interact with    Cobi
using spoken language and a web application. The web application displays a problem description and partial
worked-out solution steps in table form to guide the learners in their teaching of Cobi. There is a microphone
image that learners use to press and talk to Cobi. Learners walk Cobi through the worked-out problems using
spoken  language,     explaining  each   step.  Cobi    listens and   responds    with questions,   self-explanations,  and
encouragement (Lubold, Pon-Barry, & Walker, 2015). During these interactions, we expect learners to benefit
by articulating their reasoning and responding to agent questions. Learners may also feel as though they can
make more mistakes when interacting with an agent rather than a peer (Chase, Chin, Oppezzo & Schwartz,
2009). On the other hand, they may be frustrated by the relative limitations of the agent (e.g., imperfect speech
recognition, limited ability to explain its reasoning).
          The  goals   for UbiCoS      are twofold:      Provide    a platform    for  improved   understanding    of   how
collaborative  skills transfer across    activities and  support    the development    of these  productive   collaborative
interactions by scaffolding learner and teacher practices. These goals are difficult to achieve, as there are several
designs and logistical challenges related to building such a complex system. In this paper, we take a first step
towards   the design  and  development     of  UbiCoS    by   investigating the   following  research question: What     are
learners' motivations   and   strategies for  help-giving?    To  shed  light  on this question, we   engaged   in five  co-
design sessions with middle school learners surrounding this theme. Using the results of these sessions, we can
begin to design a curriculum and related technological support that facilitates learner help-giving across multiple
platforms.

                    Figure: 1. (left) discussion on the right-hand side of the interactive digital textbook;
                                                (right) Khan Academy discussion.

Student input: Co-design sessions
With the above platforms as our starting point, we conducted a series of co-design workshop sessions with 8th
graders to   understand  learner  perceptions     of   help-giving    and how   they   could  inform  our  approaches    for
technology and curriculum design. Over seven months, we conducted five after-school two-hour workshops. We
followed Sanders' (2003) approach to participatory design, where users' participation reveals their underlying
goals  and needs.   Participants  came     from   different   schools   within  a single  school  district located  in   the
Southwestern   United   States  and were     part   of a district leadership   program   that met   regularly after school
throughout the year. 87% of learners in the district qualify for free or reduced priced meals. In total, 16 learners
participated in the sessions (9 female, 7 male).
          To  build   rapport  between    learners     and researchers,   all  workshops    started with   15  minutes   of
unstructured social time over food. The goals for the first workshop were to familiarize learners with the project
context and goals. Learners interacted with two of the digital contexts (the interactive digital textbook and the
teachable agent), and designed achievement badges based on their previous collaboration experiences outside of
these sessions, as  well   as the two  technologies      they used  in  the session.  The goal  for the  second  and    third
workshops was to understand how learners conceptualized aspects of technology-based support. In the second
workshop, learners participated in a group design activity to brainstorm and create their own intelligent agent
within the Khan Academy context, including its appearance, characteristics, and behavior. They were then asked

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         546                                                    © ISLS
to draw and describe their agents, as well as to develop a skit depicting interaction with their agents. In the third
workshop,   we  took  the  Speed  Dating    approach   (Davidoff,   Lee, Dey,   & Zimmerman,       2007)   and  presented
learners  with    several  scenarios    of  various  help-giving    dialogues,   enacted   by     Anki's   Cozmo     robot
(www.anki.com/en-us/cozmo).       We    then  had   learners write   and  enact  their own   dialogues.    In   the fourth
workshop,    we   further investigated   help-giving   motivations.   Learners   played  a  game      where   there    were
opportunities to informally help each other, filled out a self-report questionnaire related to their motivation more
generally, and discussed their responses. The goal for the fifth and final workshop was to leverage learners'
expertise as users and get their feedback on three preliminary findings and three design ideas. Learners first
individually wrote down their thoughts on each item we presented, and then we discussed them as a group.
         These  sessions   resulted  in videos, discussion   recordings,  and   paper  artifacts. Rather   than analyzing
each workshop individually, we analyze their results in conjunction to better understand our research questions.
Our  analysis follows  the  general  inductive  method     (Thomas,  2006).  Several   members     of the  research    team
initially generated codes for the data. All data was then coded by one of the authors in two distinct passes. To
validate the clarity of the coding, another author was handed a set of thirty data points (18.9% of all data) as
well as  the list of  codes and  was    asked  to   assign codes  to the  data. Agreement   between      both   raters was
acceptable,  Kappa=0.692.   As   additional   validation,  findings  were discussed   with  the   learners themselves    in
Workshop 5 (W5).
         Throughout    the  workshops,     learners discussed   and  demonstrated  motivations     for  helping     others.
Perhaps the most salient reason for helping was reciprocity. One should help others because they have helped
you before or could help you in the future. For example, when learners developed a script in which an agent
tries to convince a learner to help someone else (W3), other learners had the agent appealing to reciprocity:
"They helped you before, so the best thing to do is help them." Another learner commented on his motivations:
"They always helped you before (...) you're always gonna need help sometime (...) if you help them they might
help you." Along similar lines, learners also expressed the notion of helping their friends in need. In W3, when
asked for feedback on whether the prompt "It is a great practice to learn too" would motivate a learner to
answer a question, learners quickly and emphatically replied that it would not. Asked how they would prompt
help instead, they proposed "your friends need help." Learners also exposed their reasoning for not helping
someone as they should already know the content. For example, a learner told us about a time when he was
aggressive to a request for help in his class: (W3) "Because we had learned it the year before that, everybody
already knew it." Similarly, learners may also be unwilling to help when they have already helped several
times. Both groups acknowledged this into their W3 scripts: "but I already answered it 4 times." Learners also
expressed their lack of time or bad mood as other reasons for not helping.
         A second major theme brought up by learners was their strategy for giving help. The most striking
feature of their strategy was a focus on empathy and feelings before actual content. For example, the badges
learners developed in W1 highly focused on the social components of help-giving rather than on cognitive ones.
Themes   such  as fighting  to  bully,  being  welcoming,    and showing   etiquette   were prevalent    across   learners'
badges. Furthermore, in W2 one of the agents was described as having feelings, and its skit began with the agent
automatically   detecting  that  the learner   was   sad   ("What's  wrong?")   before  proceeding     with   the   content
explanation. One learner explained the reasoning: "if you're a strict person giving directions the person you're
telling will lose track of you and doze off while you explain it. But if you're friendly, if you are friends with
them, you can keep asking if they get it and since they know you they're gonna listen to you better" (W5).
Learners  also  repeatedly  expressed    their  concern    with the  clarity and  conciseness      of information.     For
example, a learner wanted the support to "give enough information to the point they [learner seeking help]
understand" (W5). Similarly, other learner commented their approach for helping: "Give them [other student]
the key ideas so it helps them better" (W5) and that we should make sure that "the information that the system
gives is comprehensible and not confusing" (W5). Finally, there were diverging opinions on persistence while
helping. When prompted whether they would persist in trying to help someone who needed help, the majority
of learners said that they would persist (W5). Learners also expressed strong reliance on knowledgeable help
(i.e., teachers) especially when they could not help any further. For example, in W5 a learner suggested adding
to the textbook app a chatroom with the teacher in case nobody could help you. Another learner suggested that
instead of the "Activity recommendation" feature we proposed in W5, we added a "Teacher help" feature. He
justified it in this way: "Every time I ask some of my friends they usually don't understand, so they just ask the
teacher."

Conclusion
In this paper, we presented results from five co-design sessions that contribute to an understanding of learners'
perceptions  of   and strategies for   help-giving  by   emphasizing  learners'  focus  on  helping    their  peers,   their

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      547                                                      © ISLS
prioritization of feelings in addition to content, and the need for authoritative sources to confirm the help they
are giving. One contribution of our approach is that we present the learners' reports of their perceptions of help-
giving behavior and motivations to engage in these behaviors in the classroom. Based on the results from the co-
design, we have new insight into how to design curriculum for help-giving across the different contexts. For the
interactive digital textbook, it is essential to build on the foundation of a positive classroom community (where
learners have bonds of friendship and a mutual history) such that these bonds transfer to the digital setting.
Many learners cited previous experiences as their reasons for giving help: Have they helped the person before?
Could they in the future? Is the person a friend? They often focused on providing social or emotional support
before  cognitive. Making   both who  the  learners are helping   and their previous   relationships salient in  the
interactive digital textbook may motivate more productive interactions between the learners. Notably, there are
different implications for Khan Academy, where the help-seeker may be unknown to the learners. It may be
important here to focus on increasing awareness of the help-seeker's performance or existing knowledge, so that
learners feel more motivated (e.g., because they can see that the help-seeker has helped others in the past or is
genuinely trying to learn the material). Given learners' reliance on more knowledgeable (i.e., teachers) help and
connections to their classroom community, bringing learners' peers and teacher into their interactions with other
learners on Khan Academy may also be motivating for them. Lastly, we conceptualized the teachable agent as a
safe place for learners to practice their help-giving skills. Based on the participatory design results, this may be a
good setting for learners to: 1) focus on becoming more confident in their ability to explain in this particular
domain, and 2) practice persisting with help in the face of the agent "not understanding." Our findings further
suggest that  learners  may  not see the  value of  the teachable  agent,  since it is not  part of  the classroom
community, and thus potential benefits should be reinforced by the teacher.
        To conclude, we conducted 5 co-design sessions to investigate learners' help-giving motivation and
strategies. The results from the sessions will enable the design a CSCL curriculum and technology to support
collaborative learning across multiple platforms by facilitating communication and interaction between learners.
This paper represents one step towards the ultimate goal of supporting learners in developing their help-giving
skills as they move between physical and digital contexts.

References
Chase, C. C., Chin, D. B., Oppezzo, M. A., & Schwartz, D. L. (2009). Teachable agents and the protégé effect:
        Increasing the effort towards learning. 18(4), 334-352.
Davidoff, S., Lee,   M. K., Dey,  A. K.,  &  Zimmerman,     J. (2007, September).   Rapidly exploring    application
        design  through  speed   dating. In International Conference   on  Ubiquitous  Computing (pp.    429-446).
        Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2010). Technology for classroom orchestration. New science of learning (pp.
        525-552). New York, NY.: Springer.
Dillenbourg,  P.,  Järvelä, S.,  &  Fischer, F.  (2009).    The  evolution  of research  on  computer-supported
        collaborative learning. Technology-enhanced learning (pp. 3-19). Springer, Dordrecht.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (2009). An educational psychology success story: Social interdependence
        theory and cooperative learning. Educational Researcher, 38(5), 365­379.
Hiltz, S. R. (1998). Collaborative Learning in Asynchronous Learning Networks: Building Learning
Communities.
Lubold, N.,   Pon-Barry,  H., &   Walker,  E. (2015).   Naturalness   and  rapport  in a pitch   adaptive learning
        companion. In 2015 IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding. (pp. 103-
        110). (ASRU) IEEE.
Sanders, E. B. (2003). Design and the Social Sciences. (J. Frascara, Ed.)
Taton, J. A. (2011). It's School Organized Like a Giant Videogame": Participation Structures Embedded within
        the  Mathematics    Content  and  Curriculum  of  the   Khan  Academy.   Working   Papers   in Educational
        Linguistics (WPEL) 26.2.
Thomas, D. R. (2006). A General Inductive Approach for Analyzing Qualitative Evaluation Data. American
        Journal of Evaluation, 27(2), 237-246.
Wu, D.,   &   Hiltz, S. R.  (2004).  Predicting  learning   from  asynchronous   online  discussions.    Journal of
        Asynchronous Learning Networks, 8(2), 139-152.

Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No 1736103. We
thank the coordinating teacher and co-design participants who made this research possible.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   548                                                  © ISLS
