                              School Goes Online With Avatars:
                       Extended Learning in a Secondary School
       Gadille Martine, Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LEST UMR 7317, martine.GADILLE@univ-amu.fr
     Impedovo Maria Antonietta, Aix-Marseille Univ, ADEF, maria-antonietta.IMPEDOVO@univ-amu.fr

          Abstract: This paper focuses on the initial implications of students' extended activity between
          virtual and in-presence learning. The study is part of an ongoing project founded in 2018in a
          CSCL setting titled "e-PIm" (Incubator of Immersive Pedagogy for Virtual Reality) taking
          place in a secondary school in France labelled as pilot in 2016. For this study, some data are
          selected and qualitatively analysed. The implication of the implementation of the Multi-user
          Virtual Environment     emerge     in the   field of    didactics, student-teacher   interactions,  and
          students' corporal and socio-cognitive behaviours; the uses of the MUVE are revealed to be
          an ongoing   transformative     learning  experience    through    an  extended    learning space   and
          institutional change.

Introduction
For long time, the walls of the classroom and the school were the limited space where students shaped their
learning.  This  "broadcasted   mode"     gave  a central   role  to teachers   and   scholastic books.  Technology,     the
multicultural  dimension    and  continuous     social  and economic      change  have   disrupted   and  undermined       the
traditional  system:  learning  environments     have   multiplied,   going   online  (Tapscott,  2009)   in  clouds.   It is
acknowledged that learning technologies do not necessarily involve innovation, rather they are catalysts that,
when used well to carry out a communal piece of work or task, allow high engagement and active learning
between school and life (Dawley and Dede, 2014) and within virtual communities (Preece, 2001).
          One way to extend learning between the classroom and the virtual realm is the use of MUVEs. Made
popular by Second Life, the MUVE is an immersive 3D virtual space where people, entering the space via their
avatars, meet and interact with one another and with 3D objects in real time. The use of a virtual space in the
classroom    can introduce  changes    to how   the   teacher executes,   facilitates and  releases  the learning   through
authentic  tasks  involving 3D   object   manipulation,   creativity   and   corporal mobility   via avatars, which    bring
change  to   how  the learner acquires,   applies   and constructs   knowledge    (Jung  &   Latchem,   2011).    This paper
focuses on the initial implications for students' extended activity between virtual and in-presence learning, from
the general   broad   perspective   of how    technology-supported      collaboration    can  facilitate the  sharing   and
dissemination of knowledge and competencies among community members (Di Blass and Paolini, 2014). The
study is part of an ongoing project entitled "e-PIm" taking place in a pilot secondary school in France (students
from 11 to 15 years old). For this study, some data are analysed and initial research results are presented.

The project: Incubator of Immersive Pedagogy for Virtual Reality
The project "e-PIm" takes place in a pilot school, in line with the Digital Plan for Education launched by the
French government in May 2015and related to the appropriation of tablets distributed by the academy as part of
the "Connected Schools" project. The school set out on the path of digital experimentation in 2016 and is being
financially supported by the Digital Education Directorate from 2018 to 2021. The three aims of the project are:
     1)   to propose   a scientific  study   over   a  period  of  4 years   (since   September   2018).  It  is  about  the
          technological  and  social conditions   of   appropriation   of virtual reality, in a  network  of  primary   and
          secondary schools;
     2) to   support, on  the  territory  of the  academy     via a  collaborative  network,  the  sharing   of   knowledge
          resulting from the joint work of researchers and teachers;
     3) to create a training guide for trainers or teachers wishing to get involved in this field.
     The general project considers Participatory Action Research (Wadsworth, 1998) for an interdisciplinary
approach,    involving   didactics,  sociology,     psychology    and   management       science.  Within    this   method,
participatory and   collaborative   processes   are developed     with and   the aim  of  achieving   a  critical change   of
practices,  through   continuous spirals  of  planning,  action,   observation,   reflection and  re-planning     (McIntyre,
2008). The research is built on four immersive pedagogy projects developed by the teachers at the school in
collaboration with the ITC and research partners: 1) "Interdisciplinary" is an experiment in 3D scriptwriting of
lessons (English, Italian, French, History, Mathematics, Technology), on two 5th-year classes in which students
are asked to build 3D objects in the virtual school and give meaning to them within the framework of a scenario

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       549                                                        © ISLS
dealing with the seven new wonders of the world; 2)"Language and International" focuses on remote linguistic
exchanges between the French students and a class of correspondents, via their avatars who visit and explain the
meaning of a virtual exhibition prepared beforehand and showing photos of their favourite places in their city;
3) "Homework" is about help with distance work that allows small groups of students to benefit from homework
support   provided       by   a school    teacher in   their home    environment       at  the  end      of   the afternoon;      4)       "Work       on
SEGPA": The MUVE is used here for learning in two different trades as well as in general disciplines.
           The  global      strategy    of  data-gathering,     launched     back in    2016    and     still ongoing,        is proposed             in a
longitudinal approach. A multilevel approach considers the territorial, organisational, collective and individual
level. In     this way,       we  view     the appropriation      of  the    3D   space    from     a    different,     complementary                 and
interdisciplinary perspective, as represented in Figure 1.

 Jan 2016                   June 2016          Jan 2017                           June 2017               Jan 2018                June 2018

     Official                    Material                                                      Official                 Incubator          Reduction
     label                       ressources       Meeting                                      TeamMeeting  Meeting     project            of iPad use

       Experts for collective                                Engagement in                              Virtual collaboration              Online
       use                                                   the script work      Script                Teacher-Researcher                 work space
  Maths and German: use of PI3D                              Maths, German and English:        No expert  Addition of         3 scripts; after-work,
                                                             work on the online script         iPad       Italian class  collaborative and language
    Maths, Spanish and German: iPad use                                                                                  work.

    Deny videos             Close login        Open login    Allow videos          Technical problems (internet; etc...)

    Implementation of a collaborative space + more iPads acquired                                                                  Open call

           Institutional                    Collective                         Individual                                     Territorial

                                          Figure 1.    Multilevel approach to data-gathering.

Methodology
Ethnographic       observations    (with    note-taking    and    photos),   analysis   of the   virtual      space   (written     text      in      chat,
forum, recording of online activity and online discussion) and collection of practices inside the school (verbal
exchanges, report minutes, individual interviews) have been made since January 2016. To organise the data, the
NVivo software is used to structure the corpus and encode it with specific dimensions and shared encoding
between the researchers' group following a grounded approach.

The aim of the study
The research questions are:        What are the main first direct implications of the project for students' extended
activity between virtual and in-presence learning? What indirect implications does the project have for teachers
and the school in general?

Initial analysis of data
For an  answer     to    the  research    questions    of this  study about    the     initial direct    implications         of the      project      for
students' extended activity between virtual and in-presence learning and the indirect implications of the project
for the teachers involved and the school in general, the corpuses of data selected are: five student interviews and
direct online   and      in-classroom     observation;    nine    teacher interviews      on   different    subjects    relating          to students
online  and   in-classroom       activity;   two  video    recordings     of meetings      between       teachers     and      researchers.           An
analysis   of content      and   discursive    exchanges     is applied   to data  (Bezemer         &   Kress,    2017).       Four       dimensions
emerged    from    the    selected    data:  MUVE       didactic   affordances;        MUVE     student-teacher         interaction;         MUVE
students' corporal and socio-cognitive behaviour.

Findings

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                                550                                                                       © ISLS
Regarding the 3D space's affordances for didactic activity, for the teachers, we observed a rise in mental load
with an increased permeability between working time and home time for the scripting activity. This time seems
counterbalanced by the benefit of being able to make children work with this use of technology. The teachers
wonder about the opportunity presented by the introduction of the 3D space in relation to their pedagogical
script, linked to the affordances of the technological tools. The understanding of the 3D environment's potential
offers new opportunities, as this extract shows: "When the coordinator told me about avatars, I said to myself,
why not? We can exchange objects, and on Skype, it does not always work very well". In maths also, the 3D
space is interesting to some teachers as it abolishes the physical limitation: "the skills learned: moving on a map,
I extended it to the virtual school, we had only two dimensions". For each discipline at the school, the use of the
3D space represents differentiated interests besides the fact that it improves the possibility of situated learning.
Students, on their part, stress the evolution of the use of the virtual space, as a girl from 5 class put it: "We
started before the Christmas holidays, but at the beginning we did not go as often as now, when you do not
know what to do about it ...".
         Regarding the effect of the 3D space on student-teacher interaction, linked with the ITC opportunity,
teachers suggest that use of the 3D environment improves interaction with students, which can be different,
focusing on a new modality of learning. For example: "In the classroom I move around to advise and help, and
it's easier when   you  have     an assistant.   On  the platform,   it is  all the more     possible   because   we  have    the
headphones    and   the microphone,      in  the classroom   it  is difficult,  there is   a  lot of   noise that   can disrupt
communication, but in the virtual school not yet". The use of 3D helps teachers to interact with students in a
new   way,  with   a  "silent    body",  the    avatar,  which  allows   idealistic   communication        without    disturbing
interferences.
         Regarding the effect of the 3D space on the behaviour of the students, the teacher interviews stress the
physical  implications  for   their  classroom   activity. Although     the students    can   be  "quieter"  in  the  classroom
because  they  are  sitting   ("the students  are   no  longer disturbing   the   class when     they  are  able  to  connect"),
paradoxically, students are very active online ("Children in the space are much more dynamic, there they were
very active behind their screen"). At the same time, the use of the 3D space can also help to support the students
in a particular part of the day or of the year, when they are more tired ("at the end of the year we must also give
new motivation to the good students, who begin to get tired, and the students with difficulties..."). Finally, for
the  children  interviewed,   the   3D  space   represents either a  space  of  creativity,   or  a space   of motivation    and
resilience used at school as well as at home. The uses of the MUVE when children are at home, helps and
support distant exhanges with their teacher in the aid device to homework's in particular. When used to achieve
collective  tasks in  class,  it enhances    exchanges   also,  for profiles   of very  shy   children     who  have  difficulty
participating.
         Regarding    the  effect   of  the  3D  space  on institutional change,    during    the process    and  the exchange
between teachers, researchers and students, different points are constantly being negotiated, like the right to take
pictures of students' faces and the authorisation to destroy 3D objects or virtual documents ("if we leave the
documents in the immersive space, they can be damaged, modified, or deleted, how do we protect them?"). As a
consequence,   the  script    with  the MUVE     is  continually  evolving   in   relation to  technical   and   administrative
aspects, linked to the prescriptions of the curriculum and teachers' preferences, like in this teacher's comment:
"... unless the government comes back on those two hours a week, we work together with a maths teacher who
guided us to the virtual school: with the avatar it is better to break the ice, offering a nice, warm welcome in a
space for discussion".

Discussion
As   shown   by   the initial  data  analysis,   the  implementation     of the   project,   and    in particular   the MUVE
technology, have had and still have implication for didactic, student-teacher interaction, students' corporal and
cognitive behaviour and institutional change, becoming an ongoing transformative learning experience.
         Regarding the 3D space affordances for didactic activity and student-teachers' interaction, we stress
how the introduction of technology oblige the teacher and also the student to rethink the traditional model, as
widely discussed in the technology. The process of appropriation also includes aspects concerning the mutual
influence   between   the   technology    and   the  users (Overdijk    &   van   Diggelen,    2008),   with   a  simultaneous
transformation    process   including   the   learner  and the   tool and   where     the  learners    are also  teachers.   The
originality of  our   initial finding   lies in the  socio-professional    and  organisational    conditions    for  teachers to
develop individually and collectively creative scripts within their professional group
         Regarding     MUVE        students'  corporal   and   cognitive   behaviour,     the introduction     of   new  digital
technologies such as MUVE puts a new non-linguistic, bodily and visually learning dimension at the centre of
users' experience,    removing     language   from   the dominant    vector  of   the experience.      Moreover,    teachers  are

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        551                                                         © ISLS
becoming aware through their experience of the MUVE that extended learning between online and in-presence
also implies an embodiment framework as a unifying perspective, considering that all psychological processes
are influenced by body morphology, sensory systems, motor systems, and emotions (Glenberg, 2010; Schubert
& Semin (2009).
         Regarding   technology   in  MUVE     institutional   change, an  educational  institution generates   tensions
between an old system of working and the new one, which needs to be accommodated and assimilated by all of
the community     involved  (Jones   &   Issroff, 2007).    At  the  same  time,  the students,  teachers  and  all the
administrative staff of the school, supported by the ITC office and also researchers in geographic proximity,
need to make sense of the new technology alone and as a group, finding a new opportunity for learning and
action.

Conclusion
The  observation   and data    collected show     that this experimentation   with  a   MUVE     extends  and   strongly
transforms  the  learning   space by    giving teachers,    students, parents and   the whole    educational  team  the
opportunity to exchange, strengthen and build new ways of experiential learning (Jarmon et al., 2009) through
projects, involving a wide range of experience (manipulation, social exchange, 3D object creation) from various
disciplines. The originality of our work lies in the general application of the MUVE space in the school. We can
consider how extended learning is enacted following a multilevel approach, with implications for organisational,
collective, individual and  territorial  transformation.  In   order  for expansive learning  to take place,  students,
teachers and researchers need to be involved in collaborative actions, generating a rich exchange of practices
enabling the transformation of the activity. The adoption of the Participatory Action Research, involving the
students, the research team, teachers and ITC partners on a daily basis, enables this collective work oriented
towards a critical change of practices, through continuous spirals of planning, action, observation, reflection and
re-planning. These initial results will be further analysed in the longitudinal appropriation of the 3D MUVE by
the school.

References
Dawley, L., & Dede, C. (2014). Situated learning in virtual worlds and immersive simulations, in J. M. Spector,
         M.D. Merrill, J. Elen, & M. D. Bishop (eds), Handbook of research on educational communications
         and technology (4th ed., pp. 723-734). New York, NY: Springer.
Di  Blas,   N., &  Paolini, P.  (2014).  Multi-User     Virtual  Environments     Fostering Collaboration    in Formal
         Education. Educational Technology & Society, 17 (1), 54­69.
Bezemer, J., & Kress, G. (2017). Young people, facebook, and pedagogy: Recognizing contemporary forms of
         multimodal       text    making.      Global       Youth     in    Digital    Trajectories    (pp.     22-38).
         doi:10.4324/9781315303239
Glenberg, A. (2010). Embodiment as a unifying perspective for psychology. WIREs Cognitive Sciences, 1, 586-
         596.
Jarmon, L., Traphagan, T., Mayrath, M., & Trivedi, A. (2009). Virtual world teaching, experiential learning, and
         assessment:   An   interdisciplinary  communication      course  in Second   Life. Computers    &  Education,
         53(1), 169-182.
Jones, A., & Issroff, K. (2007). Learning technologies: Affective and social issues. In G. Conole & M. Oliver
         (Eds.), Contemporary perspectives in e-learning research: Themes, methods and impact on practice
         (pp. 190­202). London: Routledge.
Jung, I., & Latchem, C. (2011). A model for education: Extended teaching spaces and extended learning spaces.
         British Journal of Educational Technology, 42(1), 6-18.
Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2005). Mobile usability and user experience. In A. Kukulska-Hulme & J. Traxler (Eds.),
         Mobile Learning: A handbook for educators and trainers (pp. 45­56). London: Routledge.
McIntyre A. (2008). Participatory action research. Sage, London.
Overdijk, M., & van Diggelen, W. (2008). Appropriation of a shared workspace: Organizing principles and their
         application. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(2), 165-192.
Preece,  J. (2001).  Sociability  and   usability  in  online   communities:  Determining    and  measuring     success.
         Behaviour & Information Technology, 20(5), 347-356.
Schubert, T., Semin, G. R. (2009). Embodiment as a Unifying Perspective for Psychology. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol.,
         39, 1135­1141.
Tapscott, D. (2009) Grown up Digital. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Wadsworth,    Y.  (1998). What    is Participatory     Action  Research?   Action Research   International.  Available
         online: http://www.scu.edu.au/schools/gcm/ar/ari/p-ywadsworth98.html

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       552                                                  © ISLS
