                  Young Interpreters: The Situated as Supportive
                                    Kevin Johnstun, Heather Leary, Bryant Jensen
                     kevinjohnstun@byu.edu, heather.leary@byu.edu, bryant_jensen@byu.edu
                                               Brigham Young University

         Abstract: Across the United States schools are largely segregated by race, creating schools
         that  are  densely  Hispanic    and   teaching  staff  that   is overwhelming      monolingual      English
         speakers.   This has   created  difficulty in home    communication       in   these  schools.  This  study
         looks at ongoing design-based research efforts to engage bilingual students in helping their
         teachers   become    more   capable   of   communicating      in  Spanish.     Through     online-delivered
         challenges teachers and students work together to complete a series of tasks that help teachers
         learn about communicating across cultures and preparing several communication-aids to help
         them reach out more frequently. Through a narrative profile analysis, we uncovered the types
         of influences the five-week intervention can have on teacher's home communication efforts,
         beliefs in their own ability to develop stronger language skills, and relationships with students,
         and   we  trace the  implications  these   efforts have    on teacher  practice,   design   iterations, and
         scaling.

The frequency   and   types  of interactions   between   teachers   and   parents  have  important      implications for both
students  and  families.  When   teachers  and   school   officials  reached   out   to parents    regularly, Epstein  (1991)
reported  that parents   are more   likely to  help their   students   with projects    and assignments.     The  same   study
concluded  that  as  parent  involvement    increased,  parents   were    also  more    likely  to  feel positive about  their
children's abilities to  succeed  in school.   Recent   meta-analyses     arrived  at   similar  conclusions   (Castro et al.,
2015; Jeynes, 2003).
         Communication with parents becomes increasingly complex for teachers when they don't speak the
same language. Gandara (2005) described this widespread problem: "Typical respondent comments cited the
teacher's  inability to  speak  the  parents'   language.   While    teachers    acknowledge       the  value of  family  and
community in the education of these students, many feel unable to call on this critical resource" (p. 10).
         It may well be the case that increased training is requisite for making inroads in-home communication
efforts with   Spanish-speaking     families.  Gandara    (2003)    noted   that  among     teachers     who  taught  English
Language learners (ELL), 23% of them reported that they had trouble communicating with the parents of ELLs.
That number went up to 30% when the teacher had received no or almost no training on communicating with
parents of ELLs. These numbers are likely much higher in regular education classrooms, where teachers are
much less likely to receive special training for communicating with the families of ELLs.
         We report on the efforts to offer online training modules that present a problem-based scenario where
teachers  and  students  use  their respective  skills to   build bilingual  communication         aids  designed to enhance
school-home communication. In this way, the types of situated skills that students develop in their everyday
lives can lend support to teachers trying to communicate with parents.
         There  is  cursory  evidence   to suggest  that  students   have   the  resources    to help   teachers navigate the
tensions that can arise between wanting to communicate more with Spanish-speaking families and not having
the ability to do so quickly and effectively. Both Valdés (2014) and Orellana (2009) document the social and
cognitive benefits as well as particular skills developed by the children of immigrants who grow up translating
and interpreting for their parents. Particularly, they highlight young interpreters' skills and abilities to translate
effectively, help teachers understand community norms of effective communication, and navigate the power of
student-teacher relationships in a way that is mutually enriching.
         This  paper  presents  preliminary    findings   from    a design-based     research    intervention, "Spanish   For
Lunch" (SFL). This intervention aims to incorporate the Spanish language abilities of students, specifically by
involving young interpreters as the principal facilitators of phrase-based Spanish instruction. Our research into
the intervention uses qualitative, interview methods to learn about the teachers' experiences using the online
resources  to  structure the  challenges   and  work   with  their  students   to help   them    to both  communicate    with
families and build partnerships with students.
         This narrative research study (Seidman, 2013) was guided by these research questions:
    1.   How    does  participating   in   the SFL   program    aid    teachers   in  developing    positive,  frequent,  and
         supportive communication with Spanish speaking parents?

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       557                                                        © ISLS
   2.  How does participating in the SFL program strengthen teachers' beliefs and attitudes toward their
       ability to communicate with Spanish speaking parents?
   3.  From a teacher's perspective, what type of partnerships form between teachers and students who
       participate in the SFL program?
In the pilot work from 2018, six 6th-8th grade teachers from both urban-public and urban-charter schools in the
western United States selected two to six bilingual students from their classes to collaborate with them on the
translation challenges. Student selection was solely at the discretion of the teachers.
       The program consisted of five online modules for teachers and an equal number of online videos for
students. These online materials guided both groups through five weekly meetings to create different
communication aids for a specific home communication task each week (greeting parents, writing a get-know-
you-letter, writing positive-template texts, scripting a short-positive phone call, and scripting a parent-teacher
conference). After reviewing their respective online materials, the students collaborated with teachers by
helping them select and translate a group of phrases that meet the requirements of the challenge each week.
During their weekly meetings, teachers and students talk through the question and the guiding question, and
then come up with several phrases that answer the question. The students translate these phrases as the teacher
writes them down and practices saying each one. The teacher takes a picture of each completed communication
aid. Figure 1 shows an example of one of the challenges.

                             Figure 1. Example from template text challenge.

       After completing all five of the challenges the teacher receives a micro-credential, a digital portfolio
certificate of completion that can be stored online, as a certificate of their completion. The schematics of the
program are displayed in Figure 2.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 558                                                     © ISLS
                                       Figure 2. Program workflow.

       Before we began the intervention, we held a 45-minute semi-structured interview with all six teachers.
The purpose of this interview was to gather information about the teachers' attitudes and perceptions toward
home communication    and partnerships with students. During    the second     and third interviews, also semi-
structured 45-minute  interviews, we gathered stories and    anecdotes    from teacher's experiences  using the
program materials, meeting with students, and using their communication aids to reach out to parents. These
interviews took place during week three of the intervention and within one week of the end of the training.
Figure 3 shows the timeline for each of the phrases of the intervention.

                             Figure 3. Timeline of interviews and challenges.

       We created narrative profiles of each of the teachers' experience using the Seidman (2013) process.
This included creating a transcript of all of the teacher's relevant comments related to their experience, and then
eliminating experiences that seemed non-essential. This was repeated again to produce the final narratives. We
sought to uncover what elements of the program helped teachers reach out more, develop the capacities they
wanted to develop, and form partnerships with their students. Specifically, we looked closely at the way that the
teachers describe the development of the program. For example, we wanted to see how the teacher described
his/her communication with families in interviews one, two, and three to see if there is a narrative of growth to
be uncovered.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  559                                                  © ISLS
        We  found  that  the program   did not have a significant impact   on teachers' communication  attempts
across all five teachers, but those teachers who reached out most, we encouraged by their growth. Additionally,
we found that teachers Spanish did not improve significantly, but their belief that these kinds of activities could
be very beneficial was a recurrent theme. Specifically, the teachers felt that they were able to focus on the kinds
of phrases that they needed to know, and learn them in a hands-on-environment. They were also encouraged by
the patience of the students as they coached them through pronunciation and spelling.   Finally, we found that all
of the teachers reported that working   with students strengthen  their relationships with them by establishing
complementary roles, sharing cultural values, and sharing personal experiences.
        Finally, we found that several teachers discussed changes that they were considering making to their
teaching practice based on the experiences in working with students. For example teachers talked about more
frequently providing places for students to act as teachers in the classroom, focusing on examples where the
teachers had made mistakes, modeling making mistakes in front of students, and exemplifying life-long learning
by try to develop new language skills.

References
Epstein, J. L., & Dauber, S. L. (1991). School programs and teacher practices of parent involvement in inner-
        city elementary and middle schools. The Elementary School Journal, 91(3), 289-305.
Castro, M., Expósito-Casas, E., López-Martín, E., Lizasoain, L., Navarro-Asencio, E., & Gaviria, J. L. (2015).
        Parental  involvement   on student   academic  achievement:  A    meta-analysis. Educational  Research
        Review, 14, 33-46.
Jeynes, W. H. (2003). A meta-analysis: The effects of parental involvement on minority children's academic
        achievement. Education and Urban Society, 35(2), 202-218.
Gandara, P., Maxwell-Jolly, J., & Driscoll, A. (2005). Listening to Teachers of English Language Learners: A
        Survey of California Teachers' Challenges, Experiences, and     Professional     Development    Needs.
        Policy Analysis for California Education, PACE (NJ1).
Gandara, P., Rumberger, R., Maxwell-Jolly, J., & Callahan, R. (2003). English Learners in California Schools:
        Unequal resources,'Unequal outcomes. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 11, 36.
Orellana, M. F. (2009). Translating childhoods: Immigrant youth, language, and culture. New Brunswick, NJ:
        Rutgers University Press.
Seidman, I. (2013). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in education and the social
        sciences. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Valdés, G. (2014).  Expanding   definitions  of giftedness:  The  case  of young  interpreters  from immigrant
        communities. New York: Routledge.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  560                                                 © ISLS
