           Collaboration Script Appropriation in a Science Class
                       Si Zhang, Nanyang Technological University, si.zhang@nie.edu.sg
                    Wenli Chen, Nanyang Technological University, wenli.chen@nie.edu.sg
                       Yun Wen, Nanyang Technological University, yun.wen@nie.edu.sg
                   Chee-Kit Looi, Nanyang Technological University, cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg
                Aileen S.W. Chai, Nanyang Technological University, aileenchai@hotmail.com
                      Joo Liak Ang, Nanyang Girls' High School, ang_joo_liak@nygh.edu.sg

          Abstract: This paper presents how a collaboration script informed by the Funnel Model was
          appropriated by a class of students in a secondary science class lesson. Based on the script, a
          class of 33 tenth grade students enacted four stages of a technology-supported collaborative
          learning activity: individual   construction, intra-group   construction, inter-group  rating, and
          intra-group refining.   Quantitative   and qualitative   analyses   of  students' behaviors    and
          perceptions  were     conducted  to  identify  and   explain    how  students    appropriated   the
          collaboration script.

Introduction
Collaboration script  is an  important  topic in the field of  computer-supported    collaborative learning   (CSCL)
(Fischer, Kollar,  Stegmann,    & Wecker,    2013; Yun   & Kim,    2015). While   collaborative  learning when  aptly
designed and enacted has been shown to be helpful for students' higher-order thinking (Lazarou, Sutherland, &
Erduran,  2016),   students  may  not  be  substantively  engaged   in  the process  of  sharing, communication     or
negotiation. The embedded collaboration script can help to provide a structured collaborative learning scenario,
such as associating group learners with specific tasks, roles, and resources, or designing an interactive structure
for group learning (Tsovaltzi, Puhl, Judele, & Weinberger, 2014). Many researches focus on scripting individual
and collective regulatory processes (Borge, Ong, & Rosé, 2018; Wang, Kollar, & Stegmann, 2017), learners'
appropriation (perception, understanding and embodiment) of the script was also an important factor influencing
their collaboration learning (Tchounikine, 2016). In this context, we worked with a school teacher to implement
a collaborative learning lesson, and studied how each group appropriated the collaboration script.
          We  propose  a  script  based   on Funnel  Model    that is a  pedagogical  model    guiding  for  collective
knowledge   improvement     (Chen, Wen,   &   Looi, 2012;  Wen,    Looi, &  Chen,   2011).  This  model  abstracts the
process of group interactions into three stages: "brainstorm", "rise above", and "advance." We developed an
online system called AppleTree to tightly embody Funnel Model (Chen, Looi, Wen, & Xie, 2013) in the system
design. In this study, we focus on investigating: 1. Whether and how was the use of AppleTree system with the
collaboration script helpful for improving students' conceptual knowledge learning? 2.         How did the students
appropriate the collaboration script and what factors affected their appropriation of the script?

Research design
We employed design-based research to design and implement collaborative learning activities using AppleTree
for secondary grade ten class with 33 students in Singapore. These students studied physics phenomena over
three weeks   (one  lesson   per  week  and  each  lesson  was  a  cycle  of the  design-based    research)  using the
AppleTree system. All the 33 students were heterogeneously grouped by the teacher according to their previous
test scores on Science. There were nine groups of 3-4. The data analyzed in this paper were from lesson 3 on the
topic of electromagnetic induction phenomenon. In this lesson, students in each group first conducted their own
hands-on experiment to observe the induced current flowed in a solenoid over time when a magnet fell through
it. Each student in groups needed to sketch a current-time graph based on what she observed in the experiment.
To deepen the students' understanding on electromagnetic induction phenomenon, the teacher provided students
opportunities to inquire and explain the phenomena that they observed on the AppleTree system. The purpose of
collaborative learning   is  to integrate the conceptual   knowledge     of group   and  class members    to  facilitate
complete and reasonable explanations.     Below are the details of students' activities.
          Stage 1: Every student was asked to provide explanations to elaborate the current-time graph on their
          group space in AppleTree system.
          Stage 2: After each member of a group provided at least one explanation, they negotiated, challenged
          and revised their explanations (Figure 1).
          Stage 3: Students went to the workspace of other groups to review their group artefacts and provide
          comments. Students were asked not only to rate others' explanations, but also to provide comments for

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     561                                                   © ISLS
         others to improve. In this lesson, the teacher asked group 2 to visit group 1; group 3 to visit group 2,
         and so on.
         Stage 4: All the students returned to their own group to further revise and refine their own group's
         artefact based on the feedbacks provided by others.

                                      Figure 1. The interface of stage 2.

Coding scheme for analyzing students' revision behavior
The first author analyzed all of students' revisions several times and created open codes. Then, these open codes
were clustered as primary themes. Third, the obtained themes were validated again by checking the data against
the themes and were merged and modified. The final coding scheme is shown in Table 1.

Table 1: The coding scheme for students' revision of explanations

                       Add (+)                                  Modification                    Delete (-)
          Post                        Link                        Content
x   Explanation             x   Knowledge support      x     Partial modification          x   Post
x   Data                    x   Emotional support      x     Completely modification       x   Link
x   Reasoning               x   Knowledge against
x   Irrelevant content      x   Query

Coding scheme for analyzing students' comments
The coding scheme adapted from Lu & Law (2012)'s studies was used to code students' comments. Content
analysis was conducted    to  examine the  categories of   comments    (e.g., identifying problems  or  providing
suggestions). The unit of content analysis in this study was a comment. The first and third authors independently
coded all the comments, with an inter-rater reliability of 0.736 (Cohen's Kappa).

Pre-test and post-test design
Pretest and posttest used the same text paper, which contained 4 questions, one point for each question. The test
questions were closely related to the knowledge points in this lesson.

Data collection and analysis
The data collected in this study included 1) students' pre-test and post-test scores on their scientific knowledge
of the concepts; 2) all group artifacts generated on AppleTree and; 3) students' post-intervention interview data.
We  echo  with  Tchounikine   (2016)  that learners would   appropriate  the  script and  its technology   both as
individuals and as a group. "With respect to appropriation, we do not see individual and collective perspective
as incoherent." (Tchounikine, 2016, p.366). Therefore, in this study, we investigated how students appropriated
a collaboration script as a  group based   on their learning process   data.  Meanwhile,  we   required individual
students to reflect on their experiences of collaborative learning based on two guiding questions in the post-

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  562                                                  © ISLS
intervention interview: 1. What did you do at each stage of collaborative learning activity? 2. What factors may
affect the revision of your explanations at each stage of collaborative learning activity?

Findings

The improvement of conceptual knowledge.
Descriptive statistics and the Wilcoxon signed Ranks test was used to detect differences between pretest and
posttest. The results showed that the students' post-test score (M=3.70, SD=0.83, Z=-4.647, df=32, p<0.001)
was significantly higher than the pre-test score (M=2.58, SD=0.529, Z=-4.647, df=32, p<0.001).

The observable behaviors of the script appropriation
All the groups were engaged in the activity, but not all the groups followed all the stages.We calculated the
number of explanations posted by students as a group at stages 1, 2, and 4 respectively. All the groups, except
for group 2, revised their group artifacts and contributed new ideas after the intra-group discussion. Only group
7 and group 8 contributed new postings at stage 4. For those groups who did not generate new postings, they
revised their existing postings. Students revised group artefacts 56 times in stage 2 and 4 (see Figure 2).

                           Figure 2. The number of changes in stage 2 and stage 4.

All the groups provided comments for others but the quality of comments was uneven. A total of 79 comments
were provided in stage 3, see Table 2. Students provided more comments related to "Identifying problems" and
"Positive". Comments related to "Editing language" were rare, and negative comments did not appear.

Table 2: The number of comments (by type)

             Categories                  Example                                                       Number
             Identifying problems        "Why does the direction change?"                              31
             Providing suggestions       "Talk about different direction of currents."                 11
Cognitive    Providing explanations      "It becomes  zero    cos there is no more         cutting of  2
                                         magnetic field lines!"
             Editing language            "Wrong SIN spelling."                                         1
Affective    NegativePositive            "You did not even do it!"                                     0"Very detailed explanation.", "Good explanation."38
Note. 4 of 79 comments were double-coded as belonging to two categories.

The perception of the collaboration script
Students' reflections on collaborative learning experiences  in the post-interview were      analyzed. In   stage 1,
students independently expressed their ideas and input them into the AppleTree platform directly until the end
of this stage. Each group member gave only one or two explanations in this stage. In stage 2, students mainly
revised their own explanations. They only gave a suggestion for revision rather than revised the explanation
directly. In stage 3, students actively commented on other group's explanation and brought good explanations
back to their own group. In stage 4, students carefully read the comments given by other group members. But,
some factors hindered students' revision of their explanations, such as students' understanding of the scientific
conceptual knowledge, and the limited time of this stage.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  563                                                    © ISLS
Discussion and conclusion
This study    elaborates  how     students  appropriate   the collaboration    script based  on  the empirical    data from
students' behaviors and perception, as well as explores out the factors that may affect students' appropriation of
collaboration script. Firstly, the findings show that students' conceptual knowledge influences their appreciation
of collaboration script. As far as science is concerned, students need to judge the validity of explanations or
comments     in  the process  of   deleting, revising  and   integrating. If students    cannot judge   the  validity of  the
conceptual   knowledge,      they will find  difficult to complete    the task  in stage  2  and 4.  Secondly,    time is an
important factor influencing students' appropriation of collaboration script. As shown in the study, even if the
students had been well aware of the collaborative learning process, they did not have enough time to further
refine their  explanations.   Thirdly,  students' appropriation    of  collaboration  script  may be    influenced by  other
factors such as culture. In the Asian culture, it is usually considered not polite to point out others' mistakes
directly. It is  observed    that even if  there  was  inconsistency   among   students'  explanations     within the group,
students did not take the initiative to revise other group members' explanations, but they would modify the
postings that originally posted by themselves if necessary. Nevertheless, this may be also because the students
were   still in  the early   stage  of  collaboration,   so   they still  lacked sufficient   group-awareness.     A   future
longitudinal study will be conducted to further explore it. The current study provides insights on the factors that
need to be considered when designing and implementing collaboration script for school students.

References
Borge,  M.,   Ong,   Y.  S., Rosé,  C. P.  (2018).   Learning  to  monitor   and regulate    collective thinking  processes.
          Internal Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 13(1), 61-92.
Chen,  W.,    Looi,  C.  K.,  Wen,   Y.,  &  Xie,  W.    (2013).  AppleTree:   An     assessment  oriented   framework    for
          collaboration  and    argumentation.    In N.  Rummel,    M.   Kapur,  M.   Nathan   &  S. Puntambekar      (Eds.),
          Proceedings of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2013 (Part 2, pp. 6-9). Madison,
          USA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Chen,  W.,   Wen,    Y., Looi,    C.K. (2012).   Technology    enhanced   pedagogical     innovation    in second  language
          learning.  Global Chinese Journal for Computers in Education, 8(1/2), 122-133.
Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computer-
          supported collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 56-66.
Lazarou, D., Sutherland, R., & Erduran, S. (2016). Argumentation in science education as a systemic activity:
          An activity-theoretical perspective. International Journal of Educational Research, 79, 150-166.
Lu, J., & Law, N. (2012). Online peer assessment: Effects of cognitive and affective feedback. Instructional
          Science, 40(2), 257-275.
Tchounikine,     P. (2016).  Contribution    to a theory  of  CSCL    scripts: taking  into  account the   appropriation  of
          scripts by learners. Internal Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 11(3), 349-369.
Tsovaltzi,   D., Puhl,   T., Judele, R.,   & Weinberger,    A.   (2014).  Group  awareness    support   and  argumentation
          scripts for individual preparation of arguments in Facebook. Computers & Education, 76, 108-118.
Wen, Y., Looi, C. K., & Chen, W. L. (2011). Towards a model for rapid collaborative knowledge improvement
          in classroom language learning. In H. Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake & N. Law (Eds.), Proceedings of
          Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2011 (Part 2, pp. 836-840). Hong Kong, China:
          International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Wang, X., Kollar, I., & Stegmann, K. (2017). Adaptable scripting to foster regulation processes and skills in
          computer-supported       collaborative  learning.   Internal Journal   of   Computer-Supported      Collaborative
          Learning,12(2), 153-172.
Yun,   S. M.,   &   Kim, H.   B.  (2015).  Changes    in students'  participation  and   small  group   norms  in  scientific
          argumentation. Research in Science Education, 45(3), 465-484.

Acknowledgments
This study    was   funded   by   Singapore  Ministry  of Education    (MOE)    under    the Education   Research   Funding
Programme      (OER     07/17   CWL)     and  administered    by   National    Institute of   Education    (NIE),  Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Singapore MOE and NIE.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         564                                                     © ISLS
