 Understanding the Connections of Collaborative Problem Solving
   Skills in a Simulation-based Task Through Network Analysis
                                    Mengxiao Zhu and Jessica Andrews Todd
                                      mzhu@ets.org, jandrewstodd@ets.org
                                           Educational Testing Service

         Abstract: As one of the identified key 21st century skills, collaborative problem solving (CPS)
         attracted attention from both  education  research  and the  assessment industry. Studies   and
         assessments  were   developed  to  conceptualize   and  to measure  CPS  skills. Most     studies
         operationalized different dimensions of CPS skills as discrete measures even though they may
         be interweaving in the construct. In this study we went beyond the separate measures on the
         different dimensions and focused on the connections among these skills. Using log data of
         20,947 events on actions and chats from 43 teams, we studied how different dimensions of CPS
         skills were connected as reflected in problem solving. CPS skill networks were constructed to
         capture the co-occurrence of the skills in turns during collaboration. The results showed that
         teams with high and low performance had significantly different CPS network structures.

Background
Competencies such as collaborative problem solving (CPS) are considered increasingly important for career and
academic success in the 21st century. As individuals move through school and into the workforce, they will be
expected to work with others to make decisions, solve complex problems, and generate novel ideas, and many
times in contexts in which team members are not in the same physical location. The awareness of these changes
has motivated interest in education and assessment industries in developing and assessing skills such as CPS. A
number of recent efforts have been put forth that seek to conceptualize CPS and create assessments for CPS (e.g.,
Andrews et al., 2017; Hesse, F., Care, E., Buder, J., Sassenberg, K., & Griffin, 2015; Liu, von Davier, Hao,
Kyllonen, & Zapata-Rivera, 2015; OECD, 2013) However, most projects operationalize different dimensions of
CPS skills as discrete measures, and the connections among CPS skills are rarely considered.
         Epistemic frame theory (Shaffer, 2004) suggests that communities can be characterized by not only the
possession of knowledge, skills, value and practices, but more importantly the associations among these different
elements and the configurations of them. For example, two communities with similar levels on their knowledge
and skills, may have very different perceptions of how different dimensions of knowledge and skills are related
to each other, and how these are related to values and practices. In the current study, we drew ideas from the
epistemic frame theory, and focused on understanding how CPS skills are connected to each other. We constructed
networks of CPS     skills for individuals solving a simulation-based   task  collaboratively. The   goal  was  to
characterize the CPS skill networks and to compare the structural features of the networks for teams with different
performance levels.

Method

Participants
Eight community college and university instructors and their corresponding engineering and electronics classes
participated in the study. A total of 129 students were randomly assembled into groups of three for each class (43
teams). Of those who reported their gender (2% were unreported), 81% were males and 17% were females. Of
those who reported their race (2% were unreported), 51% were White, 7% were Black or African American, 6%
were Asian, 2% were American Indian or Alaska Native, 10% reported being more than one race, and 2% reported
Other. For ethnicity, 22% of the sample who chose to provide demographic information reported being Hispanic.
The ages of participants ranged from 16 to 60 with an average age of 24.

Task
Students were asked   to   complete a simulation-based task   on electronics concepts called   the Three-Resistor
Activity (see Figure 1). Each student in a team of three worked on a separate computer that ran a simulation of a
portion of an electronic circuit composed of three resistors connected to form a series circuit. Each of the three
resistors was controlled by a different teammate. Each team member had the goal of reaching a specified goal
voltage across their resistor. However, since each resistor was connected in series, any changes that one teammate
made on their resistor value to obtain their own goal voltage would affect the current through the circuit and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   565                                                  © ISLS
therefore the voltage drop across each teammates' resistor. Therefore, students needed to communicate via a chat
box and coordinate their actions to reach the goal voltages across each resistor in the series. The task included
four levels of increasing difficulty. In higher levels of the task, students were additionally asked to work together
to determine the unknown resistance and voltage of an external, fourth resistor in the series that none of the
teammates could control. As students worked together to solve the problems, all of their relevant actions and
discourse (e.g., measurements, resistor changes, calculations, answer submissions, text chats) were logged to a
database and used for our subsequent analyses.

                                Figure 1. Screenshot of Three-Resistor Activity.

CPS ontology
A CPS ontology was developed to conceptualize the CPS construct. Ontologies are similar to concept maps and
provide  a theory-driven   representation of targeted skills  and their relationships and    link them to observable
behaviors in a task that would provide evidence of the skills. The CPS ontology includes nine high-level CPS
skills. Four    skills correspond to the  social dimension    of CPS    (i.e., maintaining   communication,  sharing
information, establishing shared understanding, negotiating) and five skills correspond to the cognitive dimension
of CPS   (i.e., exploring  and understanding,  representing   and formulating,    planning,  executing, monitoring).
Maintaining communication includes content irrelevant social communication whereas sharing information refers
to content relevant information shared in the service of solving the problem. Establishing shared understanding
corresponds to communication used to learn the perspective of others and ensure that what has been said was
understood. Negotiating refers to communication used to identify conflicts in ideas among teammates and resolve
conflicts that may exist. In the cognitive dimension, exploring and understanding corresponds to actions taken to
explore the task environment and build a mental representation for components of the problem. Representing and
formulating refers to communication used to represent the problem and formulate hypotheses. Planning includes
communication around developing a strategy for solving the problem. Executing includes actions taken to carry
out a plan and communication used to carry out a plan. Monitoring corresponds to actions and communication
used to monitor progress toward a goal and monitor the organization of the team. For more in depth discussion of
the CPS ontology, see Andrews-Todd and Forsyth (in press).

Qualitative coding
Two raters coded the content of students' discourse and their actions for nine CPS skills outlined in the CPS
ontology. Executing and monitoring were shown in both actions and chats and were thus split into two separate
action and chat skills. This created 11 total skills for the qualitative coding (i.e., maintaining communication
(SMC), sharing information (SSI), establishing shared understanding (SPT), negotiating (SN), exploring and
understanding (CEU), representing and formulating (CRF), planning (CP), executing actions (CE), executing
chats (CEC), monitoring actions (CM), and monitoring chats (CMC)). Raters coded the log data at the level of
each log   file event,  with each event  receiving only one   code. Inter-rater  reliability between two  raters was
calculated on a sample of 20 percent of the data that was double coded and was found to be high (Kappa = .84).
There were a total of 20,947 log file events, which were coded for the presence of one of the 11 CPS skills.

Analyses
To explore connections among the CPS skills, we built co-occurrence networks of the CPS skills. We defined
each turn for an individual as a series uninterrupted chats or actions, and considered the co-occurrence of the CPS
skills in each turn. For each team, we scanned the records containing events from all team members, and built the
aggregated CPS skill network for the team. In these networks, the nodes represent CPS skills, the links represent

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     566                                                   © ISLS
the co-occurrence of the CPS skills in the turns, and link weights represent the frequencies of the co-occurrence.
To characterize the constructed CPS skill networks, we used six well-adopted network measures (Newman, 2003;
Wasserman & Faust, 1994). Density captures the number of existing links divided by the number of possible links.
Weighted density is the sum of link weights divided by the number of possible links. Centralization (Freeman,
1979) captures the extent to which the number of links connected to nodes vary across all nodes in the network.
Further, Maximum Component Size is the size of the biggest connected component in the network. Connectedness
is the number of dyads (a set of two nodes) with existing direct connections or indirect connections through other
nodes divided by the total number of dyads. Lastly, Maximum Degree is calculated as the maximum number of
links connected to a single node.
         For each team, we calculated the above measures to characterize the CPS skill networks. To compare the
network measures of teams with different performance levels, we considered two measures of team performance.
In the Three-Resistor Activity, each team had the opportunity to complete up to four levels. We used the number
of successfully completed  levels  and   the number    of levels attempted as  two  separated measures    of team
performance. For further analysis, we dichotomized the two performance measures using the medians as the cut
point to yield low and high performing subgroups. Multiple independent sample t-tests with Bonferroni correction
were conducted on the network measures for subgroup comparisons.

Results
All 43 teams attempted to solve at least one level, but were not all successful. Among all teams, 20 attempted all
four levels, seven attempted three levels, eight attempted two levels, and eight attempted just one level. Nine
teams  successfully completed all   four levels,  12  completed  three levels, five completed    two levels, eight
completed one level, and nine did not complete any levels successfully. For the dichotomization, we used the
medians of 2 and 3 for the number of successful levels and the number of levels attempted, respectively. Teams
with values higher than the medians were coded as high (H), and teams with values lower or equal to the medians
as were coded as low (L). Examples of CPS skill networks from two teams with high and low performance are
shown in Figure 2. For each network, the size of the nodes indicates the frequencies of the CPS skills presented
in the team's chats and actions, and the thickness of the links indicates the frequencies of the co-occurrence of the
CPS skills in turns. Visually, the high performing team network in Figure 2 (a) has not only bigger nodes but also
more and thicker links than the low performing team network in Figure 2 (b).

                 (a) Attempted 4 levels, solved 3                (b) Attempted 1 level, solved 0
            Figure 2. Example networks from a high performing team and a low performing team.

         Using number of levels successfully completed, high performing teams (M = 854.43, SD = 328.56, N =
21) demonstrated higher frequencies of CPS skills than low performing teams (M = 369.45, SD = 198.47, N =
22), t(33) = 5.83, p < .001. When measured by the number of levels attempted, CPS skills frequencies of the high
performing teams (M = 824.95, SD = 322.66, N = 20) were also significantly higher than low performing teams
(M = 416.17, SD = 281.85, N = 23), t(38) = 4.39, p < .001. However, higher frequencies of CPS skills did not
necessarily indicate more links in the network. In fact, the correlation between CPS skill frequencies and network
density was 0.57. We next compared the CPS skill network statistics for the high and low performing teams using
independent sample t-tests (adjusted D=.05/6=.0083), and the results are summarized in Table 2. When using
number of levels successfully completed, we found that high and low performing teams differed in most network
measures  except centralization.  The differences   in Density,  Weighted  Density, Maximum      Component   Size,
Connectedness and Maximum Degree all showed that the CPS skill networks for the high performing teams were
better connected and  had more    coverage   than the low  performing  teams.  The  lack of significant results for
centralization indicates that both high and low performing teams did not show preferences towards connecting
certain CPS skills with others. Instead, the connections among the CPS skills were evenly distributed with no CPS
skills more central than others. When using number of levels attempted, only weighted density was significantly
different for high and low performing teams.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   567                                                 © ISLS
Table 2: Comparisons of teams with H/L performance

                          By Number of Successful Levels                     By Number of Levels Attempted
                      MH       ML(n=21)(n=22)    t-test                 MH        ML(n=20)(n=23)    t-test
Density            0.45        0.30   t = 3.62, df = 41, p = .0008     0.43      0.32    t = 2.62, df = 41, p = .012
WeightedDensity    1.64        0.79   t = 4.59, df = 38, p < .0001     1.58      0.87    t = 3.57, df = 41, p = .0009
Centralization     0.43        0.43   t = -0.05, df = 40, p = .958     0.44      0.42    t = 0.61, df = 41, p = .547
MaximumComponent Size10.10     8.77   t = 2.95, df = 39, p = .005     10.00      8.91    t = 2.37, df = 40, p = .023
Connectedness      0.85        0.65   t = 3.18, df = 41, p = .003      0.83      0.67    t = 2.49, df = 41, p = .017
MaximumDegree      7.95        6.50   t = 2.79, df = 41, p = .008      7.90      6.61    t = 2.44, df = 41, p = .019

Discussion and future directions
In this study, we constructed CPS skill networks from log data on team actions and chats during collaborative
problem solving. The results showed that high and low performing teams significantly differed not only on the
frequencies of the CPS skills displayed, but also on how the skills were connected with each other. This study
makes contributions to the measurement of CPS skills by demonstrating a new way of assessing and understanding
CPS skills: through the exploration of connections among CPS skills. For future directions, different approaches
to constructing the CPS skill networks will be explored. This study used the co-occurrence of skills in the same
turn, and focused on the connections of skills represented in the chat and actions of individual team members.
Alternatively, the    moving   window  approach  (Siebert-Evenstone     et al., 2017)  captures the evidence  of the
connections displayed during the interactions among team members. We intend to identify the connections using
this alternative approach and explore the similarities and differences of the resulting networks.

References
Andrews-Todd,     J., &  Forsyth, C. M.   (in press). Exploring  social  and cognitive dimensions   of collaborative
    problem       solving   in  an   open  online     simulation-based   task.   Computers  in   Human     Behavior.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.10.025
Andrews, J. J., Kerr, D., Mislevy, R. J., von Davier, A., Hao, J., & Liu, L. (2017). Modeling Collaborative
    Interaction    Patterns  in a Simulation-Based    Task.   Journal of   Educational Measurement,    54(1), 54­69.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/jedm.12132
Freeman, L. (1979). Centrality in Social Networks I: Conceptual Clarification. Social Networks, 1, 215­239.
Hesse, F., Care, E., Buder, J., Sassenberg, K., & Griffin, P. (2015). A framework for teachable collaborative
    problem solving skills. In P. Griffin & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills (pp.
    37­56). New York: Springer.
Liu, L., von Davier, A. A., Hao, J., Kyllonen, P., & Zapata-Rivera, D. (2015). A tough nut to crack: Measuring
    collaborative problem solving. In Y. Rosen, S. Ferrara, & M. Mosharraf (Eds.), Handbook of research on
    computational tools for real-world skill development (pp. 344­359). Hershey, PA: IGI-Global.
Newman, M. E. J. (2003). The structure and function of complex networks.         SIAM Review, 45, 167­256.
OECD. (2013). Pisa 2015 Draft Collaborative Problem Solving Framework March 2013. OECD Publishing.
Shaffer, D. W.    (2004).  Epistemic   Frames   and   Islands of  Expertise: Learning  from Infusion   Experiences.
    Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference of the Learning Sciences, 473­480.
Siebert-Evenstone, A., Arastoopour Irgens, G., Collier, W., Swiecki, Z., Ruis, A. R., & Shaffer, D. W. (2017). In
    Search     of Conversational    Grain Size: Modelling     Semantic  Structure Using  Moving   Stanza   Windows.
    Journal of Learning Analytics, 4(3), 123­139. https://doi.org/10.18608/jla.2017.43.7
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods and applications. Cambridge University
    Press, Cambridge.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant DUE 1535224
awarded to the second author, and in collaboration with Concord Consortium and CORD. The opinions expressed
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the National Science Foundation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     568                                                  © ISLS
