                Video Annotation for Content-Focused Coaching
                          Julie M. Amador, University of Idaho, jamador@uidaho.edu
                  Jeffrey Choppin, University of Rochester, choppin@Warner.Rochester.edu
                      Cynthia Carson, University of Rochester, ccarson3@u.rochester.edu
                        Ryan Gillespie, University of Idaho, gill6762@vandals.uidaho.edu

         Abstract:  We   implemented   an  innovative  online  mathematics   professional learning model
         designed to create high-impact growth opportunities for teachers in rural school districts. As a
         part of this model, classroom teachers were partnered with coaches with whom they worked
         on content-focused coaching cycles. Within a coaching cycle, teachers and coaches met to
         plan a mathematics lesson, the teacher video recorded the lesson, the coach and teacher both
         annotated the lesson video, and finally the two met to debrief the lesson verbally. We report
         on the process of video annotations. Data analysis focused on identifying the type of response
         within an annotation as well as the extent to which the teacher or coach noticed students'
         mathematical   thinking. We   contend  that  the  annotation process  afforded opportunities  for
         direct suggestions   to teachers  that may    not  have  otherwise  occurred.  Findings  indicate
         annotations  were    predominantly  focused   on    mathematics   content goals  and  classroom
         discourse practices.

Conceptual background, context, and significance
Teachers in rural areas face constraints in terms of accessing the expertise and resources required for high-
quality professional learning experiences, often because of lack of proximity to such resources as institutions of
higher education and critical masses of teachers required to collectively reflect on problems of practice (Howley
& Howley, 2005). Rural contexts are thus ideal sites for online professional development, which can be offered
at a distance and can engage geographically dispersed participants in collaborative learning experiences (Francis
&  Jacobsen,  2013).  The  innovative  online   professional  learning experiences   in our  project focus  on the
development of teacher capacity to enact ambitious, responsive instruction espoused in recent US educational
policy documents   (CCSSI, 2010). Recognizing the critical need to prepare all teachers to implement rigorous
instruction, especially teachers  who  are not  geographically    proximate to  face-to-face trainings or  coaching
resources, we engaged participants in online courses, online demonstration lessons, and online video coaching
over the last two years. In the process, we created experiences that match, if not exceed, what is possible in face-
to-face settings. The project is based in two geographically diverse locations in the US to explore the scalability
of the model to other under-resourced contexts.
         In this paper, we focus on online coaching, particularly the use of video annotations to stimulate the
coaching  interactions. The use   of coaching   to foster teacher learning  and improve   student achievement  has
become an increasingly popular strategy for schools, districts, and states in the US (Heinke, 2013). Prior studies
have shown that coaching can improve both teaching and student learning (Sailors & Price, 2015; Kraft, Blazar,
& Hogan, 2018). However, coaching activities vary widely, impacting the effectiveness of coaching and posing
problems for researchers and professional developers alike (Gibbons & Cobb, 2016). Content-focused coaching
is a specific model  for guiding  coaching  activities that  aims to support teacher learning  by  focusing on the
mathematical goals of the lesson, and how students might engage with those goals (West & Staub, 2003). In
content-focused coaching, the coach accepts equal accountability for generating effective student learning (West
& Staub, 2003).
         To facilitate online content-focused coaching, we used video conferencing software (Zoom), and video
capturing/annotating  software   (Swivl).  The  online  video  coaching  was    purposely designed   with  features
analogous to West and Staub's (2003) face-to-face content-focused coaching cycle. First, the teacher and coach
met via Zoom to plan the lesson; second, the teacher video recorded the lesson implementation using Swivl;
third, the teacher and coach separately viewed and annotated the video of the enacted lesson; and finally, the
coach and teacher met via Zoom to reflect on the lesson, using the annotations to anchor their discussion. The
purpose of this study was to better understand the content of the annotations and the interactions of the coach
and teacher in the online space. Specifically, we were interested in understanding the discursive moves and
content of the annotations from both the coach and teacher. We posed the following research questions:
     1.  What was the focus of the annotations (e.g., non-mathematical aspects of classroom practice, teacher
         discourse moves, student strategies, mathematical goals of the lesson)?

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    569                                                 © ISLS
    2.   What were the discursive moves coaches and teachers used when annotating video of a mathematics
         lesson?

Method
Using  a cohort    model,    we   engaged    16 teachers  in an  intensive two-year        professional   development         model
focused on supporting teachers to engage in ambitious, responsive instruction. The teachers taught in grades five
through  eight    (ten to 14  years-old),   specifically in mathematics,   and        worked in  rural   locations     that made  it
difficult to engage in face-to-face coaching.

Data collection
The unit of analysis was coach-teacher pairs, with each coach-teacher pair completing two or three coaching
cycles annually. For the purposes of this paper, we focus specifically on data from the annotations the coach and
teacher produced as they initially reviewed the lesson video and made comments. To make the annotations in
Swivl, the coach and teacher each viewed the lesson video in the Swivl software platform. They then stopped
the video at moments they saw as relevant to the coaching cycle, which were automatically time-stamped by the
software. The coach or teacher would then annotate the moments with their thoughts and reflections. They were
given the following prompt:

         Add your comments, questions, and thoughts to the video segment in Swivl at any points in
         the video that might be interesting to discuss further. For example, were there any moments
         that surprised you? (i.e., misconceptions that emerged, strategies that you did not anticipate,
         struggles/challenges, or any "Ah-ha" moments) Were there particular instances that showed
         evidence of student thinking? Is there something that you see as you watch the lesson that
         relates to the goal you set for this coaching cycle?

For each  of the   nine   coaching    pairs, we  analyzed   the written annotations       from   three   coaching      cycles. This
involved annotations from five different coaches and nine different teachers. Figure 1 shows an example of an
annotation, with Bishop as the coach and Cole as teacher (both are pseudonyms), making comments on the
video of a lesson Cole taught.

00:22:34   Jun 01, 2017      Cole      ---Can we leave the answer in radical form?---
00:25:52   Jun 04, 2017      Bishop    Great introductory discussion about why we might want to leave the result in radical form
                                       and why sometimes the rounded form is good enough.
00:26:21   Jun 04, 2017      Bishop    I wonder what the students might have noticed if before you introduced the formula you had
                                       focused the students on how they might be able to find the lengths of the two legs of the right
                                       triangle without drawing the triangle. "Suppose you did not have a coordinate plane to draw
                                       the triangle in questions 1. Could you have found the lengths of 4 and 5 by reasoning with the
                                       two ordered pairs only? Can you explain how?" We could even ask students to turn and talk
                                       about how they might be able to do this prior to sharing with the entire class.

                                             Figure 1. Sample of annotations.

Data analysis
Data analysis focused on identifying the coaches' and teachers' discursive moves                  and nature of comments in
the annotations.   Initially, each    annotation  was  assigned  a Category  Code        based   the nature   of       the comment.
These  codes  (i.e. Marking       an Event,  Question,   Suggestion,  Interpretation/Explanation,        and  Evaluation)      were
intended  to capture    the  essence   of  the  annotation. We  then  developed        a codebook    to  analyze       the discourse
moves and content of the annotations. The codebook is based on research on content-focused coaching (West &
Staub, 2003) as well as open codes, based on initial constant comparison analysis (Corbin & Strauss, 2003). The
codebook  contains     first level   codes  and second   level  codes for four        different categories:  Coach         Discursive
Moves, Teacher Discursive Moves, Goals of Lesson, Content/Design of Lesson. Figure 2 provides an excerpt of
the Coach Discursive Moves of the codebook.

                                     Features of Coaching Discursive Moves (HOW Coaching)
     First Level           Second Level                   Description
     Invitational          Elicitation/Pressing           Eliciting a response; broad initial questions;
                           Other                          Other Comment
     Direct Assistance     Suggesting                     Offering an alternative point of view or suggesting

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        570                                                               © ISLS
                         Explaining                      Provide and interpretation or rationale of an event, interaction,
                                                         or mathematical idea
                         Other                           Other comment
     Describing          Account of Practice General     Provides an objective account of a scenario or practice withoutreference to a specific event

                     Figure 2. Excerpt of Codebook, Coaching Discursive Moves Section.

From this codebook, each annotation received a Discursive Code that was either a Coach Discursive Move or a
Teacher Discursive Move and a Content Code that related to the Goals of Lesson or Content/Design of Lesson.
Two  researchers   each   independently     coded    each annotation,   assigning      at least  one Category   Code,         one
Discursive Code, and one Content Code for each annotation and then met to compare and reconcile codes.

Findings
Examining the annotations across the various coaches and teachers, coaches wrote approximately 60% of the
annotations and teachers 40%. The first focus of the research was to identify the Category Code coaches and
teachers used when annotating video of mathematics lessons. Of the five Category Codes (i.e. Mark, Question,
Suggestion, Interpretation/Explanation, and Evaluation), Marking was the most common for both the coaches
and teachers. Marking included comments that pointed to a specific account of practice deemed relevant by the
teacher or coach, meaning they highlighted a particular action or verbalization of someone in the video by using
a timestamp to draw attention to that action. As an example, one teacher wrote, "Student explained the pictures
of  the shapes  and their  angles   in Part A." Most     annotations coded    as Mark       were also  coded  with  another
Category Code, such as Interpretation/Explanation or Evaluation, as the Category Codes were not mutually
exclusive. Although these were the most common category codes, annotations that received this code commonly
received another code as well. As an example, one teacher wrote, "I'm handing out the papers and placing them
down on the desk in hopes of keeping their focus on the front - hoping they are not distracted by the formula on
the top of the back of the paper. I don't usually hand out papers this way. :)" In this example, the teacher Marked
the moment, stating that she was handing out the papers; however, she then went on to Interpret/Explain that
she usually does not pass out papers this way and hopes it is not distracting. With these additional comments,
this annotation was coded as both Marking and Interpretation/Explanation (the discursive code was Describe:
Account of Practice Specific, meaning a detailed review of an event).
         With respect to the other Category Codes interestingly, Evaluative comments were distributed almost
equally  between  coaches   and teachers.   As  an   example  of an  Evaluative        comment,  one  coach  wrote,        "Great
introductory discussion about why we might want to leave the result in radical form and why sometimes the
rounded form is good enough." The Evaluative codes were used when there some type of positive or negative
judgement about something in the lesson. The code for Questions was used when either the coach or teacher
wrote a direct question to the other person or wrote a question to his or herself as something to consider at a
later point, and this code was the least frequently applied.
         The    Discursive Moves    that were   most   common    (those   coming       from  the codebook,   Figure        2, and
relating to the type of speech from the coach and teacher) included Direct Assistance from the coaches and
Describing  Accounts   of  Practice    from the teachers.   The   coach   commonly        included   phrases that provided
suggestions to the teacher on how they may rethink their instructional moves or on how they may consider
pedagogy in the future. Many of these suggestions began with "I wonder..." and included language about what
could or should be done in a similar situation in the future or in the next lesson. In contrast, the teachers most
commonly described what they were doing in the video as they wrote out their annotations.
         With respect to the Content Codes, Math Content Goals and Discourse were the most common topics
for discussion.  As an  example,    one  teacher     was  working on    a goal   of    supporting  students  to understand
formulas. For the annotation, the coach wrote, "Perhaps rewriting the distance formula as the square root of
delta x squared plus delta y squared, might have helped some students makes more sense of the formula at this
point." In this example, the coach focuses on the mathematics content goals of the lesson and provides a specific
suggestion  related to the  mathematics.    Discourse     was   another common         topic of  focus in the   annotations.
Discourse refers to verbal interactions among the teacher and students. As an example, one coach annotated the
following, "George states that every angle can make a straight line. This statement is quite ambiguous but is a
start to the conversation. I wonder what would have happened if you followed this up with George says that
every angle can make a straight line. What does he mean by this? Do you agree or disagree?" In this example,
the coach comments on how the teacher started a conversation and then provides a specific question the teacher
could have asked. It was common that the coach and teacher wrote comments that were aimed at improving
classroom discourse, which was a focus of the professional development project.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       571                                                            © ISLS
Implications and conclusion
The coaches and teachers focused most of their annotations on the mathematical content and discourse moves,
reflecting  the  content-focused   coaching   model   and   the focus of  the   professional  development   project.  The
annotations provided an opportunity for the coaches and teachers to indicate how they were interpreting the
enactment of the mathematical goals and how teachers were facilitating those goals.           This is typical of face-to-
face coaching interactions, when the coach and teacher can explore artifacts together in person. In the absence
of that opportunity, the annotations provided a means for the coach and teacher to independently mark crucial
moments, which could then be used to anchor the post-lesson Zoom discussion. Though classroom management
was sometimes      a focus of  the annotations,    most  of the annotations  were   more   in line with content-focused
coaching.    Importantly,  the   annotations  also  focused    on classroom     discourse  moves,  and   many     of these
annotations were non-evaluative, instead describing objective accounts of the episode.
         These   findings  draw    attention to the   possible  affordances  of the annotation   process   for supporting
teachers to   pay  attention  to  students'  mathematical   thinking, an  important    aspect of  effective mathematics
instruction  (Jacobs,   Lamb,  &   Philipp,  2010).   We contend   that  the process   of watching   a video   and   typing
specific comments      about  the  video through    a content-focused   coaching  model    (West   &   Staub,  2003)  may
support  teachers    in  thinking  more  about    the specifics of  mathematics     as compared    to  having   a  general
conversation about a lesson, as may occur with an interview or other type of interaction. Therefore, we consider
the Swivl online annotation platform as a possible medium to elicit math-specific comments that may support
teachers' development and understanding about pedagogy and content. The data show that the online annotation
platform allows for new types of interactions between the teacher, coach, and their learning environment, which
may afford new knowledge of collaborative online technologies for supporting teacher learning. We recognize
additional analysis would be necessary to support claims about the benefits of annotation, but this study gives
rise to the possibility of these types of affordances of annotation technology.

References
Common     Core    State  Standards  Initiative (CCSSI).    2010. Common      Core  State  Standards   for  Mathematics.
         Washington, DC: National Governors Association and the Council of Chief State School Officers.
Corbin,  J., &   Strauss, A.  (2008). Basics    of qualitative  research: Techniques   and    procedures for   developing
         grounded theory (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Francis, K., & Jacobsen, M. (2013). Synchronous online collaborative professional development for elementary
         mathematics teachers. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 14, 319­343.
Gibbons,   L.  K., &    Cobb, P.  (2016). Content-focused      coaching:  Five  key practices.   The Elementary    School
         Journal, 117(2), 237-260.
Heinke, S. F. (2013). Coaching discourse supporting teachers' professional learning. The Elementary School
         Journal, 113(3), 409-433.
Howley,    A.,   &   Howley,    C.   (2005). High-quality    teaching:   Providing   for   rural teachers'    professional
         development. The Rural Educator, 26(2), 1-5.
Jacobs,  V.  R., Lamb,    L. L.  C., &   Philipp,  R. A. (2010).  Professional  Noticing   of  Children's   Mathematical
         Thinking. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 41(2), 169­202.
Kraft, M. A., Blazar, D., & Hogan, D. (2018). The effect of teacher coaching on instruction and achievement: A
         meta-analysis of the causal evidence. Review of Educational Research, 88(4), 547-588.
Matsumura,    L.   C.,  Garnier,  H. E., &   Spybrook,   J.  (2013).  Literacy  coaching   to improve    student   reading
         achievement: A multi-level mediation model. Learning and Instruction, 25, 35-48.
Sailors, M., & Price, L. (2015). Support for the improvement of practices through intensive coaching (SIPIC).
         Teaching and Teacher Education, 45, 115-127.
Star, J. R., & Strickland, S. K. (2008). Learning to observe: Using video to improve preservice mathematics
         teachers' ability to notice. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 11, 107-125.
West, L., & Staub, F.C. (2003).       Content-focused coaching: Transforming mathematics lessons.             Portsmouth,
         NH: Heinemann.
West, L., & Cameron, A. (2013). Agents of change: How content coaching transforms teaching and learning.
         Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1620911. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       572                                                      © ISLS
