                    Collective Knowledge Advancement through
    Shared Epistemic Agency: Socio-Semantic Network Analyses
                         Jun Oshima, RECLS Shizuoka Univ., joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp
                      Ritsuko Oshima, RECLS Shizuoka Univ., roshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp
                                  Ayano Ohsaki, AIIT, ohsaki-ayano@aiit.ac.jp
                         Jin Michael Splichal, Univ. of Helsinki, jin.splichal@helsinki.fi

        Abstract:    This study  examined   how  high-school   students  engage   in collective   knowledge
        advancement      through shared  epistemic   agency  during   jigsaw    instruction,  and how    their
        collective   knowledge   advancement    (through shared     epistemic   agency) relates   to learning
        outcomes.    To  achieve  this, we  applied  a double-layered    socio-semantic    network   analysis
        (SSNA). In the first layer of the analysis, we conducted an SSNA to numerically represent
        collective   knowledge   advancement  and   to compare     group performances     between    different
        levels of learning outcomes. In the second layer, we carried out an Epistemic Network Analysis
        to examine the relationship between students' shared epistemic agency and learning outcomes.
        The results revealed that high learning-outcome groups were engaged in epistemic actions to
        generate new ideas; this led them to quick and sustainable knowledge advancement.

Research purpose
This study has analyzed the way in which high-school students engage in collective knowledge advancement
through shared epistemic agency (Dama et al., 2010) during jigsaw instruction (Brown & Campione, 1996). It
has also investigated the extent to which this collective knowledge advancement relates to learning outcomes.
Although studies (e.g., Miyake & Kirschner, 2013) have demonstrated that jigsaw instruction is effective in
facilitating conceptual  understanding,  few studies have   shown   how  learners   engage   in collective  knowledge
advancement    during collaboration  (Oshima,   Oshima   &  Matsuzawa,    2012).    The present   study  explored   the
students' collective  knowledge   advancement   by  applying   a   double-layered socio-semantic     network   analysis
(SSNA). In the first layer of the analysis, we conducted an SSNA to numerically and visually represent collective
knowledge advancement and to compare group performance based on learning outcomes, as evaluated by the SBF
framework (in pre- and post-testing). In the second layer, we carried out an Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA)
(Shaffer, 2017) to examine the relationship between epistemic frames of shared epistemic agency and learning
outcomes.

Theoretical background

Inquiry into collective knowledge advancement during jigsaw instruction
Many   studies  have  attempted  to design  learning  environments    to facilitate students'   collective  knowledge
advancement. One such instructional method is jigsaw instruction. In jigsaw instruction, learners engage in two
different phases of an activity. In the phase known as the "expert group activity," learners work collaboratively
on the same materials. Collaboration in the expert group facilitates constructive interaction among the learners
(Miyake, 1986), enabling them to develop their own understanding by mutually monitoring each other's ideas
from different points of view. After learning their materials during the expert group activity, learners join the
jigsaw group   activity, where  those   who studied  different materials  gather  to integrate    different sources of
knowledge collaboratively. In the jigsaw group activity, learners are predicted to engage in productive interaction
within multiple zones of proximal development, depending on the different knowledge sources (e.g., Brown &
Campione, 1996). With respect to any one component of the learning activity, one student is an expert on that
domain and teaches the other group members. This teaching­learning process is repeated multiple times.
        Although    studies have  demonstrated   that  jigsaw  instruction   is effective  in facilitating  conceptual
understanding   and  collective knowledge   advancement     (e.g., Miyake  &    Kirschner,   2014),  few studies have
examined in detail the process through which learners take responsibility for contributing to collective knowledge
advancement through collaboration, i.e., shared epistemic agency. In relation to the knowledge-creation metaphor
of learning  (Paavola &   Hakkarainen,   2005), students  are  expected   to  practice  knowledge    creation  through
collaboratively constructing knowledge objects (Bereiter, 2002). Scardamalia (2002) has discussed intentional
engagement in collective knowledge advancement as epistemic agency-- proposing this agency as a new goal for
instruction (Scardamalia et al., 2012). Dama et al. (2010) have also argued in favor of shared epistemic agency,
focusing more on group-level agency. Through an in-depth discourse analysis, Dama et al. (2010) found that

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    57                                                      © ISLS
students in collaborative groups engage in the wholly joint epistemic actions of (1) being aware of their lack of
knowledge,  (2) alleviating  the lack of  knowledge,   (3)   creating a shared understanding,   and  (4) generative
collaboration. To regulate their joint epistemic actions, students have also been found to engage in (1) projection
by setting goals and creating joint plans, (2) regulation by monitoring and reflecting on their advancement, and
(3) developing relations by transcending conflicts, redirecting critical feedback, and creating space for others'
contributions. Studies by   Scardamalia   (2002)  and  Dama     et  al. (2010)   suggest that  we need   to analyze
collaboration as knowledge creation, based on at least two layers of collective knowledge advancement: (1) how
learners' ideas are improved through their collaborative discourse (i.e., idea improvement) and (2) how learners
engage in improving their ideas collectively (i.e., shared epistemic agency).

Double-layered socio-semantic network analysis
In this study, we propose using two layers of socio-semantic network analyses (SSNA). Recent studies (Oshima
et al., 2012; Shaffer et al., 2009) have argued that existing social network models are unable to examine the way
in which collective knowledge advances through learner collaboration. Two lines of research have been used to
solve this problem. The first approach is to apply a procedure that is similar to an ordinary SNA to examine a
different type of social network: a socio-semantic network based on the words that learners use in their discourse.
Connections between words are assumed to represent clusters of ideas; the change in the socio-semantic network
structure over time is examined both visually and computationally to investigate how a group of students engages
in collective knowledge advancement (e.g., Ma et al., 2016; Oshima, Oshima & Fujita, 2018; Oshima et al., 2017).
The second approach is another SSNA, based on epistemic frame theory, called Epistemic Network Analysis
(ENA) (Shaffer, 2017). ENA is an algorithm that identifies and calculates connections among elements in coded
data and visualizes them in dynamic network models that illustrate their structure and strength over time. With
ENA, researchers can qualitatively and quantitatively examine cultural practices that participants engage in, such
as engineering projects (e.g., Svarovsky, 2011), through their discourse. The present study uses both approaches
to investigate different layers of student activity. We have carried out a vocabulary network analysis of their
collective knowledge advancement and an ENA to assess their shared epistemic agency.
        This study combines the approaches and findings of our previous studies, which examined students'
collective knowledge advancement (Oshima et al., 2017), with a further ENA by coding the same discourse data
from the perspective of shared epistemic agency.

Conceptual understanding of complex scientific concepts
Through collective knowledge advancement, learners are expected to engage in complex tasks and comprehension
of phenomena. Complex systems are multiple levels of organizations locally interacting with one another, such
as financial economies and weather systems (Wilensky & Jacobson, 2013). Studies have revealed that students
have difficulty mastering such complex subjects, despite their importance. One reason for the difficulty is that the
complex concepts conflict with learners' prior experience. They usually have a "centralized" mindset and tend to
favor explanations that assume central control and simple causality. In his interview study, Jacobson (2001) found
that undergraduate students  were  more   likely than experts  to  generate simple  causality, central control, and
predictability; by contrast, the experts exhibited decentralized thinking about multiple causes, such as stochastic
and equilibration processes.
        Hmelo-Silver and Pfeffer (2004) have proposed a structure­behavior­function (SBF) framework for
assessing different levels of student understanding of complex systems. To assess students' understanding of an
aquarium as a complex system, for instance, they used the SBF framework in the following way. Structures are
elements of a system; in an aquarium, there are fish, plants, and a filter. Behaviors represent the way in which
system structures achieve their purpose; for example, filters remove waste by trapping large particles, absorbing
chemicals, and converting ammonia into harmless chemicals. Finally, functions express why an element exists
within a given system--in other words, they express the purpose of that system element. For example, the filter
removes aquarium byproducts. When researchers studied the verbal responses and pictorial representations of
middle-school  students, preservice   teachers,  and experts,  they   found that novices  focused  on  perceptually
available, static-system components. Experts, on the other hand, focused more on interrelations among structures,
functions, and  behaviors.  These results suggest    that the SBF   framework    could be  a  useful formalism  for
understanding complex systems.
        The present study has used this framework to assess high-school students' conceptual understanding of
the human immune system as a complex system. Both before and after the lesson, we asked the students to explain
how vaccination protects us from infection by using their knowledge of the human immune system.

Methods

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     58                                                  © ISLS
Student sample
Thirty-nine tenth-grade  students at a high  school   in Japan participated in this study, as  part of their regular
curriculum. A science teacher with a Ph.D. in biology and more than ten years of teaching experience taught the
students.

Lesson design

Structure of the collaborative learning activity: Jigsaw instruction
Twelve groups were formed with three or four students in each and were given a challenge, such as "Can you
explain how vaccinations protect us from infections?" They were then provided with three study documents, each
of which was needed to solve the challenge. First, individual students from each group gathered to form twelve
expert groups (four groups to study each expert material) and worked on their allocated materials over 1.5 lesson
periods (each lasting 50 min.). Second, students returned to their original group (the jigsaw group) and shared and
integrated their knowledge in order to solve the challenge problem. This jigsaw activity took another 1.5 lesson
periods. The teacher was responsible for group composition in both group activities.

Study documents
We created the SBF framework for the human immune system based on a textbook description (Figure 1). We
then discussed with the collaborating teacher the way to separate content, during expert group activities, into
pieces of knowledge based on three essential functions: humoral immunity, primary and secondary response, and
cell-mediated immunity. In the SBF framework, the three functions interact with one another as subsystems.

Study design

Pre- and post-tests
Students were questioned individually about their understanding of how the human immune system responds to
vaccination (i.e., Can you explain how vaccination protects us from infection?). They were given a worksheet
with a printed question, on which they could write or draw their ideas. The pre-test was conducted right before
the lesson started. The post-test was conducted right after the lesson finished. Each test took one lesson period.
Thirty-five students completed both tests; their responses were then analyzed.

Process data collection
Student   conversations during group   activities were   video-recorded   and transcribed  for vocabulary  network
analysis and ENA. We used transcripts of the jigsaw group activity to examine how students exerted their shared
epistemic agency in advancing their collective knowledge.

Analytical procedure
With reference to the SBF framework for the human immune system, student explanatory discourse during the
pre- and post-test was categorized into three types: (1) no understanding, (2) single-document understanding, or
(3) integrated understanding.  When    students   did not   manifest any  conceptual  understanding    of the three
documents used in the expert group activity, they were categorized as having no understanding. Students who
appropriately demonstrated understanding of one of the three documents were categorized as having single-
document understanding. Those who manifested a more complete understanding of the human immune system,
based on   more than    two documents   in  the   expert group  activity, were  categorized    as having  integrated
understanding. The first and third authors independently evaluated ten randomly selected examples of student
discourse in each of the pre- and post-tests. Cohen's Kappa coefficient for the agreement between the two raters
was 0.92. Disagreements were resolved through discussion. The first author evaluated the remaining data. Because
all students were categorized as having no understanding in the pre-test, we focused on levels of understanding in
the post-test to assess learning outcomes.
          To visualize and computationally investigate collective knowledge advancement, Oshima et al. (2017)
selected 23 nouns to represent the structures and functions of the human immune system in the SBF framework.
On average, students engaged in discourse exchange 358.5 times in the jigsaw groups (SD = 211.8). The socio-
semantic network of vocabulary refers to meaningful links (i.e., co-occurrence) between words in exchanges. We
then used an application called KBDeX (http://www.kbdex.net) to calculate the transition of the total value of
degree centralities of nodes in the network across discourse exchanges, following the method used in previous
research (Oshima et al., 2012). We then calculated the term frequencies (TF) of the selected vocabulary words,
using the formula, tf(t, d) = 1 + log(ft,d). We compared TF means across the groups to test whether the amount of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    59                                                   © ISLS
discourse related to the human immune system differed significantly (particularly between high and low learning-
outcome groups).
       We conducted an ENA of the twelve groups' discourse, using the seven epistemic actions of shared
epistemic agency (Dama et al., 2010) to code each discourse exchange. Cohen's Kappa coefficients for the
agreement between  the  two raters ranged between 0.47      and 1.00. Disagreements were resolved through
discussion. Since we were interested in detecting the epistemic frames of shared epistemic agency exerted by all
of the groups in relation to their learning outcomes, we conducted separate ENAs for high and low learning-
outcome groups.

             Figure 1. Structure­behavior­function framework of the human immune system.

Results

Students' learning outcomes at the individual and group level (Oshima et al., 2017)
We found that twenty-one students integrated SBF understanding. Eleven students demonstrated an understanding
of a single part of a learned document; three did not sufficiently learn any piece of the SBF framework. A chi-
square analysis of student frequencies across three types of learning outcome showed significance (2 = 13.944,
df = 2, p < .05); in addition, the proportion of students who integrated SBF understanding was higher than the
proportion with no understanding. These results suggest that the jigsaw activity did facilitate student integration
of knowledge through collaboration, although group differences remained in the learning outcomes. Based on the
SBF evaluation, we identified three high learning-outcome groups in which all members acquired integrated
conceptual understanding. Nine low learning-outcome groups demonstrated mixed levels of understanding.

Collective knowledge advancement: the difference between high and low learning-
outcome groups
Figure 2 shows the transitions in total values of degree centralities, an index presented in our previous study
(Oshima et al., 2017) to detect collective knowledge advancement. We found that the values quickly increased
and ultimately exceeded 10.0 in the high learning-outcome groups, while values stayed low and increased slowly
across discourse exchanges in the low learning-outcome groups. These results suggest that students in the high-
outcome groups engage in collective knowledge advancement more quickly and sustainably.
       An additional one-way ANOVA of TFs found no significance among the twelve groups, F(11, 198) =
2.35, p > .05. This result reveals that students in all groups engaged in an equal amount of discourse related to the
human immune system.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  60                                                 © ISLS
           Figure 2. Transitions of total values of degree centralities over discourse exchanges.

Epistemic frames of shared epistemic agency: the differences between high and low
learning-outcome groups
To examine epistemic frames of shared epistemic agency, we conducted an ENA of the discourse of students in
high and low learning-outcome groups, using epistemic action codes (Figure 3). Seven codes of shared epistemic
agency were plotted in a two-dimensional epistemic space, based on adjacency matrices representing the co-
occurrence of the codes. A comparison of code connections in high and low learning-outcome groups revealed
the following critical differences. First, we found differences in variances, explained by the two-dimensional
epistemic spaces. For high learning-outcome groups, the epistemic space explained 100% of variances in the two-
dimensional space (88.9% in the first/horizontal dimension and 11.1% in the second/vertical dimension). By
contrast, for low learning-outcome groups, the epistemic space explained only 80% (46.3% in the first dimension
and 33.7% in the second). In addition, the relationship between the epistemic and regulative aspects of actions
differed in the two types of groups. In high learning-outcome groups, three epistemic actions--alleviating a lack
of knowledge (ALoK), creating shared understanding (CSU), and generating collaborative actions (GCA)--were
strongly linked to both regulative and projective actions. In low learning-outcome groups, although the three
epistemic actions (ALoK, CSU, and GCA) were linked to regulative action, they were only weakly connected to
projective action.
       In addition to analyzing the differences associated with learning outcomes, we carried out a temporal
analysis within each group, dividing the whole process of each group discourse into three phases (Figures 4 and
5). Based on the temporal ENA within each group, we found the following results. First, in high learning-outcome
groups, the most active actions changed across the three phases, from ALoK through CSU toward GCA. In each
phase, the active action was linked to regulative and projective actions. Low-learning outcome groups, by contrast,
began with ALoK and continued to CSU but did not move further toward GCA. ALoK and CSU were linked to
regulative action in the first and second phases; they were tied only weakly to projective action.

        Figure 3. Epistemic frames based on seven epistemic actions in shared epistemic agency--
       a comparison of high learning-outcome groups (left) and low learning-outcome groups (right).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   61                                                   © ISLS
 Figure 4. Temporal change in epistemic frames of shared epistemic agency by high learning-outcome groups:
               first phase (top left), second phase (top right) and third phase (bottom left).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  62                                                  © ISLS
 Figure 5. Temporal change in epistemic frames of shared epistemic agency by low learning-outcome groups:
                 first phase (top left), second phase (top right), and third phase (bottom left).

Discussion
In our previous study, presented at CSCL2017, we looked only at how a jigsaw group activity improved students'
ideas involving subject matter knowledge. Although significantly more students succeeded in acquiring integrated
SBF understanding, we also found big differences in learning outcomes among student groups. Only three of the
twelve groups (25%) succeeded in their collaboration, a problem that has now been examined more systematically
using a double-layered socio-semantic network analysis. This approach has allowed us not only to analyze what
happened in the jigsaw group activity (collective knowledge advancement) but also how it happened (shared
epistemic agency). The  new    findings, mainly obtained   through an ENA,   led  to the following      interesting
interpretations of the differences between high and low learning-outcome groups.
        First, our additional analysis of vocabulary term frequencies related to the SBF framework for the human
immune system revealed no significant difference in the amount of subject-related discourse across the groups.
The fact that the amount of discussion was the same suggests that learning outcomes were not related to how
much the students talked about the study topic. Instead, the way in which they scrutinized their own ideas appears
to have been the key to more productive group-learning outcomes.
        Second, our ENA of students' epistemic actions showed that the two types of groups (high and low)
engaged in different  types of epistemic  agency. The  high learning-outcome groups   established     more robust
epistemic space (100%   of  explained variances)  than the  low learning-outcome   groups  (80%      of explained
variances). The most epistemic aspect of actions was linked to the regulative aspect of actions in the high learning-
outcome groups. In addition to constructing a shared understanding, they also collaboratively generated actions
based on their shared understanding to explain how vaccination protects us from infection. They took regulative
and projective actions in relation to epistemic actions. In other words, they monitored their understanding and
attempted to improve their ideas continuously, in order to create their own theories of the human immune system.
No strong link between epistemic and regulative actions was found in the low learning-outcome groups.
        Finally, our temporal ENA of the students' epistemic agency provided a more accurate understanding of
the way in which they engaged in shared epistemic agency to advance collective knowledge. The high learning-
outcome groups were more engaged in alleviating their lack of knowledge during the first phase of activity--
before they constructed a shared understanding. By contrast, the low learning-outcome groups engaged in two
types of epistemic actions simultaneously, starting in the first phase. During the third phase, they continued to
construct a shared understanding and did not take the next step toward generating collaborative actions (for
example, by creating new collaborative ideas). These results suggest that there may be an optimal sequence of
epistemic actions, such as alleviating a lack of knowledge before constructing a shared understanding. The high
learning-outcome groups appeared to monitor themselves and proceed in accordance with a sequential process.
        By analyzing learning outcomes, collective knowledge advancement, and shared epistemic agency, we
were able to see how students engaged in collective knowledge advancement through their shared epistemic
agency when successfully acquiring a deep conceptual understanding. As previous research (e.g., Dama, 2014;
Scardamalia, 2002) suggests, epistemic agency plays a key role in successful collaboration. The present study
introduces a new finding: epistemic actions in collective knowledge advancement are likely to follow a sequential

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  63                                                    © ISLS
process. This hypothesis should be further tested in future studies, which could incorporate design elements into
jigsaw instruction to help students become aware of the sequence.

References
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brown, A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments:
         On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning: New
         environments for education. (pp. 289­325). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dama, C. I. (2014). The multi-layered nature of small-group learning: Productive interactions in object-oriented
         collaboration. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9, 247­281.
Dama, C. I., Kirschner, P. A., Andriessen, J. E. B., Erkens, G., & Sins, P. H. M. (2010). Shared epistemic agency
         ­ An empirical study of an emergent construct. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(2), 143­186.
Hmelo-Silver, C. & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex system from
         the perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. Cognitive Science, 28, 127­138.
Jacobson, M.  J.  (2001). Problem    solving, cognition, and complex   systems: Differences between  experts  and
         novices. Complexity, 6(2), 1­9.
Ma, L., Matsuzawa, Y., Chen, B., & Scardamalia, M. (2016). Community Knowledge, Collective Responsibility:
         The Emergence of Rotating Leadership inThree Knowledge Building Communities. In C. K. Looi, J.
         L.  Polman,  U.  Cress, &   P. Reimann    (Eds.),  Transforming Learning,  Empowering    Learners:  The
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2016, Volume 1. Singapore: International
         Society of the Learning Sciences.
Miyake, N. (1986). Constructive interaction and the iterative process of understand- ing. Cognitive Science, 10,
         151­177.
Miyake, N. & Kirschner, P. A. (2013). The social and interactive dimensions of collaborative learning. In K.
         Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, the Second Edition. (pp. 418­438).
         NY: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Oshima, J., Ohsaki, A., Yamada, Y., & Oshima, R. (2017). Collective knowledge advancement and conceptual
         understanding of complex scientific concepts in the jigsaw instruction. In Smith, B. K., Borge, M.,
         Mercier, E., and Lim, K. Y. (Eds.), Making a Difference: Prioritizing Equity and Access in CSCL, 12th
         International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2017, Volume 1 (pp.
         57­64). Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Fujita, W. (2018). A Mixed-Methods Approach to Analyze Shared Epistemic Agency
         in Jigsaw Instruction at Multiple Scales of Temporality. Journal of Learning Analytics, 5(1), 10­24.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: A social network
         analysis  application   for  knowledge    building  discourse.  Educational  Technology   Research   &
         Development, 60, 903­921.
Paavola, S., &   Hakkarainen,  K.    (2005).  The knowledge   creation  metaphor--An  emergent    epistemological
         approach to learning. Science & Education, 14, 535­557.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),
         Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67­98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M., Bransford, J., Kozma, B., & Quellmalz, E. (2012). New assessments and environments for
         knowledge building. In P. Griffin, B. McGraw, & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st century
         skills (pp. 231­300). New York, NY: Springer Science+Business Media.
Shaffer, D. W. (2017). Quantitative ethnography. Madison, WI: Cathcart Press.
Shaffer, D. W. et al. (2009). Epistemic network analysis: A Prototype for 21st Century assessment of Learning.
         International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 1­21.
Svarovsky, G. N. (2011). Exploring complex engineering learning over time with epistemic network analysis.
         Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research, 1(2), 19­30.
Wilensky, U. & Jacobson, M. J. (2013). Complex systems and the learning sciences. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The
         Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, the Second Edition. (pp. 319­338). NY: Cambridge
         Univ. Press.

Acknowledgments
We thank the participating teacher and students. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number
16H0187.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    64                                                 © ISLS
