  Negotiating Uncertainty to Develop a Joint Deepening Focus in
                               Knowledge Building Discourse
                                      Simona Pesaresi and Jianwei Zhang
                                  spesaresi@albany.edu, jzhang1@albany.edu
                              University at Albany, State University of New York

       Abstract: In open-ended and creative knowledge building communities, students engage in
       socially shared reasoning and discursive interaction to develop deep understanding of authentic
       problems related to the real world. Regulating a shared deepening focus in sustained knowledge
       building   involves    negotiating  uncertainty   as a space  for   potential idea generation and
       improvement. The research explores socio-cognitive and discourse practices in a class of fourth-
       graders studying light, whereby a shared space of epistemic objects is shaped, challenged and
       adapted   leading  to  deeper  conceptual explanations    of the  optical phenomena.    Qualitative
       analysis of talk-in-interaction, online students notes and teacher's journal showed patterns of
       cognitive    embodiment    and   uncertainty-oriented   discursive  practices   to explain shared
       regulation of progressive knowledge building.

Introduction
In knowledge building communities, members engage in sustained knowledge building discourse by which they
constantly  improve  and advance    shared understandings.    Students are required  to take  individual as well as
collective responsibility for continually advancing the community's knowledge while identifying deeper problems
and challenges (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014; Chan & van Aalst, 2018). As a critical component, researchers
need to better understand how students develop a joint deepening focus to sustain their knowledge building
discourse over time (Tao, Zhang & Huang, 2015). Building on existing research on socially shared regulation
(Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013) and collective structuration of collaborative knowledge building (Zhang et al., 2018),
this study intends to make a deeper dive to produce a micro-analytic view of the socio-cognitive and discursive
practices by which members generate ideas mediated by embodied artifacts and monitor knowledge uncertainty
to deepen their understanding.
       The regulation of collaborative knowledge building is socially distributed and embedded, as it involves
the creation and adaptation of ideational artifacts (theories, hypotheses, proofs, etc.) in the contexts in which
knowledge   building  actions and interactions unfold.   Shared regulation  of knowledge   building connects  with
Winn's (2003) framework of embodiment, embeddedness and adaptation, which theorizes learning as a mutual
interaction with the students' intelligible environment in which their ideas are embedded. Ideational artifacts
embody perception-based representations of the idiosyncratic view students hold of the real world (e.g. analogies,
physical perceptions, sensory imagery), of how students see and understand the investigated problem. As these
artifacts get progressively scrutinized, negotiated and adapted, students' knowledge advances. Their regulatory
function lies in their unbounded capacity to generate questions (Cetina, 2001), trigger puzzlement thus affording
opportunities for clarifications and negotiation of understanding. Underpinning knowledge advancement is an
intentional and imaginative   quest for sources of uncertainty  about   existing ideas  (Ford & Forman,    2015) in
dialogue with other peers. We interpret uncertainty as a space for idea generation and improvement embedded in
knowledge building discourse, and shared regulation involves the monitoring and adaptation of this space in which
embodied knowledge is challenged for deeper understanding. By engaging in dialogic discourse students unveil,
negotiate and resolve uncertainty as they seek increasingly sophisticated understandings. This study examines
how uncertainty-oriented discourse around embodied knowledge can characterize student regulation of a shared
problem space in a 4th grade science class adopting knowledge building principles.

Method
The study analyzes the inquiry work of a class of 22 Grade 4 students aged 9-to-10 years old at the Dr. Eric
Jackman Institute of Child Study Laboratory School in Toronto. Students engaged in the exploration of optical
phenomena   during  a three-month   period based on    a knowledge  building   approach.  This included  the use of
Knowledge Forum (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014), an online tool for recording ideas, theories and other inquiry
activity in problem-based views (i.e. workspaces). The teacher acted as facilitator and co-learner throughout the
inquiry work. He supported collective regulation of knowledge building by scaffolding students' progressive
discourse both during face-to-face meetings and online. He encouraged students to formulate initial questions,
write notes and carry on research and experiments to refine their theories and deepen their understanding. Prior

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    573                                                  © ISLS
to this inquiry students had already used Knowledge Forum in grade 1 when they studied how animals' fur reflects
or absorbs light depending on its color. Reviewing their online notes written at that time marked the onset of the
light inquiry during the first whole class talk (see also Zhang & Sun, 2011).
          To characterize the regulation of uncertainty in knowledge building discourse, we carried on a qualitative
analysis of a set of data including audio recording of whole classroom discussions, small group dialogues and
experiments. The analysis was extended to online artifacts in Knowledge Forum and records in the teacher's
reflection journal. We applied a whole-to-part inductive approach (Derry et al., 2010) to first develop a macro
representation of the whole inquiry and then zoom on some of the most meaningful excerpts of conversational
episodes to unpack the conversational flow and analyze discursive features. At this lower grain of analysis, we
progressively identified patterns associated with the concepts of embodied, embedded knowledge, and dialogic
discourse practices of seeking and resolving uncertainty.

Findings
Students  investigated   the topic  of light  and   its interaction  with   objects through  various activities such as
participating in small group and whole class discussions, searching for authoritative sources and carrying on self-
designed experiments. Their inquiry work evolved throughout the three months leading to the creation of seven
views  in  Knowledge     Forum,  each   containing      notes focused    on  newly  identified  or deeper  problems  of
understanding related to optics. Three salient patterns were identified from the data analysis showing how the
community developed and deepened its joint focus to sustain knowledge building over time.

Initiating a shared area of inquiry with embodied experiences and artifacts
During the whole class kick-off meeting, the teacher showed a view in an old database of Knowledge Forum
created by the students in 1st grade. The view titled "Adaptive Weirdos" collected notes about how animals adapt
to light. One   note in  particular containing    a theory  about   grey   fur reflecting light generated an  interesting
discussion around light and color reflection during which students contributed explanations using examples from
their direct experience with the real world. The teacher reported, for example, that a student "made a connection
to the black  streaks  worn  by  football   players."   The   fact that it was  snowing   outside  during the discussion
occasioned a new emerging interest about the connection between snow and white in relation to light. As reported
in the teacher's journal, "We asked the question if there was a reason why snow was white". The online notes
were collected in a new view that the teacher created and called "Grey Fur and White Snow" in symbolic reference
to the former theme in grade 1 and the emergent topic of color reflection. Bringing to the students' attention the
existence of several notes in Knowledge Forum about "how black and white interact with heat", the teacher
proposed this sub-topic as a new problem of understanding. Students started offering theories on whether black
attracts heat or light bringing in examples of various objects.
          The initial stage of problem inquiry was characterized by the development of ideas and explanations
embodied in figures of speech and analogies (Table 1). By defining physical properties or explaining abstract
concepts, these figurative arguments were used as a means to enter the problem space and get hold of an idea as
"to solve a problem quickly" (Dunbar, 2000, p. 54).

Table 1: Examples of building knowledge using embodied experiences

 Students discourse moves                                 Description of embodied knowledge
 "Light   is cold like the light reflected  from    the   A figure of speech based on the student's direct perception
 moon"                                                    of the moon light
 "Black is like magnet, it absorbs heat"                  An analogy explaining absorption as an attraction force
 "What does black does with the light - absorbs           Another figure of speech suggesting the idea of black as a
 like a sponge?"                                          porous material
 "The moon is greyish white and we said that              An implicit analogy suggesting that the moon reflects light
 sno    e  e  s ig     e a se i  is    i e"               like snow because of its greyish white color
 "Cold in the night because the moon is sort of like      A simile ­ the moon being like a mirror ­ followed by a
 mirror since heat travels from sun to moon and           visual imagery conveying the idea that heat is a physical
 then to earth ­ a lot of heat is lost in travel"         entity losing intensity across space

          Another example of embodied reasoning was the use of visual imagery in the form of perception-based
and "intuitive functional explanations" (Hakkarainen, 2003):

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       574                                                    © ISLS
         Student        I can see ... the moon is kinda colder than the sun, it would get colder... if you
                        went on to the moon with a space suit you wouldn't die, but if you went onto
                        the sun with a space suit you would die.

         The production of embodied ideational artifacts and the use of objects to think with provided an initial
and yet incomplete or, at times, misconceived view of the phenomena in the real world. However, it appeared to
have  an   important function  in maintaining   a shared  focus  by triggering curiosity  and    promoting   further
questioning. Underpinning subsequent steps of progressive inquiry was an intentional and purposeful search for
uncertainty as a space within which these objects of knowledge could be refined and sharpened.

Seeking and negotiating uncertainty as a space for deepening understanding
After framing  the initial questions and developing   early  explanations,  students pursued their inquiry   to find
evidence, refine their ideas, and overcome misconceptions. Although their goal was to improve their theories,
their emerging and transitional focus was on seeking uncertainty (gaps and problems) in those initial explanations,
spotting something that could not be accounted for by their current theory, or introducing counter-hypotheses.
Doubt and uncertainty created a space for further deepening their understanding.
         Regulation of uncertainty involved the practice of questioning and challenging others' claims. Doing so
required participants to direct attention and react coherently to one another's argument as shown in the turn
sequence that follows, which occurred a few weeks after the discussion about light and heat absorption:

         Student 1      You're saying that you need lights to um, to for the carpet to be green. But if
                        it's green it does not um ah it's not like it changes color or anything.
         Student 2      Well, it's without the lights; black through your eye is still green on the ground.
                        You don't need the lights for it to be green. You need the light for it to be green
                        to you, to your eyes.
         Student 3      Well, you don't need the light to make the carpet green, you just need the lights
                        to see that the carpet is green.
         Student 1      Exactly, so how come everyone is saying that you need green light to make this
                        carpet green (...).

         In this episode students deepened their focus on light and color. In the first turn of the sequence the
speaker paraphrased another member's claim, "You're saying that..." before noticing an anomaly in it, introduced
by the discourse marker "But if...". In the subsequent two turns students 2 and 3 tried to address the puzzlement
and refined the initial idea ­ they clarify that light is not as much needed for the carpet to be green rather to appear
green to one's eyes ­ thus giving a stronger evidence for negotiating understanding. Student 1 wrapped up the
sequence reiterating the former contradiction, as a way to validate that the explanation offered by students 2 and
3 was now satisfactory. Likewise, students purposefully gave voice to uncertainty in their own ideas challenging
part of the content as in the following turn:

         Student        If you, if this room was totally black, the carpet would still be green, the floor
                        would still be that color but you wouldn't see it because there's no light to
                        bounce off of it so you couldn't see the color. [Name] are you understanding,
                        does that make any sense to you? Because it's not like a green light bounces off
                        it so we can all see it, it's the lights that's um. But how come you can't see it?
                        Then how come when the lights are off...?

         Here the student first displayed how she understood the colors as being an intrinsic characteristic of
objects, independent of the ability of seeing them when light is on. While articulating this explanation though, she
raised uncertainties, monitoring her own understanding, as reflected in the last two questions.

Addressing uncertainty through socially embedded practices of inquiry
As uncertainty became a shared and accepted focus among peers, it encouraged adaptation of initial ideas by
directing a greater attention to the chain of reasoning behind students' theories and by finding more refined
grounds for their ideas. Carrying on experiments was one of the ways to respond to uncertainty. Theories about
reflection and absorption   of light and heat,  for instance, were  further tested through an    experiment  in  the
schoolyard to observe differences in how snow melted on a white and a black panel. Likewise, to address suspicion

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    575                                                  © ISLS
about having green color contained in light, a student stood up, went to the chalkboard and drew a prism. Pointing
to the ceiling light he explained that when the light shines through the prism it splits up into different colors thus
helping his peers understand that light is made up of different colors.

Discussion
The present investigation sheds light on the role that imagery, uncertainty, and adaptation play in sustaining and
regulating a joint deepening focus in collective inquiry. Findings illustrate that the use of embodied cognition is
a central characteristic that shapes knowledge building discourse. Students developed, monitored and refined their
understanding of abstract concepts such as light reflection and absorption by leveraging objects and experiences
from the real world. Embodied representations of conceptual thinking served to maintain a shared focus in the
moment-to-moment interaction and beyond through the online discussion in Knowledge Forum. Furthermore,
students were encouraged to think and speak imaginatively and to dare exposing doubts or formulating tentative
explanations in their knowledge advancement efforts. If learning is not about memorizing authoritative ideas or
treating scientific knowledge as definitive conclusions (Ford & Forman, 2015), teaching should support dialogic
discursive practices that promote uncertainty as a collaborative space for monitoring understanding, sparking
further questions and prompting discernment through appropriate scaffolds during class and online dialogues. A
deeper analysis of classroom videos, online notes and teacher's journal is under way to further understand how
patterns of shared regulation evolve from shorter to longer timescales of activity.

References
Cetina, K. K. (2001). Objectual practice. In T. Schatzki, K. K. Cetina & E. von Savigny (Eds.), The practice turn
        in contemporary theory (pp. 175-188). London: Routledge.
Chan, C. K. K., & van Aalst, J. (2018). Knowledge building: Theory, design, and analysis. In F. Fischer, C. E.
        Hmelo-Silver, S. R. Goldman, & P. Reimann (Eds.), International Handbook of the Learning Sciences
        (pp. 295­307). New York, N.Y.: Routledge.
Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., ... Sherin, B. L. (2010). Conducting
        video research in the learning sciences: Guidance on selection, analysis, technology, and ethics. Journal
        of the Learning Sciences, 19(1), 3­53.
Dunbar, K. (2000). How scientists think in the real world: Implications for science education. Journal of Applied
        Developmental Psychology, 21(1), 49­58.
Ford, M. J., & Forman, E. A. (2015). Uncertainty and scientific progress in classroom dialogue. In L. B. Resnick
        & C. S. C. Asterhan (Eds.), Socializing intelligence through academic talk and dialogue (pp. 143­156).
        Washington, DC: AERA.
Hakkarainen, K.  (2003). Progressive  inquiry    in a computer-supported   biology  class. Journal of Research in
        Science Teaching, 40(10), 1072­1088.
Järvelä, S., & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). New Frontiers: Regulating Learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist,
        48(1), 25­39.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, and
        technology. Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, 397-417.
Tao, D., Zhang, J., & Huang, Y. (2015). How did a grade 5 community formulate progressive, collective goals to
        sustain knowledge    building over     a whole  school  year?   In O. Lindwall  &   S. Ludvigsen   (Eds.),
        Proceedings   of the 11th International     Conference on Computer    Supported    Collaborative Learning
        (CSCL2015). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Winn,  W.  (2003). Learning  in artificial environments:  Embodiment,    embeddedness   and   dynamic  adaptation.
        Technology, Instruction, Cognition and Learning, 1(1), 87­114.
Zhang, J., & Sun,  Y. (2011).   Reading    for idea advancement   in a  grade 4 knowledge    building community.
        Instructional Science, 39(4), 429­452.
Zhang, J., Tao, D., Chen, M.-H., Sun, Y., Judson, D., & Naqvi, S. (2018). Co-Organizing the Collective Journey
        of Inquiry with Idea Thread Mapper. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 27(3), 390­430.

Acknowledgements
This research was sponsored by National Science Foundation (#1441479). The views expressed in this article are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agency. We thank the teachers and
students at Dr. Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study for their creative work enabling this research.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    576                                                 © ISLS
