          Foundations of Community in an Online, Asynchronous
                             Professional Development Website
             Genevieve Henricks, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, henrick2@illinois.edu
                   Victoria Jay, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, vjay2@illinois.edu
               Shereen Beilstein, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, beilste2@illinois.edu
                Michelle Perry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, mperry@illinois.edu
                             Meg Bates, University of Chicago, megbates@uchicago.edu
                          Cheryl Moran, University of Chicago, cgmoran@uchicago.edu
                          Joseph Cimpian, New York University, joseph.cimpian@nyu.edu

          Abstract: Having a sense of community can support teacher growth in face-to-face professional
          development, but teachers in online, asynchronous professional development might not feel a
          sense of community, given their isolation, both physically and temporally. To be successful, the
          learning must   be enacted  (in  classrooms), but the  community   is ephemeral.    To   investigate
          whether participants on one large online teacher professional development (OTPD) site were
          hampered in forming community, or overcame these barriers, this study interviewed members
          of the PD site to get at their sense of community. Using grounded theory, the transcripts of the
          interviews  were   coded to reveal members'    perceptions  of  community     in this online   space.
          Results suggest that most consider themselves as part of the community, and, importantly, see
          this as  a space   in which   to share material resources.   The   results have   implications   for
          understanding and augmenting the role of OTPD in supporting professional learning.

Objectives
Having a sense of community has been heralded as a cornerstone to success in face-to-face and online learning
environments (e.g., Supovitz, 2002). Although most scholars agree that community formation is beneficial, the
definition of community and what it looks like varies across contexts. This study examines how elementary school
teachers view community within the Everyday Mathematics Virtual Learning Community (VLC), a National
Science Foundation-funded site with approximately 50,000 members. Specifically, we investigate 1) whether
members think there is a community within the VLC and 2) why they think a community does or does not exist.
Understanding users' perceptions of community has the potential to inform strategies to strengthen the community
not only within the VLC but also within similar online teacher professional development (OTPD) sites (e.g., the
Teaching Channel, Math Forum).

Theoretical framework
Teacher   PD   has the  goal of  improving  practice and  student  outcomes.  Because      sustained engagement     with
professional development appears to be key to achieving this outcome (e.g., Heck et al., 2008;Yoon et al., 2007),
substantial work has been devoted to exploring the importance of developing community in online settings to
prevent drop-outs (e.g., Liu et al., 2009). A sense of community also helps raise course satisfaction (Drouin,
2008), aids    learning (Rovai,  2002),  strengthens cooperation   (Hur   & Hara, 2007),    and  increases   feelings of
belonging (Besser & Donahue, 1996). With this in mind, having a sense of community in OTPD may support the
kinds of persistent engagement that can make PD most effective.
          Garrison, Anderson, and Archer's (2000) Community of Inquiry (CoI) theory explains the components
necessary to create a successful community-based educational experience via the interaction of social presence
(e.g., open communication and group cohesion), cognitive presence (e.g., cognitive exploration and application
of new ideas), and teaching presence (e.g., organization and discourse facilitation). All three elements work
together to determine the content, set the climate, and support discourse.
          Although varied, definitions of online communities typically incorporate elements of the CoI theory and
particularly focus   on  the strength of  members'   relationships (e.g., Haythornthwaite     & Wellman,     1998). For
example,   Rheingold    (1993)  described  the necessity of  online   communities    to offer social  network   capital,
knowledge capital, and communion to be true communities. When defining what community looks like in learning
settings, there are  also common    threads  across  theoretical and  empirical accounts    (e.g., Hill, 1996;  Lave  &
Wenger, 1991).     For example, Rovai (2002) defined learning communities as having members who "believe that
they matter ... to the group; that they have duties and obligations to each other ...; and that they possess a shared
faith that members' educational needs will be met through their commitment to shared goals" (p. 4).
          When    online  learning communities   for  teachers   lack these  features,  the result   can  be a  lack  of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    577                                                      © ISLS
participation and interest in the community, despite the perception that the community offers valuable resources
(Barab  et al., 2001). Nevertheless,  many  emerging   OTPD     communities    are  being  built primarily  to provide
professional learning resources and experiences to teachers across the nation in an asynchronous, come-as-you-
can setting. This context challenges the focused, collaborative tenets of community described above. To imagine
how such new communities can be successful, it is important to understand how teachers themselves perceive
community. What kinds of embedded supports are needed for teachers to invest in a community, particularly one
focused on teachers individually learning to enact new practices in the classroom? How can OTPD sites provide
a sense of community in an asynchronous space? This study's purpose is to uncover which research-based tenets
of community are particularly important for OTPD community development as well which tenets are excluded
from current definitions of online and learning communities and are therefore unique to OTPD sites.

Methods and data sources
Sample
Forty-one  participants, all of  whom  were    VLC   members,   volunteered   to be  interviewed   for this study:   29
participants were  classroom   teachers, 7 were   instructional coaches   or  curriculum   coordinators, and   5 were
classroom teachers and instructional coaches. Two teachers did not answer questions pertaining to community,
leaving 27 classroom teacher participants and 39 total participants. Each participant was compensated $100.

Data source: Participant interviews
We used a semi-structured interview protocol to understand how and why participants used the VLC as well as
their perceptions  of  whether  (and how)  the  site contributed to their   professional  learning and  to  a  sense of
community. Two of the authors conducted the interviews, and most interviews lasted approximately 35 minutes.
The key question about community was worded as follows: "The C in VLC is for Community. Does it feel like a
community to you? Why or why not?" Answers to these questions serve as the basis for our analyses.

Coding
We looked for emerging themes using grounded-theory (Corbin & Strauss, 2008) and created codes that captured
participants' thoughts about whether the VLC was a community, and why. Two authors independently coded 24%
of the data. We achieved high reliability (Cohen's N = .97). Disagreements were discussed and reconciled. Most
participants clearly stated either that the VLC felt like a community or that it did not. However, a few stated that
the VLC both did and did not feel like a community. Those participants were coded under both categories, and
their reasons for both were documented.

Reasons the VLC feels like a community.
We developed four codes to capture the participants' reasons that the VLC felt like a community: Togetherness,
Sharing Resources, Familiarity, and Discussions.
         We coded participants' comments as Togetherness when they discussed how members of the VLC have
shared experiences or understanding of the rewards and challenges of the profession. Many participants discussed
leaning on each other for validation and support, and particularly appreciated being able to rely on other members
for curricular planning support, thus reducing their overall workload. Additionally, some participants commented
on how they experienced elements of a shared culture. Reflecting on this, one participant noted, "We're coming
together, and it is a unified effort towards teaching math well. I think people are on there because they want to be,
so in that sense, it's a community. And I think there's a genuine feeling that these [videos] are to be helpful, so
we're all gathered around a common idea."
         We     coded Sharing  Resources   when  the  participants indicated   that they  thought  of  the  VLC  as   a
community because its foundation is built on sharing resources. These comments highlighted how resources came
from a variety of people, and some emphasized the bottom-up nature of resource development. One participant
expressed the sentiment of many, "There's a lot of resources on here... There's so much free sharing, you know? "
         When participants mentioned that they either knew, or felt like they knew, other members on the VLC,
we coded   these  comments    as  Familiarity. Participants reported   that a sense  of  familiarity made   them   feel
connected and gave them a sense of belonging, allowing them to envision implementing suggestions and resources
more freely. In recounting the progression of becoming more familiar with the other members, one participant
said, "You know, there's even some people on the groups that are responding, and you don't know who they are,
and you can't picture them, but you already have an idea of their voice."
         We   coded   Discussions  when  participants  mentioned   dialogue   with  others and   question-and-answer
interactions about  the  content. One participant  said, "People   are open   to help each  other  out or, like in   the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    578                                                    © ISLS
discussion groups, people will check back and there are posts all week about `Well, there was this mistake here--
I'm confused' or `Is anyone else feeling the same?' Perhaps there is a technology question or something. So, yes
I would say it's definitely like a community."

Reasons the VLC does not feel like a community.
We developed three codes that captured participants' reasons that the VLC did not feel like a community: Lacking
Familiarity, Isolation, and No Discussion.
        We coded Lacking Familiarity when participants remarked about not knowing anyone who was posting
resources or not knowing the teachers in the videos. We also used this code when participants reported that they
didn't feel like their classrooms  were represented     and  that it was difficult to relate to   the other  members'
experiences. As one participant noted, "When I look at other people's videos, I have no clue as to where the other
teachers are... I'm in an urban setting... In the VLC videos, a lot of times the children are well behaved. I think,
are they in an urban setting? ... When I see a video... a majority of the students are Caucasian."
        We   coded   Isolation when participants reported    that they  felt anonymous   and  did  not  feel like they
belonged. Some observed that VLC members seemed to work independently and were focused on their own goals.
This was not always met with despair, as one participant offered, "I know what a community is, but... I feel
anonymous. In fact, sometimes you might want that, I don't know. You know, I can go in, I can go out."
        We coded No Discussion when participants pointed out that the discussions were not robust or there was
a lack of conversation. Some noted that the discussions were impersonal and lacked insight. One participant
described this issue when she said, "The one thing that I would say is that there is not a lot of people that post
about their experiences. It would be nice to see more people saying... oh, I did this, and for this lesson, I did that."

Results
The VLC as a community
The majority of participants indicated that the VLC felt like a community: 70% of teachers, 66% of coaches, and
80% of the teacher-coaches stated that the VLC was a community. 7% of teachers, 17% of coaches, and 20% of
teacher-coaches believed the VLC both did and did not feel like a community. 23% of teachers, 17% of coaches
did not think there was a community on the VLC. A F2 test revealed no statistical difference across roles.

Reasons the VLC feels like a community
Participants most frequently cited Togetherness (41% of participants) as the reason that participants felt the VLC
was a community.     They also frequently mentioned Sharing Resources (26%) and Discussions (20%), but only
13% of all participants noted that they felt Familiarity with other VLC members.

Reasons the VLC does not feel like a community
Few participants noted that the VLC did not feel like a community. When they did, 13% cited Isolation; 10%
cited  No Discussion;   and   5% cited  Lacking  Familiarity.   Interestingly, users   who   felt like there was   not
a community within the VLC cited the same aspects of what a community should look like by those who said
a community existed. For example, both those who reported community and those who did not discussed knowing
the other users (Familiarity vs. Lacking Familiarity) and having the same goals (Togetherness vs. Isolation).

Discussion and scholarly significance
For OTPD to work effectively, site developers must understand how learning and engagement develop within it,
which implicitly requires examining how community forms and grows. This study shows that the members of one
widely used OTPD platform--the VLC--currently feel a strong sense of community for a variety of reasons,
some of which coincide with the literature on online professional development (e.g., Togetherness) and others
that are more unique (e.g., Sharing of Resources). By devising a coding scheme to capture participants' feelings
of community, we have provided a clearer picture of what makes teachers feel (and not feel) a sense of community.
        This  research    has  implications for theory    and  practice. Theoretically,  this   study  contributes  to
understanding  the   types of  behavior required  for    sustained   engagement    in professional    development  by
demonstrating  that  engagement--but   not  necessarily  collaboration--promotes      community.    Additionally, the
definitions that emerged from this study emphasize the necessity of the three components of the CoI model: social
presence, cognitive presence, and teaching presence.
        Practically, this study led to the design and implementation of site-related innovations to boost interactive
dialogue and community-building among VLC members. For example, the VLC now emails members when
others respond   to their posted commentary;    other   online communities   could  develop  similar   features. More

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    579                                                     © ISLS
broadly, this study suggests that research on online communities may need to focus less on whether teachers'
online activities rise to the definition of community established in off-line learning communities (such as shared
tasks and a sense of closeness to each other) and more on how teachers define and create communities online
through shared features, ideas, and resources, even in spaces where teachers have different goals and are unknown
to each other. Perhaps it is possible that online teacher learning communities (like other online communities) can
be powerful and effective without being overtly connected or collaborative. The reasons for feeling connected,
which emerged from the comments made during the interviews, suggest that video resources on an online site can
connect teacher-learners with ideas for enactment in their own classrooms. More generally, OTPD sites can
capitalize on all of the reasons that participants provided, and amplifying the presence of these same reasons
within any flourishing OTPD has the potential to make its community even stronger.
        Because we know that fostering a sense of community is a key ingredient of successful online teacher
professional development (Lock, 2006), paying attention to why teachers feel a lack of community can also point
to avenues  for productive    changes, including  attending  to resources that  are  likely to increase feelings of
belonging.  Listening   to users' perceptions  of community     in this setting and  creating  an environment   that
incorporates those perceptions has the potential to increase teachers' usage of OTPD sites, learning from the sites,
and feelings of support within their profession.

References
Barab, S., MaKinster, J. G., Moore, J., Cunningham, D., & the I.L.F. Design Team. (2001). Designing and
        building  an online   community:   The   struggle to support sociability in  the Inquiry  Learning Forum.
        Educational Technology Research and Development, 49(4), 71-96.
Besser, H., &   Donahue,   S. E. (1996). Distance  independent   education. Journal  of  the  American  Society  for
        Information Science, 47, 799-883.
Corbin J. M., & Strauss, A. L. (2008). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developing
        grounded theory (3rd ed.). Los Angeles: Sage.
Drouin, M.A.    (2008). The   relationship between  students'   perceived sense   of community    and   satisfaction,
        achievement, and retention in an online course.    Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 9, 267-284.
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical inquiry in a text-based environment: Computer
        conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher Education, 2, 87-105.
Haythornthwaite, C., & Wellman, B. (1998). Work, friendship, and media use for information exchange in a
        networked organization. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 49, 1101-1114.
Heck, D. J., Banilower, E. R., Weiss, I. R., & Rosenberg, S. L. (2008). Studying the effects of professional
        development. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 39, 113-152.
Hill, J.L. (1996). Psychological sense of community: Suggestions for future research. Journal of Community
        Psychology, 24, 431-438.
Hur, J. W., & Hara, N. (2007). Factors cultivating sustainable online communities for K-12 teacher professional
        development. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 36, 245-268.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.      Cambridge: Cambridge
        University Press.
Liu, S. Y., Gomez, J., & Cherng-Jyh, Y. (2009). Community college online course retention and final grade:
        Predictability of social presence. Journal of Interactive Online Learning, 8, 165-182.
Rheingold, H. (1993). The virtual community: Homesteading on the electronic frontier. Reading, MA.: Addison-
        Wesley.
Rovai, A. P. (2002). Building sense of community at a distance. International Review of Research in Open and
        Distance Learning, 3, 1-16.
Supovitz, J. A. (2002). Developing communities of instructional practice. Teachers College Record, 104, 1591-
        1626.
Trust, T., Krutka, D. G., & Carpenter, J. P. (2016). "Together we are better": Professional learning networks for
        teachers. Computers & Education, 102, 15-34.
Yoon, K. S., Duncan, T., Lee, S. W.-Y., Scarloss, B., & Shapley, K. L. (2007). Reviewing the evidence on how
        teacher professional development affects student achievement. Issues & answers. REL 2007-No. 033.
        Regional Educational Laboratory Southwest. Regional Educational Laboratory Southwest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation, Grant No. 1621253. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   580                                                  © ISLS
