    Exploring Teaching and Course Assistants' Interventions with
                   Groups during Collaborative Problem-Solving
             Saadeddine Shehab, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, shehab2@illinois.edu
               Emma Mercier, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, mercier@illinois.edu

        Abstract: This study explores the task-related interventions of a teaching assistant and three
        course   assistants   with   six small   groups during  collaborative     problem-solving       activities in
        undergraduate engineering classrooms.         Results indicated that the majority of the interventions
        were not preceded by monitoring the group activity and were initiated by asking the groups a
        general question about their activity or progress on the task. The majority of the interventions
        were   dominated     by   feedback   moves    which  suggests    that the  teachers    were   using  direct
        instruction strategies more than dialogic strategies when intervening with the groups' work.

Introduction
The  role  of  the teacher    in  orchestrating   collaborative  problem   solving    activities   in   face-to-face   STEM
classrooms has received increasing attention in recent years (Gillies, in press). Research suggests that teachers
must  implement    strategies that   can  facilitate student interactions  and    positively   impact   the  group    progress
towards the   goal of solving    the  task  during   these activities (Kaendler    et al.,  2015). Few    empirical    studies
focused on   the strategies  that  teachers  use  during   collaborative problem-solving       activities to intervene   with
group  work.   Similarly, studies    that   take place  in  higher    education   STEM      classrooms    and examine      the
intervention  strategies that    are implemented     by  graduate  teaching      assistants (TAs)   and   sometimes      more
advanced undergraduate students are equally limited. This study addresses this gap in the literature by exploring
the interventions of a graduate teaching assistant and three undergraduate course assistants (CAs) with groups
during collaborative problem-solving undergraduate engineering discussion sessions.
        Effective   teachers'    interventions   in  group   work  are   characterized      by being    contingent    on   any
difficulties that the group is facing, but without taking away the need for students to co-construct knowledge as
they solve the task (e.g., Hofmann & Mercer, 2016). In order for such interventions to occur, teachers must
avoid immediately using authoritative or directive strategies (e.g., giving solution procedures). Instead, teachers
must monitor the group activity to diagnose the difficulties that are blocking the group members from engaging
in high quality interactions or making progress on the task (Kaendler et al. 2015). Then, teachers can initiate the
intervention by asking the group members to describe what they are thinking about and actively listen to their
thoughts and discussions (Hofmann & Mercer, 2016). This gives teachers the opportunity to further understand
the group members' difficulties and be helpful without immediately evaluating their ideas or providing answers
(Chiu, 2004). Also, teachers must implement follow-up strategies to facilitate the group work. These strategies
can be direct instruction strategies such as telling the group the solution processes or giving the group hints.
They can help the group in solving the task or focusing the group's attention on certain concepts or aspects of
the task (Chiu, 2004). They can also be dialogic strategies such as asking questions to probe and explore the
group's understanding of the task and pushing the group members to clarify and elaborate on their ideas. These
strategies can   engage  group    members     in  thinking  together   and can     encourage     silent group  members      to
participate in the discussion (Hofmann & Mercer, 2016; Webb et al., in press).
        Although we know a little about how teachers intervene in group work, we do not yet know how these
interventions look  like  in  actual  collaborative   problem-solving    higher   education    STEM     classrooms    that are
orchestrated by teaching assistants. This study explores the interventions of a teaching assistant and three course
assistants (CAs)   with   six small      groups  during  collaborative   problem-solving       undergraduate       engineering
discussion sessions. The study set out to answer the following research questions:
    1)  What were the initiating and follow-up moves that the teachers used when engaging in task-related
        interventions with groups?
    2)  What was the nature of the strategies that the teachers implemented during these interventions?

Methods
A qualitative    exploratory  design     is used  in  this  study, which      is a part    of  a multi-year   design-based
implementation   research    project  that   aims  to develop   tools  to  support    collaborative     problem    solving  in
undergraduate engineering courses.

Participants

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       581                                                         © ISLS
Participants were one TA (Austin), three CAs (Tom, Jim, Ted), and 20 undergraduate engineering students (13
males and 7 females). The TA was a graduate engineering student and the CAs were undergraduate engineering
students who   had  taken     this engineering  course  in previous    semesters.    The  TA    and the CAs    had    no prior
teaching experience when they started teaching the discussion sessions and had not attended any professional
development    on  teaching     in  a collaborative    problem-solving    classroom.      However,     the   faculty  member
responsible for the course met weekly with all the TAs to provide some framing for the learning and teaching
goals of each weeks' task.

Data collection
The data for this study was collected during two 50-minutes discussion sessions that were a required part of an
introductory   engineering    course  at a large  Midwestern    university. Both     discussion  sessions    took place  in  a
laboratory classroom. In the first discussion session, four groups of undergraduate students, the TA (Austin),
and the  two   CAs  (Tom      & Jim)  were   recorded  using   ceiling mounted       cameras and    lapel, table  or  hanging
microphones.     Similar  recordings     were collected   in  the   second  discussion     session,  from    two  groups     of
undergraduate    students,  the TA    (Austin), and   the two  CAs   (Tom   &    Ted). During    both   discussion    sessions,
students worked in small groups to solve the same ill-structured, authentic engineering task that was designed
using the guidelines developed by Shehab et al. (2017). Students worked on 11-inch tablets with software built
specifically  for this   project.   Each   student had    one  tablet; tablets    of students   in  the same     group   were
synchronized, so that members of each group worked on and contributed to the same document.

Data analysis
The videos were transcribed and analyzed. The analysis focused on the task-related intervention episodes that
were initiated by the TA or one of the CAs. An intervention episode began when the TA or CA joined a group
and ended when the TA or CA left this group. The TA or CA's activity was examined to identify if the TA or
CA appeared to purposefully observe a group's activity before intervening. When this occurred, the researcher
assumed   that the TA    or   CA   monitored  the  group  activity. To  evaluate     interrater reliability, two  researchers
coded the TA or CA activity that preceded the intervention episodes of two of the six groups. Cohen's kappa
was .90. Disagreements were discussed to reach agreement.
         Two emergent coding schemes were used to identify the initiating move that occurred at the beginning
of an intervention episode and the follow up moves that occurred during an intervention episode. The initiating
moves coding scheme (see Table 1) was applied to the initiating turn by TA or CA. The follow up moves coding
scheme (see Table 2) was applied to each follow up turn by the TA or CA that came after the initiating turn in
the same intervention episode. To evaluate interrater reliability, two researchers coded all initiating and follow
up turns of the intervention episodes of two of the six groups. Cohen's kappa was .90 for the initiating moves
and .80 for the follow up moves. Disagreements were discussed to reach agreement. For the purpose of this
analysis, the coded follow-up turns were categorized as moves that can be associated with giving feedback to
group members (provided a simple answer, provided an elaborated answer, evaluated/judged, provided explicit
tips/hints, provided   an  explanation    or  elaboration, and  instructed  student    or  group),   and   prompting     for a
response    from  the  group       members    (repeated/revoiced,   invited      students to    speak,  explored     students'
understanding, challenged student idea, and encouraged students to collaborate).

Table 1: Initiating moves coding scheme

Code                                   Definition                                            Example
Asked a general question               The TA/CA asked a question that was related to        "What are you guys doing?"
                                       the group's activity or progress on the task
Asked a specific task-related          The TA/CA asked a question that was related to a      "So, have you calculated the
question                               specific step necessary to solve the task             shear force?"
Commented on collaboration             The TA/CA commented on the collaborative              "I notice you're not working
                                       process of the group or the collaborative behavior    with your group, how are
                                       of a group member                                     you doing?"
Commented on the group's work          The TA/CA commented on the quality of the             "Interesting work Marco!"
                                       group or student's work
Instructed group                       TA/CA instructed one or more students to do or        "Now you put down what
                                       not to do something                                   you do to solve for it."

Other                                  Inaudible talk

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       582                                                         © ISLS
Table 2: Follow-up moves coding scheme

Provided a simple answer          The TA/CA answered a student's              Student: "Is that talking about the shear or the
                                  question without any additional             normal force?"
                                  elaboration or explanation                  TA: "Shear force"
Provided an elaborated answer     The TA/CA answered a student's              Student: "Do we only get one of each?"
                                  question with additional elaboration or     TA: "Yes, so those are all the objects that
                                  explanation                                 you're working with. You put one of each of
                                                                              those on one of the shelves."
Evaluated/Judges                  The TA/CA evaluated or judged the           TA: "No, what you guys did here is wrong"
                                  group work
Provided explicit tips/hints      The TA/CA explicitly presented hints or     TA: "Just put the books in the middle of the
                                  tips on how to solve the problem            shelf and you are on the right track"

Provided an explanation or        TA/CA explained or elaborated on            "So for this case since we have zero axial or
elaboration                       certain concepts or problem-solving         zero forces, it does not really matter"
                                  procedures
Instructed student or group       TA/CA instructed one or more students       "Okay so can all of you go to page three? I
                                  to do or not to do something                can explain this to all of you. And then just put
                                                                              your tablets down"
Reacted to a student's            TA/CA simply accepted, confirmed, or        Student: "So the shelf is held on the left and
statement                         rejected students' statements or made       right side"
                                  neutral statements                          TA: "Right, the shelf is held on the left and
                                                                              right side"
Asked a student to clarify or     TA/CA asks a question to clarify            Student: "So we are going to find the
repeat idea                       something related to what the student       distribution that fails"
                                  was saying                                  TA: "Huh? say again"
Repeated/ Revoiced                TA/CA repeated/revioced a student idea      Student: "We put everything in the middle and
                                  to give the student a space to follow-up    now we're going to calculate it"
                                                                              TA: "You are calculating it, okay."
Invited students to speak         TA/CA invited one or more students to       "So what do you guys think?"
                                  speak up to share
                                  ideas/thoughts/reasoning
Explored students'                TA/CA prompted students to say more         TA: "If I cut it just to the right of that 62
understanding                     about a certain concept or problem          newtons going down it, what would it be?"
                                  solving procedure
Challenged student idea           TA/CA challenged student's idea by          Student: "So this distribution will fail"
                                  asking a question or providing a counter    TA: "Are you sure about that?"
                                  argument that prompts student's
                                  thinking
Encouraged students to            The TA/CA encouraged students to            "Just discuss how you want to go about the
collaborate                       communicate/talk/discuss ideas with         problem and the assumptions that you want to
                                  each other                                  make"
Other                             Inaudible or unintelligible
No follow up moves                The TA/CA left the group without
                                  making any follow up moves besides
                                  the initiating move

Results
The total number of task-related TA or CA intervention episodes was 29. Nineteen episodes were not preceded
by monitoring the group activity; ten episodes were preceded by monitoring. Fifteen of the 19 episodes that
were not preceded by monitoring the group activity were initiated by asking the group a general question. Of the
10 episodes that were preceded by monitoring, six were initiated by asking the group a general question and
four were initiated by asking the group a specific task-related question. The 29 TA or CA intervention episodes
included a total of 229 follow-up turns. Figure 1 shows the number of turns that were coded as moves that can
be associated with giving feedback to group members and with prompting the group members for a response. Of
the 29 episodes,   Figure     2 shows the    number   of episodes    that  included only   giving feedback     moves,       only
prompting moves, a mixture of both, and only other or no follow-up moves.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         583                                                       © ISLS
 Figure 1. Number of Turns per Category of Follow-up Moves.               Figure 2. Type of Episodes.

Conclusions and implications
This study examined the task-related intervention episodes of one TA and three CAs with six small groups in
two  collaborative  problem-solving  undergraduate   engineering   discussion sessions. Results  indicate  that the
majority (19 out of 29) of the intervention episodes were not preceded by monitoring the group activity. This
suggests that the teachers did not diagnose the difficulties that may have been blocking the group members from
engaging in high quality interactions or making progress on the task. Rather, TAs and CAs intervened to check
on the groups' progress on the task as part of doing their job in managing the classroom. The fact that 15 of the
19 episodes that were not preceded by monitoring were initiated by asking the group a general question supports
this claim. However,   all  10 episodes that were   preceded  by monitoring the group   activity were initiated by
asking the group a question. This suggests that the teachers may have avoided intervening immediately with the
groups' work before getting a sense of the students' thoughts and progress on the task.
         Figure 1 shows that the number of follow-up moves that are associated with giving feedback to the
group members are greater than the number of follow-up moves that are associated with prompting the group
members   for  response. Figure  2 shows   that the majority  of the episodes (20  episodes) either included  only
giving feedback moves or a mix of giving feedback and prompting moves. Further examination of the sequence
of turns of episodes that included a mix of giving feedback and prompting moves, indicated that even when the
teachers prompted students for a response to explore their thinking or share their ideas, at some point during the
intervention the teachers switched to answering students' questions, explaining the solution processes or giving
the group tips that can help in solving the task. This suggests that the teachers tended to use direct instruction
strategies more than dialogic strategies when intervening with the groups' work. Implementing these strategies
kept the teachers in control of the problem-solving process and may have taken away the need for students to
co-construct knowledge as they solved the task. Further analysis is needed to understand the impact of these
strategies on variables, such as the quality of student interactions and progress on the task, that can influence
what students learn during a collaborative problem-solving activity. In addition, further analysis of data that was
collected from other discussion sessions that were taught by the same and different teachers is needed to better
understand the differences in the interventions across the teachers and across the groups.

References
Chiu, M.    M. (2004).   Adapting  teacher interventions to  student needs during  cooperative   learning: How   to
         improve student problem solving and time on-task? American Educational Research Jrl,41, 365-399.
Gillies, R. M.  (in press). Promoting   academically productive   student dialogue during  collaborative   learning.
         International Journal of Educational Research.
Hofmann, R., & Mercer, N. (2016). Teacher interventions in small group work in secondary mathematics and
         science lessons. Language and Education, 30(5), 400-416.
Kaendler, C., Wiedmann, M., Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2015). Teacher competencies for the implementation
         of collaborative learning in the classroom: a framework and research review. Educational Psychology
         Review, 27(3), 505-536.
Shehab, S., Mercier, E., Kersh, M., Juarez, G., & Zhao, H. (2017). Designing tasks for engineering problem
         solving. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative
         Learning. Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Webb, N. M., Franke, M. L., Ing, M., Turrou, A. C., Johnson, N. C., & Zimmerman, J. (in press). Teacher
         practices  that promote   productive   dialogue and  learning in  mathematics  classrooms. International
         Journal of Educational Research.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1441149. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    584                                                 © ISLS
