    Students' Funds of Knowledge and Knowledge Creation During
            STEM Learning in a Computer-Supported Makerspace

                                     Anu Kajamaa and Kristiina Kumpulainen
                            anu.kajamaa@helsinki.fi, kristiina.kumpulainen@helsinki.fi
                                           University of Helsinki, Finland

         Abstract: Despite increased research attention to novel design and making environments, often
         referred to as "makerspaces", students' funds of knowledge and knowledge creation are still a
         fairly unexplored    issue in these contexts. To   address this gap, we draw  from   sociocultural
         theorizing, with a specific interest in the notions of funds of knowledge and knowledge creation.
         We ask: how do the students' funds of knowledge mediate their knowledge creation during
         STEM learning in a novel computer-supported makerspace? Our findings indicate three forms
         of  knowledge   creation   during  STEM   learning:   "horizontal knowledge  creation",  "vertical
         knowledge creation", and "extended knowledge creation". Our work joins with the line of
         research focused on complex intersection between students' funds of knowledge and schooled
         knowledge   in a  third space.  It makes  visible  how  a  novel  computer-supported   makerspace
         makes   available  a repertoire of  digital, material and  social resources that can   advance the
         emergence of creative third spaces.

Introduction
Digital learning tools and technologically enhanced learning environments often referred to as "makerspaces"
have aroused recent educational interest (Honey and Kanter, 2013; Halverson and Sheridan, 2014; Kafai, Fields
and Searle, 2014, Peppler, Halverson and Kafai, 2016, Kumpulainen, Kajamaa and Rajala, 2018). Makerspaces
account for interest-driven engagement in hands-on creative activities with a range of tools and artefacts. Despite
the growing   importance    and  popularity  of these  learning  environments,  how   students'  use their  funds of
knowledge and create knowledge in these contexts is still fairly unexplored. To address this research gap, we
investigate students' funds of knowledge and knowledge creation in a novel computer-supported makerspace, the
FUSE Studio, which is a choice-based digital infrastructure for STEM (i.e., Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics) learning (Stevens and Jona, 2017). It is located within a school context and provides digital
tools and other material means for mediating between school and the out-of-school lives of the participating
students. Ideally, the students can make their implicit funds of knowledge explicit and expand these in innovative
learning processes   by constructing   novel  solutions  to the  STEM    challenges during the   design and making
activities. This thus provides an intriguing context for the investigation of students' funds of knowledge and
knowledge creation during STEM learning. Drawing from sociocultural theorizing, we ask: How do students'
funds of knowledge mediate their knowledge creation during STEM learning activities in a novel computer-
supported   makerspace?   To  answer   this  research  question, we  draw  on  the  theoretical notions of  funds of
knowledge (e.g. Moll, Amanti, Neff and Gonzales, 1992; Vélez-Ibáñez and Greenberg, 1992; Barton and Tan,
2009; Esteban-Guitart, Maria Serra and Llopart, 2018) and knowledge creation (e.g. Nonaka and Takeuchi, 1995;
Paavola, Lipponen and Hakkarainen, 2004; Hakkarainen, 2009; Ritella and Hakkarainen, 2012).

Conceptual background
"Funds of knowledge" refers to a student's multiple cultural resources that stem from their life worlds in and out
of  school. Earlier studies applying   the  funds of  knowledge   approach  have largely  focused  on  promotion  of
inclusive educational practices, highlighting that pedagogical practices built upon students' funds of knowledge
can generate positive consequences for their learning and participation in the classroom, potentially leading to
improved educational quality (e.g. Moll et al., 1992; Vélez- Ibáñez and Greenberg, 1992; Gonzales, Moll and
Amanti, 2005; Barton and Tan, 2009). Recent research has shown that classroom interaction plays a crucial role
in  mediating students' opportunities    to draw  upon  their  funds of  knowledge   and  productively  connect this
knowledge to their academic learning (Rodriguez, 2013; Esteban-Guitart et al., 2018; Silseth and Erstad, 2018).
Research also shows how new digital tools and online spaces can support students' sense making and meaning-
making and coherence between the students' funds of knowledge across school and out-of-school contexts (e.g.
Kamberlis and Wehunt, 2012; Lantz-Anderson, Vigmo and Bowen, 2013; Kumpulainen et al., 2014). Recently,
studies have explored students' funds of knowledge in STEM education of non-dominant groups' mathematics
learning (Civil, 2016) and to understand math, science and engineering concepts, at the secondary and post-

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     585                                                  © ISLS
secondary level (Verdin, Godwin and Capobianco, 2016). However, at present little is known how students' funds
of knowledge   mediate their   knowledge    creation in novel, computer-supported      makerspaces  that  differ from
regular  classroom contexts    with teacher-centered    classroom practices.  Our study    is based    on Vygotsky's
sociocultural idea of  conceptual   (signs, language)   and  material  (artefact/tool) mediation    of human    action
(Vygotsky, 1978, see also Ritella and Hakkarainen, 2012). We stress tensions, questions and questioning as
important mediators, mediating the student's interaction and innovative learning and knowledge advancement.
We view knowledge creation as a non-linear process, drawing from the funds of knowledge of the participants,
always embedded in practices and mediated by language and tools (Vygotsky, 1978). Further, the explication of
students' funds of knowledge is considered central in the genesis of students' creative processes (Nonaka and
Takeuchi, 1995). In our case, in the technologically enhanced design and making activities, following Nonaka
and Takeutchi (1995), we view knowledge as created through a continuous dialogue between tacit and explicit
knowledge, in our study the tacit referring to the student's funds of knowledge and the digital tools and other
material means   and  the  collaborative interaction  seen as  enabling  the articulation  of tacit knowledge,    and
mediating the transfer between the tacit and the explicit knowledge.

Empirical study
The context of this study is a city-run comprehensive school with 535 students and 28 teachers at the primary
level. The school  strives for student-centredness   and stresses design  and digital  learning, which    is  aimed at
enhancing students' creative problem-solving skills across the curriculum. In 2016, as a response to the new
national core curriculum requirements, the school introduced the FUSE Studio (www.fusestudio.net) as one of its
elective courses. The FUSE Studio is a technological and pedagogical infrastructure that provides digital tools
(computers,   3D printers) and  other materials  (e.g.,  foam  rubber, a  marble, tape   and  scissors)   for  science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) learning. In the FUSE Studio, students are free to select which
`challenges' to pursue, who with (or alone) and when to move on. The challenges level up within sequences,
following the basic logic of video game design principles. Each challenge is designed to engage students in
different STEM topics and skill sets. A Solar Roller challenge, where the students build a toy car and try to move
it by charging it with power from the lamp, as an example. The challenges are accompanied by computers, 3D
printers and other materials, as well as instructions on how to process the challenges. The core idea is to promote
young learners' STEM learning and to cultivate STEM ideas and practices among those who are not already
affiliated with them, and by so doing broadening the access to participation in STEM learning. The assessment of
a student's participation and learning does not include grading, but is carried out by utilizing photos, video or
other digital artifacts and the student's own documentation (Stevens and Jona, 2017).

Methodology
       ima    aa   om  ise      o    so   ans  i e   vi eo   e o  ings an  ie  no es o   g o   so   s     en s
aged between 9 and 12 years old and their facilitator-teachers carrying out making and design activities in the
FUSE Studio. The video recordings were collected intermittently over a period of one academic year. The data
come from three groups of students and their teachers who participated in the FUSE Studio elective course. Due
to the elective nature of the course, the groups consisted of students from several classes. Group 1 consisted of 32
students (22 boys and 10 girls), Group 2 consisted of 30 students (19 boys and 11 girls) and Group 3 consisted of
32 students (19 boys and 13 girls). Each group was supported by two to four teachers and teaching assistants. At
the beginning of the first semester, each group had one 45-minute FUSE session a week. Later in the semester,
each session was extended to 60 minutes. All relevant parts of the video data and field notes of students' and
teachers' collaborative interaction in the design and making environment were transcribed. Our analytic approach
can be defined as abductive, involving repeated iterations between theory and data. Our analysis focused on the
interaction taking place between the students and their teachers in their making activities. Our analysis proceeded
from inductive analysis of the discursive acts in the student's interactions (Jordan and Henderson, 1995) in which
the student's explicated their funds of knowledge. We depicted episodes where the students' funds of knowledge
were either supported or overrun by the peers and/or the teachers. For this, we first engaged in close and iterative
readings of all the interview data and started to extract funds of knowledge from the data. On this basis, the
students out-of-school and school experiences were given codes, and connections were then looked among codes,
and the codes were then progressively clustered in emerging main themes. With the aim of deepening our analysis
of the students' funds of knowledge, and to investigate it in relation to their knowledge creation that emerged in
the students' collaborative interaction, we then focused on further analyzing the parts of the transcripts in which
the students experienced challenges and success during their STEM activities. Our interaction analysis proceeded
to the tracing of the main forms (or patterns) of student's knowledge creation from the depicted interaction

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    586                                                    © ISLS
episodes. Moreover, inspired by the approach on knowledge creation developed by organization scholars, Nonaka
and Takeuchi, (1995), we developed a typology of forms of knowledge creation which gave evidence of how the
students' funds of knowledge mediated knowledge creation, moving across different domains of STEM practice--
everyday life, school, and STEM disciplines (see also Civil, 2016).

Findings
Our study revealed three forms of knowledge creation in the students' design and making activity in the FUSE
Studio. Horizontal knowledge creation refers to the bottom-up and student-driven nature of knowledge creation
during which the students actively explicated their funds of knowledge to others in their making activity. For
example, the students enthusiastically interacted and instructed one another, and their funds of knowledge were
recognized and taken into account, by their peers and / or the teacher. This often reframed the activity, extending
the original FUSE maker challenges. While drawing on their everyday experiences, the potential of the FUSE
Studio to contribute to knowledge creation between school and out-of-school was effectively realized. Here, the
students  relied on their personal  funds  of knowledge  that  potentially contributed  to their  creation of new
knowledge and STEM learning. Vertical knowledge creation refers to the top-down directed nature of knowledge
creation in which there was little room for the students' funds of knowledge. The students' funds of knowledge
remained implicit and were not explicated in ongoing interactions. For example, the students drew from their
existing knowledge without questioning or reconceptualizing the FUSE challenges or the teacher's instructions.
The students' activity was focused on STEM learning, however, the FUSE studio then privileged a traditional
classroom interaction through which students followed authorized instructions given from the outset with little
recognition of their personal funds of knowledge. This created multiple tensions between the students and their
teachers. Extended knowledge creation refers to hybridized forms of knowledge creation in which the students'
funds  of knowledge   hybridized  with and advanced   schooled   knowledge  and practice.  In these  episodes, the
students' funds of knowledge created extended possibilities for their knowledge creation and STEM learning. The
students stepped beyond the horizontal and vertical knowledge creation and applied knowledge in creative ways
while working on the FUSE maker challenges. We illustrate how this process may lead to creative processes (see
also Sefton-Green et al., 2011), as well as to the development of the student's "conceptual artifacts", which are
symbolic in nature and enhance the student's learning activity (Paavola et al., 2004).

Potential significance of the work
Our findings highlight the importance of not only the students bringing in their funds of knowledge into the design
and making activity, but also how creative processes emerge when the students' personal funds of knowledge are
explicated and   hybridized with  schooled    knowledge, advancing   their knowledge    in ongoing   collaborative
interactions. In the FUSE Studio, the students creatively explicated their funds of knowledge in the collaborative
interaction, and also broke away from the situation and the instructions. In some cases, extended, innovative and
unexpected ways of working and solutions on the FUSE challenges emerged. However, often times the students
quite mechanically carried out vertical knowledge creation, in other words, strictly followed the structures and
instructions of the FUSE Studio and/or facilitating teachers. Our work joins with the line of research focused on
complex intersection between students' funds of knowledge and schooled knowledge in a third space (see also
Moje et al., 2004; Gutiérrez, 2008; Barton and Tan, 2009). The study makes visible how a novel computer-
supported makerspace, in our case, the FUSE Studio makes available a repertoire of digital, material and social
resources that can advance the emergence of creative third spaces. Widening of the understanding of the different
forms of students' knowledge creation can provide valuable lessons and guide knowledge advancement and
transformation of school contexts, yet due to the tensions, this presents a challenging endeavor.

References
Barton, A. and Tan, E. (2009). Funds of knowledge, discourses and hybrid space. Journal of Research in Science
          Teaching, 46(1), 50­73.
Civil, M.  (2016).  STEM   learning research  through a  funds of knowledge   lens. Cultural  Studies  in  Science
          Education, 11, 41­59.
Esteban-Guitart,  M., Maria  Serra, J. and Llopart, M.   (2018). The Role  of the Study    Group  in the Funds  of
          Knowledge Approach. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 25(3), 216-228.
Gonzáles, N., Moll, L. C., and Amanti, C. (2005). Funds of Knowledge: theorizing practices in households,
          communities, and classroom. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research Quarterly, 43,
          148­164.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   587                                                 © ISLS
Hakkarainen,   K. (2009).   A knowledge-practice    perspective  on  technology-mediated    learning.  Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 213-231.
Halverson, E. R. and Sheridan, K. (2014). The maker movement in education. Harvard Educational Review,
         84(4), 495-504.
Honey, M. and Kanter, D. (Eds.) (2013). Design, make, play: Growing the next generation of STEM innovators.
         New York: Routledge.
Jordan, B. and Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 4(1), 39­103.
Kafai, Y., Fields, D., and Searle, K. (2014). Electronic textiles as disruptive designs: Supporting and challenging
         maker activities in schools. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 532-556.
Kamberelis, G., and Wehunt, M. D. (2012). Hybrid discourse practice and science learning. Cultural Studies of
         Science Education, 7(3), 505­534.
Kumpulainen, K., Lipponen, L., Hilppö, J., and Mikkola, A (2014). Building on the positive in children's lives: a
         co-participatory study on the social construction of children's sense of agency, Early Child Development
         and Care, 184(2), 211-229.
Kumpulainen, K., Kajamaa, A., and Rajala, A., (2018). Understanding educational change: Agency-structure
         dynamics in a novel design and making environment. Digital Education Review, 33, 26-38.
Lantz-Andersson, A., Vigmo, S., and Bowen, R. (2013). Crossing boundaries in Facebook: Students' framing of
         language  learning   activities as extended    spaces.  International Journal  of  Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 8(3), 293­312.
Moje, E. B., Ciechanowski, K.M, Kramer, K., Ellis, L., Carrillo, R. and Collazo, T. (2004). Working toward third
         space in content area literacy: An examination of everyday funds of knowledge and Discourse. Reading
         Research Quarterly, 39(1), 38­70.
Moll, L. C., Amanti, K., Neff, D., and Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitative
         approach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 132­141.
Nonaka, I., and Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating company: How Japanese companies create the
         dynamics of innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., and Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of innovative knowledge communities and three
         metaphors of learning. Review of Educational Research, 74(4), 557­576.
Peppler, K., Halverson, E., and Kafai, Y. B. (Eds.). (2016). Makeology: Makerspaces as learning environments
         (Vol. 1). New York: Routledge.
Ritella, G. and Hakkarainen,  K. (2012).   Instrumental genesis  in technology-mediated    learning: From double
         stimulation  to   expansive  knowledge     practices.  International  Journal  of  Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 7(2), 239­258.
Rodriguez, G. M. (2013). Power and agency in education: Exploring the pedagogical dimensions of Funds of
         Knowledge. Review of Research in Education, 37(1), 87­120.
Sefton-Green, J., Thomson, P., Jones, K., and Breslin, L. (Eds.). (2011). The Routledge international handbook
         of creative learning. London: Routledge.
Silseth, K., and Erstad, O. (2018). Connecting to the outside: Cultural resources teachers use when contextualizing
         instruction. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction. Published online before print, February 2018,
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lcsi.2017.12.002
Stevens,  R., and Jona,  K. (2017).  Program  design.   FUSE    Studio -website. Retrieved  May 20,   2017 from
         https://www.fusestudio.net/program-design
Vélez-Ibáñez, C. G., and Greenberg, J. B. (1992). Formation and transformation of funds of knowledge among
         U.S.-Mexican households. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 23(4), 313-335.
Verdin, D., Godwin, A., and Capobianco, B. (2016). Systematic review of the funds of knowledge framework in
         STEM education. School of Engineering Education Graduate Series, 59(6), 26­48.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher mental processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University Press.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   588                                                 © ISLS
