    Children's Interactive Strategies around Digital Technology in a
                        Collaborative Learning Environment
                              Dhvani Toprani, Mona AlQahtani, and Marcela Borge
                         dhvanitoprani@psu.edu, maa359@psu.edu, mborge@psu.edu
                                        The Pennsylvania State University

        Abstract: The current study examines how children develop different interactional strategies
        around digital technology as they get enculturated within a community of design learners. Using
        a comparative case study of a single case we discuss how a student progresses from individual
        to collective interactional strategies, over a period of time, as she collaborates around digital
        technology in a small design group. We then discuss the social affordances of technology and
        its importance in developing technology integration models.

Technology integration in collaborative learning
The introduction of screen-based technologies has led to improvements in developing both academic and 21st
century skills and hence many schools have quickly adopted one computer per student initiatives in a classroom
(Freeman et al., 2017; Swallow, 2017). However, the mere addition of technology in learning environments is not
a sufficient condition to ensure improvements in learning outcomes, since technology presents trade-offs that
interact with individual and group processes (Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2016; Kirkwood & Price, 2014; Lim & Chai,
2008). Our previous work suggests that digital technology affords different kinds of interactions in collaborative
learning environment that are especially problematic in developing shared understanding among young children
(Toprani, Yan, & Borge, 2016). These findings led us to further unpack the results on a time scale to understand
if these processes are impacted by continued participation within a community of learners. Towards this goal, the
current study aims at identifying the interactional strategies that students use around digital technology as a part
of learning design, over a period of time, and subsequently analyzing their development within the larger culture
of design practices.
        Technology has been efficiently used to widen the scope of learning by providing more competent tools
to learn with, however, it's potential to bring about a shift from traditional instructional approach to a student-
centered instructional approach fostering higher-order thinking processes are preliminarily developed (Kirkwood
& Price, 2014). There is a need for developing technology integration models that approach the process from a
nested, systemic perspective where the role of technology is studied in relation to factors like curriculum, teaching
pedagogies, learner's needs, and the learning goals (Veletsianos, 2016). We conceptualize collaboration as a
nested process between   individuals,  small groups,  and  the   larger classroom  community.   During   this process
participants are engaging in higher-order thinking: developing a joint understanding about the idea, collectively
critiquing the idea, discussing alternative perspectives, evaluating its feasibility, and negotiating solutions so as
to  create new  knowledge     (Stahl, 2006).  Studies   that look  at   collaboration from    a nested,  knowledge-
building perspective have found technology to have a more ambiguous and distributed impact on learning because
of the interplay of a number of factors (Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2016; Toprani et al., 2016). Hence, in the current
study we intend to explore How student's strategies around digital technology change as they become a part of
the community of design learners? To take a systemic perspective, we explore these ideas in relation to one
student's  process of getting enculturated   within the afterschool     club over a period  of  two years. We   view
enculturation as a process that supports not only the acquisition of knowledge but also development of judgements
around its application (Tishman, Jay, Perkins, 1993). We track the development of a student, "Catherine", who
was a part of the afterschool club for more than two years (four semesters). We identify the collaborative strategies
she developed  around  digital technology  in relation  to   her continued   participation at the club. The   study is
designed from the student's vantage point to understand technology's affordances within a sociotechnical system
i.e. what the technology offers and how the students develop social processes to make use of it. We observe
Catherine's interactional strategies over a period of two years, within the larger framework of the afterschool
club's cultural practices to understand how her interactional strategies change.

Context and data selection
The current study is situated within an afterschool club, developed to promote design thinking among 8-12 years
old students, in North East United States. The club is conducted weekly and each session is 75 minutes long where
students work on design projects in teams of three or four. The goal of the club is to help students go through
different design stages of questioning, planning, creating, and finally evaluating their design prototype against the
initial client requirements. As a part of this project, Catherine, joined the club as a 4th grader and returned to the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   589                                                    © ISLS
club every  semester   starting  Fall  2015,  until Spring    2017  (i.e. four semesters).    Her case   provides a unique
perspective to understand how student's collaborative strategies develop as they get enculturated through the club
activities and experiences. Catherine, in her first semester was grouped with three other students of her age: Kathy,
Eric, and Aron. They worked on creating a garden for a fictional client named Fred. In Spring 2017, Catherine
was grouped with the same members Eric and Aron, and the fourth member was changed to Marcos. In this
semester they were again creating a butterfly garden for Fred with a different set of requirements. In both the
semesters students would create a Lego plan of their design and then recreate the same design in Minecraft,
incorporating minor revisions.
        We selected Catherine, because she has been in the club the longest without missing any semesters. We
compared Catherine's collaborative strategies around digital technology across three semesters i.e. Fall 2015
(FA15) and Spring 2016 (SP16), when she was a novice to the design club's culture, and Spring 2017 (SP17),
when she was enculturated in the design club based on her participation for four semesters. By systematically
reviewing video data and curriculum plan we selected one comparable lesson for each of the three time points.
Across the three semesters, we selected the first lesson when they started designing with digital technologies.

Methods
Three  lessons were    analyzed     using  interaction    analysis approach   (Jordan    &  Henderson,   1995) to   build   a
comparative case study (Glaser & Strauss, 1973) and shed light on how the collaborative interaction strategies
changed across the three time points within the cultural practices of the club. The case studies were developed by
analyzing talk among the group members with a focus on the strategies used by Catherine. We began by reviewing
the lessons in their entirety and then gathering critical instances representing collaborative interactions among the
team members. An instance was started when two or more members interacted with each other within the context
of their design project and ended when the discussion was either terminated or interjected by the beginning of a
new topic. We gathered 28 instances from FA15, 22 instances from SP16, and 24 instances from SP17 for further
analysis of strategies. We then created Content Logs of these instances, followed by a detailed analysis of the
transcripts in order to understand the strategies. These strategies were interpreted from the data by the first author,
audited by the second author and then reviewed by the third author to look for biases and inconsistencies. The
analysis draws from Ciolek and Kendon's (1980) and Streeck's (2013) work on spatial organization of talk and
artifacts, facilitating collective learning processes.

Findings
The three cases presented below contrast between the interactional strategies used by Catherine when she had no
exposure to the design club's culture and after she participated in the club for almost four semesters. The three
cases present a trajectory of change from using individualistic interactional strategies, to using more inclusive and
collective interactional strategies, as she got enculturated into the design club over a period of time.

FA15: Individualistic strategies around shared technology
When Catherine was a club novice, she largely controlled the arrangement of the artifacts. Catherine and Kathy,
while collaborating together, shared a laptop and Catherine controlled access to the screen, while Kathy was left
in a position of asking for access. Table 1 represents the spatial arrangement of artifacts and the position of the
participants from the 11th lesson in FA15.     In line 314 Kathy made a move to press some keys on the laptop and
in 317, since her attempt failed, she tried to instruct Catherine of where she wanted to go in the shared Minecraft
server. Although Catherine gave Kathy the autonomy to guide her in Minecraft, when Kathy asked her to focus
on the fence instead of the biking trail, she redirected her attention to a decision Eric made earlier in the group
about the fence, and continued working on the biking trail. The given instance and the arrangement of the artifacts

 Table 1: Catherine's Individualistic Strategies around shared technology, FA15 (New participant)

                                           314 Kathy: Can I control ((pressing some keys on the laptop))
            Catherine           Kathy      315 Cath: Ehh.. wait watch out Kathy
     Screen           Eric                 316 Cath: Tell me what to do because you are the one who `tells me what to do'
                                           317 Kathy: Go there, there, there
                                           318 Cath: Should I just do the biking trail?
                                           319 Kathy: We need umm more fence because we have a very skinny
                                           320 Cath: Well Eric wants it to be that way so let's first ((continues doing the
                                           biking trail))

in the group  provide      evidence   for Catherine's  individualistic approach.  All     the artifacts were placed in her

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         590                                                    © ISLS
transactional space (Ciolek & Kendon, 1980) i.e. space that was easily accessible to her and Kathy's entry into
the space was controlled by her (315). Kathy and Eric's position made the spatial arrangement more problematic
for collaboration because the three students had no shared transactional space, physically or virtually, to initiate a
conversation. Although they were in a shared Minecraft server, they didn't know where the other person was and
what they were doing. This kind of a spatial arrangement of the participants and the artifacts in the group creates
a tension in the process of developing shared meaning (Streeck, 2013). This tension was verbalized towards the
end of the lesson when Catherine, Kathy, and Eric got into an argument about having a magical fairyland in their
design, which was added by Catherine without Eric's knowledge and Kathy's complete understanding of the idea.

SP16: Individualistic strategies around individual technology
By SP16 Catherine had limited exposure to the club's culture and was still a novice, collaborating with the same
group of students from FA15. In the 4th lesson of this semester, they were building a haunted house in Minecraft
and they all had individual laptops to work on. Table 2 represents the spatial arrangement of artifacts and the
position of the participants. In line 665 Catherine tried to control what Kathy could touch in Minecraft world,
using her own laptop. Catherine asked Kathy if they should fill up a structure in Minecraft (669). When Kathy
expressed that she liked it the way it was (670) Catherine disregarded her opinion and stated that it wasn't very
important. She asked other team members if it belonged to their design (671) and later in the session deleted the
structure. These interactional strategies, with individual laptops, continued to look similar to the FA15 strategies.
The arrangement of the laptops and the position of the participants continued to be problematic for developing
intersubjectivity (Ciolek & Kendon, 1980; Streeck, 2013). Kathy and Catherine's screen arrangement, and their
spatial positioning provided them with no transactional space to reference what they were doing in Minecraft.

 Table 2: Catherine's Individualistic Strategies around individual laptops, Spring 2016 (New participant)

   Screens                            665 Cath: Hey Kathy do not touch the chest. One good thing. Kathy where are
                 Kathy                you?
                                      666 Kathy: I am right here.
                                      667 Cath: I am coming.
                                      668 Cath: What's this?
                        Catherine     669 Cath: Should we fill it? Should we fill it?
                                      670 Kathy: Ohk.. Actually I like it.
                                      671 Cath: eh I think it's not important. I don't think it's important. Let's ask
                                      anybody if they built it.

SP17: Collective strategies around individual technology
 Table 3. Catherine's Collective Strategies around Individual laptops, Spring 2017 (Experienced participant)

 (a)                    (b)                      330 Cath: Guys is this big enough ((fence she was building in
                                                 Minecraft)) what I am building, is this big enough?
         Marcos                                  331 Aron: No cover..cover the entire area that
                                                 332 Marc: We have to leave the water there
                                                 333 Aron: No too much water
                                                 334 Marc: Until she finishes the fence
                                                 335 Cath: Is this fine? How big it is so far?
 Catherine                                       336 Marc: Where are you?
                                                 337 Cath: Are we making it a square, or a rectangle?
                                                 338 Marc: Rectangle. Ya that's pretty big. Outline the water

By SP17, Catherine had four semesters of experience at the design club and was working with other students with
similar amount   of experience.   Catherine's interactions  provided  more    opportunities    for collective meaning
making. Table 3 represents the spatial arrangement of artifacts and the position of the participants. In line 330,
Catherine stopped half way through creating the fence that demarcated their building area in Minecraft, and asked
Marcos and Aron if it looked alright to them. Initiating a discussion among the members, in line 331 and 338
Aron and Marcos respectively verbalized their alternative perspectives as a response to her question. Her follow-
up questions (335, 337) gave all of them an opportunity to engage in collective information synthesis by trying to
jointly understand the group's design and iterating on it (Borge, Ong, & Rose, 2018). These interactions in relation
to the arrangement of the artifacts in the group provide evidence for Catherine's collective approach. Arranging
the artifacts in the shared transactional space, giving every member equal opportunity to access them, is seen to

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   591                                                      © ISLS
be favorable for collective interactions (Ciolek & Kendon, 1980). The transactional space was maintained in the
virtual Minecraft environment by asking each other their locations, and physically turning their screens around to
show what they were building (see picture b).

Discussion
The crucial change that emerged in the interactional strategies used by Catherine, from the instances analyzed
across FA15,    SP16,  and  SP17,   was  a shift  from    an  individualistic  interactional approach  to a collective
interactional approach while designing in her small-group. Collaboration is a social process of developing shared
meaning within a small group (Stahl, 2006). Catherine's interactional strategies, mediated through the group's
artifacts (digital technology in this case) played an important role in developing shared understanding among the
members about their design projects. The existence of shared transactional space in SP17 ensured more efficient
communication among the members compared to FA15 and SP16. This connects to Streeck's (2013) discussion
of how intersubjectivity develops around embodied interactions between participants. The movement of artifacts
contributes to the development of meaning making as the participants experience a single object together and
build off of each other's experiences to expand on their ideas. As Catherine got enculturated in the design club,
she manipulated   the artifacts  in ways   that promoted      collective interactions. Streeck (2013) considers  these
approaches as being central to the development of intersubjectivity, which in turn is influential in developing a
shared understanding     in collaborative  teams   (Stahl,    2006).   Different technologies   have  different social
affordances for supporting discourse-based learning and imbibing collaborative cultural practices among children
(Kirschner et al., 2004; Toprani et al., 2016). This knowledge is crucial in orchestrating technology-enhanced
learning environments to help designers and instructors integrate technology to benefit learning systemically,
rather than influencing its parts (Prieto et al., 2011).

References
Bartlett, L., &  Vavrus,    F. (2017).  Comparative      case studies:   An innovative   approach.  Nordic  Journal of
          Comparative and International Education (NJCIE), 1(1), 5-17.
Borge, M., Ong, Y. S., & Rosé, C. P. (2018). Learning to monitor and regulate collective thinking processes.
          International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 13(1), 61-92.
Ciolek, T. M., & Kendon, A. (1980). Environment and the spatial arrangement of conversational encounters.
          Sociological Inquiry, 50(3-4), 237-271.
Freeman, A., Adams Becker, S., Cummins, M., Davis, A., & Giesinger, C. (2017) NMC/CoSN Horizon Report:
          2017 K­12 Edition. Austin, Texas: The New Media Consortium.
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1973) The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies of qualitative research. London:
          Wiedenfeld and Nicholson.
Jeong, H., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2016). Seven affordances of computer-supported collaborative learning: How
          to support collaborative learning? How can technologies help?. Educational Psychologist, 51, 247-265.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The journal of the learning
          sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Kirkwood,   A., & Price,  L.   (2014).  Technology-enhanced     learning   and  teaching in  higher education: what is
          `enhanced'and how do we know? A critical literature review. Learning, media and technology, 39, 6-36
Kirschner, P., Strijbos, J. W., Kreijns, K., & Beers, P. J. (2004). Designing electronic collaborative learning
          environments. Educational technology research and development, 52(3), 47-66.
Lim, C. P., & Chai, C. S. (2008). Teachers' pedagogical beliefs and their planning and conduct of computer-
          mediated classroom lessons. British Journal of Educational Technology, 39(5), 807-828.
Prieto, L. P., Dlab, M., Gutiérrez, I., Abdulwahed, M., & Balid, W. (2011). Orchestrating technology enhanced
          learning: a literature review and a conceptual framework. International Journal of Technology Enhanced
          Learning, 3(6), 583-598.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition. London: The MIT Press.
Streeck, J. (2013). Interaction and the living body. Journal of Pragmatics,46(1), 69-90.
Tishman,   S.,  Jay, E., &     Perkins, D. N.   (1993).   Teaching     thinking  dispositions: From   transmission  to
          enculturation. Theory into practice, 32(3), 147-153.
Toprani, D., Yan, S., & Borge, M. (2016, October). A comparative analysis of the collaboration process across
          different technologies. In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Conference on Creativity and Fabrication in
          Education (pp. 66-69). ACM.
Veletsianos, G. (2016). The defining characteristics of emerging technologies and emerging practices in digital
          education In George Veletsianos (Ed) Emergence and innovation in digital learning: Foundations and
          applications, (pp. 3-16). Edmonton: AU Press.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      592                                                   © ISLS
