 Examining the Educative Value of Person-To-Person Knowledge
Sharing on Social Media: The Case of YouTube as a Site of CSCL?
                 Ilana Dubovi, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, dubovi@post.bgu.ac.il,
                      Iris Tabak, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, itabak@bgu.ac.il,

        Abstract: This conceptual paper examines the educative potential of social media as a platform
        for everyday on-demand computer-supported collaborative informal learning. We propose three
        dimensions: reliability, learnability and critical-construction, as a framework for investigating
        collaborative learning within naturally occurring social media. We use YouTube as a focal case.
        Our review of literature on YouTube as a space for informal peer learning suggests that post-
        video   deliberative comments      hold  much     promise  as precursors  for  co-construction of
        knowledge. However, questions remain concerning the veracity of user-contributed videos, and
        the adequacy   of this medium      for  different learning  goals. Nonetheless, investigating  the
        educative value of non-formal person-to-person knowledge sharing on social media can be an
        important direction for CSCL research in its aim to support learners in formal environments for
        future life-long learning and civic engagement.

Introduction
In this conceptual paper, we examine the educative value of person-to-person knowledge sharing on social media,
and propose how it can be a productive line of inquiry in the CSCL community. Web 2.0 offers a platform for
both social and informal  learning  by     providing support   for user-generated content  with features of  social
networking sites (Duffy, 2008). Interaction with these social spaces is based upon a discovery of new materials
in a self-directed mode which is aimed to satisfy different learners with a variety of informal learning goals. A
unique feature of learning with social media is that it is mostly motivated by an intrinsic need which is followed
by intentional but also by an opportunistic search for information. Though this may start as a solitary endeavor,
once the information is located, it can be supported by a collective shared knowledge and shared literacy.
        This duality: motivated by a particular authentic need but also supported by a social learning space, offers
an opportunity for the CSCL community to better understand how knowledge that is created and shared as part of
everyday life routines might contribute to theoretical dimensions of collaborative learning (Dyosi & Hattingh,
2018; Ludvigsen, Cress, Law, Rosé, & Stahl, 2016). More specifically, by unfolding informal collective learning
with YouTube as a focal case, we aim to contribute to a deeper understanding of opportunities for collaborative
learning. This study is intended to question the social nature of collaboration in such environments (Asterhan &
Bouton, 2017;   Asterhan  &   Schwarz,     2007; Kimmerle,    Moskaliuk,   Oeberst, &  Cress, 2015;   Cress, Stahl,
Ludvigsen & Law, 2015), with the goal of articulating principles that distinguish what constitutes person-to-
person knowledge sharing versus collaborative learning, and when and how it is possible to generate situations
that constitute collaborative learning.
        In  the following sections,     we review literature  on  YouTube   as a space for informal peer   learning.
Following, we propose, and apply to YouTube, a framework to evaluate the educative value of social media.

YouTube as a focal case for educative social media
A widespread example of informal learning from the Web 2.0 is YouTube, launched in 2005 to enable any
subscribed member to create, upload, and share a wide range of content ranging from homemade video to movie
scenes. Yet, YouTube is not merely the second-most popular platform in the world for broadcasting content, but
an emblem of emerging participatory culture, which plays a central role in learning on demand that is embedded
within social interaction in the form of commenting, seeking and providing information (Tan, 2013). Within this
context, the transformation in learners' consumption and participatory practices may alter what and how learning
occurs. This social epistemological nature of YouTube facilitates both joint interaction with group members and
interaction with broader communities such as citizen science, which might create a need for unanticipated and
unexpected learning of new science knowledge and skills (Polman & Hope, 2014).
        YouTube is designed as a content sharing site which is mostly based on videos that are used for informal
learning tasks and entertainment. The instructional videos on YouTube can be classified through three following
main types of learning: First is procedural learning that has a motor, visual or auditory components, such as
specific troubleshooting of printer jam clearance (Rodriguez, 2002); laptop memory replacement; handheld device
assembly (Watson, Butterfield, Curran, & Craig, 2010); learning of technique-based musical objectives (Waldron,
2013); or medical education, i.e., how to step by step perform a lumbar puncture procedure (Rössler, Lahner,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     593                                                © ISLS
Schebesta, Chiari, & Plöchl, 2012). People are able develop their procedural motor skills by performing the actions
while watching the sequences in motion with actual objects and tools. A second type of learning on YouTube is
informational learning, such as where to visit when touring a destination, what to pack. A widespread example is
when people search for health-related information issues such as immunizations or H1N1 Influenza Pandemic.
The rarest form of YouTube learning is the third type, procedural conceptual learning, which focuses on how to
perform intellectual skills, for example how to analyze risk, how to decide between alternatives based on multiple
criteria, or how to decide which statistical analysis is appropriate and how to interpret analysis results.
          Although more than 72 hours of videos are uploaded to YouTube every minute, numerous studies have
documented severe quality deficits in the information provided, stating that some of the videos' information
quality "pose a grave threat" (Rössler et al., 2012, pp. 657). This threat is heightened by the unlimited ability of
users  to upload  open-ended   materials  which  can then   be further   shared. This  suggests that  awareness    of
information   accuracy is key in this  context  (Stadtler & Bromme,     2007). However,   the content management
features such as YouTube channels, a playlist, and measures to assess popularity, enable users to organize, source,
and share  videos. It  thus becomes  important  for researches  to  investigate  the nuances  and practices   in peer
interaction and learning in YouTube as a collective knowledge sharing platform. With this aim in mind, we
propose three dimensions for examining the educative value of YouTube as a focal social media platform.

Dimensions in the educative value of YouTube
We propose three dimensions: reliability, learnability and critical co-construction, as a framework for examining
whether and how informal learning unfolds in YouTube, and whether it can be considered a CSCL environment.
          The Reliability dimension.   In order for YouTube    instructional   videos to have educative     value the
information and procedures that appear in them need to be reliable. Although the question of who determines or
sanctions knowledge and procedures is charged, here, we define reliability as information that accords with the
consensus in leading scientific journals or central professional organizations (Krippendorff, 2008). The question
is what means are available to YouTube users in evaluating the veracity of the content that is uploaded? YouTube
includes a number of features that can be considered with respect to this question. These include various measures
to assess popularity (i.e., popularity rankings, number of views), the ability to upload an unlimited number of
videos, and to post comments, which may further encourage users' discussions and interactions. Some evidence
uncovers that these affordances of collective and individual social engagement, support information evaluation
and sourcing within social media spaces. For instance, Azer (2012) who evaluated YouTube as a medium for
learning anatomy, stated that although only 27% of videos were useful for teaching and learning purposes, the
useful videos  had   a viewership per  day  on  average   double   that of non-useful  videos  (38 vs. 16    average
viewership/day). Similar results were suggested by Pandey et al. (2010) who evaluated YouTube as a source of
information   on the  H1N1   influenza pandemic.  Their   findings point   out that  61.5% of videos  had    accurate
information about the disease, while the information that was contributed by CDC had the highest viewership
share. Duncan, Yarwood-Ross and Haigh (2013) evaluated 100 YouTube channels to assess the quality of clinical
skills videos. They found evidence that quality is recognized by the viewers and approval is expressed through
the 'like' button on the YouTube site. In this sense, user-to-user to content interactions (i.e., sharing, popularity
rankings) creates a collective literacy in information evaluation.
          The Learnability dimension. This dimension examines whether and how the form and content of the
video mediates learning, and to what degree. It also offers a way to compare the different types of learning
discussed above (e.g., procedural versus informational), in terms of what strategies are more effective for each
type of learning. As mentioned above, procedural learning is the most popular type of learning with YouTube
instructional videos. Some evidence shows that learning with this medium is driven by perceived usefulness and
expectations that learning through YouTube would improve their understanding of "how to do something" (Lee
& Lehto, 2013). Interestingly, Dyosi and Hattingh   (2018) reported that children who watched how-to-YouTube-
videos did not realize that they were actually learning and acquiring skills, underlining that informal learning with
YouTube can be incidental and unintentional. Unfortunately, there is not much direct evidence in the literature
concerning the efficacy of learning with YouTube and similar social media. Although, there is some evidence
through self-reports in subscribers' text comments on the posted video that suggests that knowledge and skills
were acquired (Hattingh, 2017). One area for future research is to develop specialized methods to elicit evidence
of learning from social media that goes beyond self-report measures.
          The degree of critical co-construction and interdependence dimension. This dimension represents the
degree of interaction and interdependence among consumers of the shared media, and between the consumers and
the subscribers who create and share the media (Cress et al., 2015). This is the dimension that is most critical to
the CSCL community, and for determining whether the learning context can be considered a CSCL environment.
YouTube and similar social media might generate situations that make collaborative learning possible, and as

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   594                                                    © ISLS
such, there is a great potential for learning. Though the structure of social media is designed to support sharing of
knowledge and ideas, the process of critical evaluation, refinement or improvement of ideas is not guaranteed,
and consequently, there is no guarantee that collective knowledge construction will take place. For example,
Asterhan and Bouton (2017) investigated secondary-school students' interactions with social media, and found
that their communication  was  mainly   characterized   by peer-to-peer  exchange  of information and knowledge
sources, and not by in-depth, peer-guided, knowledge co-construction. They further argue that the notion of
knowledge   sharing is a more  accurate    depiction of this type of social knowledge-based   activities than  co-
construction or collaborative learning.
        Online  knowledge   sharing is   a well-known   construct in communication,    business  management   and
information sciences (John, 2013). Knowledge sharing refers to activities in which individuals make their own
internally stored knowledge and/or external knowledge sources that they have at their disposal accessible to
others. In the majority of cases, there is no direct reward for making one's knowledge available. Knowledge
sharing requires time and effort to assemble and share online, and involves letting someone else have something
that you have, often without knowing who benefits from this knowledge. Despite its pro-social value, Asterhan
and Bouton (2017) caution about the educative value of online knowledge sharing, because the ease with which
one can consume knowledge that is produced by others, forfeits important individual learning activities (e.g.,
summarizing, highlighting and integrating information) that are essential for skill development and knowledge
growth. They posit that the lack of these pivotal attributes can be explained by the discrepancy between the
underlying values that characterize social networking versus formal learning environments, such as promoting
pro-social behavior versus assessment and evaluation based on individual performance.
        In the Asterhan and Bouton study the most common platform studied was WhatsApp, other studies that
evaluated YouTube suggest that it may offer more potential for deliberation and knowledge co- construction. For
instance, studying comments on videos concerning climate change, Shapiro and Park (2018) reveal that though
there were no moderators to guide the interaction, an argumentative discourse took place. Interestingly, though
the post-video comments were not necessarily related to the corresponding video's content, the argumentative
communication   was  supported by users    who posted   some  scientific evidence, and  by other  subscribers who
questioned that evidence by providing counter claims and citing academic sources. Another potential avenue for
co-construction in YouTube is through interaction between those that post the videos and their audience. Hattingh
(2017) describes how, in a subsequent video post, the presenter referred back to questions he got from subscribers
and explained concepts with which they had struggled. Deschamps (2014), proposed that those comments present
an opportunity for users to "transform the narrative by presenting new information... by challenging arguments,
relaying new ideas, offering counterfactuals or by attempting to re-frame the discussion" (pp. 345).
        Some studies have analyzed coherence in video-related comments on YouTube. Coherence refers to
connections between ideas that appear in different individuals' comments (Bou-Franch, Lorenzo-Dus, & Blitvich,
2012). Bou-Franch and her colleagues (2012) analyzed two samples of 150 consecutive comments and found that
the comments included many coherence-forming linguistic devices. This suggests a degree of attention to the
content of one another's comments that can be a productive pre-cursor to the type of critical co-construction that
is essential to transformative CSCL interactions. However, such coherence was produced by a minority of users,
so it is not clear what impact such processes might have on the majority of users.

Is there an educative value?
While most CSCL studies deal with learning within specially designed environments to support collaborative
learning, the current conceptual paper concerns the landscape of spontaneous and non-formal interactions that
emerge as part of the social epistemological nature of YouTube. These everyday, self-regulated, informal learning
opportunities that are driven by an authentic need, offer, as shown above, precursors for collaborative learning
through deliberation in the post-video comments. There are a number of open research questions to explore. First,
the educative value of YouTube hinges on the reliability of its content. While ranking markers for the video itself
seem to pose a fairly good indicator of reliability, such formalized and aggregating ranking markers do not exist
for in-comment reactions to other comments. Thus, the ratability of the post-video deliberation, and the ability to
gauge reliability need further research. In addition, aside from self-reports, there is a paucity of measures for
documenting evidence of learning, especially for procedural conceptual learning, which has received little, if any,
attention in the study of social media. We see this line of research as an important goal for the CSCL community,
because a key role for contemporary formal education is to prepare learners for future civic participation (Gratton,
2010). Therefore, knowing how to design intentional learning environments that support future public use of
informal networked learning-on-demand platforms will be central to fulfilling this role.

References

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   595                                                 © ISLS
Akgun, T., Karabay, C. Y., Kocabay, G., Kalayci, A., Oduncu, V., Guler, A., ... Kirma, C. (2014). Learning
         electrocardiogram on YouTube: How useful is it? Journal of Electrocardiology, 47(1), 113­117.
Asterhan, C. S. C., & Schwarz, B. B. (2007). The effects of monological and dialogical argumentation on concept
         learning in evolutionary theory. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(3), 626-639.
Asterhan, C. S. C., & Bouton, E. (2017). Teenage peer-to-peer knowledge sharing through social network sites in
         secondary schools. Computers and Education, 110, 16­34.
Azer, S. A. (2012). Can "YouTube" help students in learning surface anatomy? Surgical and Radiologic Anatomy,
         34(5), 465­468.
Bou-Franch,  P.,   Lorenzo-Dus, N.,  &  Blitvich,  P. G. C.  (2012). Social  interaction  in YouTube    text-based
         polylogues: A study of coherence. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 17(4), 501­521.
Cress, U., Stahl, G., Ludvigsen, S., & Law, N. (2015). The core features of cscl: Social situation, collaborative
         knowledge   processes  and  their design. International Journal  of Computer-Supported     Collaborative
         Learning, 10(2), 109-116.
Deschamps, R. (2014). What potential for you tube as a policy deliberation tool? commenter reactions to videos
         about the keystone XL oil pipeline. Policy and Internet, 6(4), 341­359.
Duffy, P. (2008). Engaging the YouTube Google-Eyed Generation: Strategies for Using Web 2.0 in Teaching and
         Learning. The Electronic Journal of E-Learning, 6(2), 119­130.
Duncan, I., Yarwood-Ross, L., & Haigh, C. (2013). YouTube as a source of clinical skills education. Nurse
         Education Today, 33(12), 1576­1580.
Dyosi, N., & Hattingh, M. J. (2018). Understanding the extent of and factors involved in the use of YouTube as
         an Informal Learning Tool by 11- to 13-year-o        i  en   eo e i a   n e     inning   o ia    ogni ive
         Theory, 1­10.
Gratton, L. (2010). The future of work. Business Strategy Review, 21(3), 16-23.
Hattingh, M. (2017). A Preliminary Investigation of the Appropriateness of YouTube as an Informal Learning
         Platform for Pre-teens, 101­110.
John, N. A. (2013). Sharing and Web 2.0: The emergence of a keyword. New Media and Society, 15, 167­182.
Kimmerle, J., Moskaliuk, J., Oeberst, A., & Cress, U. (2015). Learning and collective knowledge construction
         with social media: A process-oriented perspective. Educational Psychologist, 50(2), 120-137.
Krippendorff,   K. (2008). Reliability. The   International  Encyclopedia  of  Communication.    Retrieved  from
         https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781405186407.wbiecr029
Kruse, N. B., & Veblen, K. K. (2012). Music teaching and learning online: Considering YouTube instructional
         videos. Journal of Music, Technology and Education, 5(1), 77­87.
Lee, D. Y., & Lehto, M. R. (2013). User acceptance of YouTube for procedural learning: An extension of the
         Technology Acceptance Model. Computers and Education, 61(1), 193­208.
Ludvigsen,  S., Cress, U., Law,  N., Rosé,  C. P., &  Stahl, G.  (2016). Future-looking   conversations in CSCL.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 11(3), 255­262.
Pandey, A., Patni, N., Singh, M., Sood, A., & Singh, G. (2010). YouTube As a Source of Information on the
         H1N1 Influenza Pandemic. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 38(3), e1­e3.
Rodriguez, M. A. (2002). Development of diagrammatic procedural instructions for performing complex one-
         time tasks. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 14(3­4), 405­422.
Rössler, B., Lahner, D., Schebesta, K., Chiari, A., & Plöchl, W. (2012). Medical information on the Internet:
         Quality assessment of lumbar puncture and neuroaxial block techniques on YouTube. Clinical Neurology
         and Neurosurgery, 114(6), 655­658.
Shapiro, M.  A., &  Park,  H. W. (2018).   Climate  Change   and YouTube:    Deliberation Potential in  Post-video
         Discussions. Environmental Communication, 12(1), 115­131.
Shifman, L. (2012). An anatomy of a youtube meme. New Media and Society, 14(2), 187­203.
Stadtler, M., & Bromme, R. (2007). Dealing with multiple documents on the WWW: The role of metacognition
         in the formation  of documents    models. International Journal  of Computer-Supported     Collaborative
         Learning, 2(2­3), 191­210.
Waldron, J. (2013). User-generated content, YouTube and participatory culture on the Web: Music learning and
         teaching in two contrasting online communities. Music Education Research, 15(3), 257­274.
Watson, G., Butterfield, J., Curran, R., & Craig, C. (2010). Do dynamic work instructions provide an advantage
         over static instructions in a small scale assembly task? Learning and Instruction, 20(1), 84­93.

Acknowledgments
Funded, in part, by the I-CORE Program of the Planning and Budgeting Committee (LINKS center) and The
Israel Science Foundation grant 1716/12, and by a Kreitman School Postdoctoral Fellowship to the first author.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   596                                                 © ISLS
