                      Designing Epistemic Scaffolding in CSCL
                       Feng Lin, University of Wisconsin-Madison, irisfenglin@gmail.com
         Sadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin-Madison, puntambekar@education.wisc.edu

        Abstract: In this paper, we propose an epistemic scaffolding framework to understand the
        support for epistemic change in computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL). Two types
        of epistemic scaffolding are differentiated based on existing literature and educational practices,
        namely, implicit and explicit epistemic scaffolding. Implicit epistemic scaffolding refers to the
        support (including tool, activities, resources, etc.) that has epistemic implications but is not
        made obvious to learners. Explicit epistemic scaffolding refers to the support that intentionally
        makes epistemic ideas explicit to learners to promote their epistemic understanding. Many of
        the CSCL environments have been designed with epistemic underpinnings, which could serve
        as   implicit epistemic  scaffolds. We   propose  that embedding   explicit epistemic scaffolds  in
        CSCL environments that are designed with implicit epistemic scaffolds is a promising way to
        maximize the power of support for epistemic growth.

Introduction
Epistemic cognition is a field that studies individual's epistemic related thinking, including understanding of the
nature of knowledge, process of knowing, and achievement to epistemic ends (Chinn, et al., 2014; Hofer, 2016).
The importance of promoting sophisticated epistemic cognition has been acknowledged by a growing number of
researchers  (Greene,  et al., 2016; Sinatra &   Chinn,   2011). Sophisticated  epistemic cognition  is not only an
important educational goal itself, but also an important predictor of students' learning (Chinn, et al., 2011; Elby,
et al., 2016). In recent decades, much progress has been made in understanding the nature of epistemic cognition,
and its relation to other constructs (Chinn et al., 2011; Hofer & Pintrich, 1997; Khine, 2008), relatively less is
known about the ways in which growth towards epistemic sophistication can be promoted (Brownlee, et al., 2001;
Kienhues, et al., 2016). In this paper, we attempt to propose an epistemic scaffolding framework to understand
the support for epistemic change. By epistemic scaffolding, we mean the support that could enable learners to
achieve a   higher  level of   epistemic  sophistication. It  encompasses  both  the  supports for   promoting   the
sophistication of  tacit epistemic  understanding  (e.g., how  people  actually work  on  knowledge)    and explicit
epistemic understanding (e.g., how people talk about the nature of knowledge). In this paper, we will primarily
focus on the epistemic scaffolding in science.
        Even though the term epistemic scaffolding has not been mentioned often in the previous literature, it
has been  employed    intentionally  or unintentionally in some   educational  designs, theories, and technologies.
Sandoval and Reiser's (2004) study is an example of explicitly using the term "epistemic scaffold" to refer to the
support used to help students understand the epistemic aspects of inquiry. There are also some other studies and
efforts that tried to support students' epistemic understanding (Carey, et al., 1989; Smith, et al., 2000), however,
there has been little examination of the nature and pattern of epistemic scaffolding. In this paper, we differentiate
two types of epistemic scaffolding, namely, implicit and explicit epistemic scaffolding, and discuss how they
could be combined to maximize the power of support for epistemic change in CSCL.
Epistemic scaffolding
Scaffolding, in the traditional sense, is used to refer to the assistance provided by a more capable individual (e.g.,
tutor) to a learner to accomplish tasks that would be otherwise out of reach. The discrepancies between what an
individual's actual   competences    are for accomplishing     tasks alone and  his/her   potential competence   for
accomplishing the task with assistance is defined as the zone of proximal development (ZPD) (Vogotsky, 1978).
ZPD defines the lower and upper bounds of developmental levels, and how providing support within these levels
may promote learning. Researchers have identified few features that are essential for scaffolding (Puntambekar
& Hubscher, 2005), including shared understanding, ongoing diagnosis, calibrated support, and fading.
        The notion of scaffolding has evolved in the past decades, and the original notion does not adequately
explain learning in complex learning environments. Especially in today's classroom, students are interacting not
only with human agents such as teachers and peers, but also with increasingly complex tools and artifacts, from
instructional materials in papers form, to computers and software, each embedded in a host of activities. The
scaffolder is no longer the more capable person; rather, scaffolding is distributed among teachers, peers, activities,
software, and resources, etc. (Puntambekar & Kolodner, 2005; Tabak, 2004).
        Different  forms   of  scaffolding  have been designed   to  help students  accomplish complex   tasks. For
example, soft and hard scaffolds    (Brush & Saye, 2002) or adaptive and fixed scaffolds (Azevedo, et al., 2004)
have been designed to provide students with support with different degree of flexibility. Soft/adaptive scaffolding

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     597                                                 © ISLS
is dynamic and situation specific. It requires teacher or peers to continually diagnose students' understanding and
provide timely assistance. Hard/fixed scaffolds are static and can be planned in advance based on students'
understanding. They can be embedded in multimedia and hypermedia to support students' learning while they use
the tool (Brush & Saye, 2002). Scaffolding has also been designed to serve different functions, such as procedural,
conceptual, and metacognitive scaffolding (Molenaar, et al., 2010). Procedural scaffolding guides learners to use
certain tools and resources, or accomplish certain tasks. Conceptual scaffolding provides support for learners'
conceptual   understanding     and  helps them    reason through   difficult concepts  or problems.     Metacognitive
scaffolding provides support for monitoring learning. In this paper, we propose epistemic scaffolding, the support
for epistemic understanding, as a separate category and different from other types of scaffolding (see Figure 1).

                 Figure 1. Types of scaffolding.              Figure 2. Synergistic epistemic scaffolding model.

         To  help   illustrate this difference,   consider  a situation in   which  students engage   in  a scientific
investigation of electrical conductivity. In this case, procedural scaffolding could support students with tasks such
as setting up their experiments, and using tools etc. The support that helps students understand the mechanism of
conductivity constitutes conceptual scaffolding; the support that helps students regulate the progress of their
inquiry is metacognitive scaffolding. The support that helps them understand the role of theory and evidence in
investigating the mechanism of conductivity is epistemic scaffold. Procedural scaffolding aims to assist learners'
procedural activity of accomplishing a task; the conceptual scaffolding primarily aims to assist their understanding
of the content knowledge of electricity; metacognitive scaffolding aims to assist the regulation of their cognitive
activities and processes;  whereas   epistemic  scaffolding   aims to support  their understanding   of the nature  of
scientific inquiry--the role of theory and evidence in inquiry.
         It should be noted that some of these scaffolds are usually intertwined. Take epistemic and conceptual
scaffolding  for example,  conceptual    scaffolding  usually has  implicit  epistemic implications; while  epistemic
scaffolding is usually situated in a context where conceptual scaffolding is provided. As the above example shows,
prompting students to understand why some materials conduct electricity is a conceptual scaffolding, while it also
has the epistemic implication of the need for explanation. The guidance for helping students understand the role
of theory and evidence in investigating conductivity is epistemic scaffolding, while it is also situated in the context
of learning about electricity.
Types of epistemic scaffolding
Based on extant literature and educational practice, we distinguish two types of epistemic scaffolding: implicit
and explicit epistemic scaffolding.
Implicit epistemic scaffolding
Implicit epistemic scaffolding refers to the support­including tools, activities, and resources­that has epistemic
implications but is not made obvious to learners. For example, the activity of engaging students in inquiry that
focuses  on the  relationship  between   explanation  and  evidence has  the  epistemic implication  that evidentiary
justification is an important part of scientific inquiry. Even though such underlying epistemology may not be
made explicit to learners, it still has potential to influence students' epistemic thinking (Hofer, 2004; Perry, 1970).
      Some of the technological tools could also provide implicit epistemic scaffolding. For example, CoMPASS,
is an etextbook   that is designed  to facilitate students' science learning  (Puntambekar   &  Stylianou,  2005).  It
visualizes connections among science concepts, helping students see how concepts and principles are related to
each other. It uses both concept maps and text as representations to facilitate students' navigation and inquiry.
The concept map mirrors the interrelated structure of the science concepts and phenomenon. The underlying
epistemic idea guiding the design is that scientific knowledge is coherent and connected, rather than fragmented.
It could   serve as implicit   epistemic  scaffolding for  promoting    students' understanding of   the  structure of
knowledge (Hofer & Pintrich, 1997). Knowledge Forum®, previously known as CSILE (Computer Supported
Intentional Learning Environments), is a computer-supported collaborative learning platform designed to support
students' knowledge building (Scardamalia, 2004). In Knowledge Forum, ideas could be connected and built upon
each other for further improvement. Here the epistemic implication is that knowledge is socially constructed and
is tentative (Lin & Chan, 2014).
Explicit epistemic scaffolding
Explicit epistemic scaffolding refers to the support that intentionally makes epistemic ideas obvious to learners to
promote their epistemic understanding and practice. there are different ways in which scaffolding could make

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     598                                                  © ISLS
epistemic ideas explicit, including explicit in epistemic structure, explicit in epistemic criteria, and explicit in
epistemic goal.
    ExplanationConstructor (Sandoval, 2003) is an example of explicit epistemic scaffolding that makes the
epistemic structure of inquiry explicit. ExplanationConstructor is an electronic journal that was designed for
students to generate explanations. It linked question, explanation, and evidence in the interface, suggesting the
importance of   and  connections among question,   explanation,  and  evidence   in scientific inquiry. Knowledge
Forum is another example of making the structure of collective inquiry explicit to students through providing
prompts for notes writing, such as "your explanation cannot explain", "a better theory", and so on.
    Epistemic criteria are standards scientists use to evaluate the validity and accuracy of scientific products,
such as arguments, models, and evidence (Pluta, et al., 2011). However, they could also be used as explicit
epistemic scaffolds when presented to, or constructed by students as standards to evaluate scientific process and
products. For example, Ryu and Sandoval (2011) examined students' understanding of the epistemic criteria for
argumentation, they found that explicitly using and talking about the epistemic criteria for argumentation were
helpful for improving students' epistemic practice. Similarly, Lin and Chan (2018) designed an instruction to let
students reflect on  the epistemic criteria of  good collaborative  discourse,   and  found it promoted    students'
epistemic understanding about the social constructive nature of science.
    Some   studies  also  showed the importance   of making    epistemic goal  explicit to  students. For  example,
Schauble and colleagues (1995) found that students did better in inquiry after the instruction about the goal of
experimentation.
    It should be noted that in many educational practices, explicit epistemic scaffolds are most often not used on
their own, but are usually combined with implicit epistemic scaffolds. In the next section, we will discuss how
implicit and explicit epistemic scaffolds could be integrated to maximize the power of support for epistemic
change in CSCL contexts.

Designing synergistic epistemic scaffolding in CSCL
As we discussed earlier, the notion of distributed scaffolding suggests that multiple forms of supports could exist
and interact with each other in a learning environment. Building on this idea, Tabak (2004) distinguished three
patterns of distributed scaffolding: differentiated scaffolds, redundant scaffolds, and synergistic scaffolds. These
patterns demonstrated how various scaffolds (e.g., resources, software, teachers, peers) could work together to
support students' learning. Differentiated scaffolds refer to the way multiple forms of supports are individually
provided to support students' different needs. Redundant scaffolds involve multiple supports for addressing the
same need. Synergistic scaffolds refer to the multiple supports that co-occur to address the same need.
         Building on Tabak's framework on synergistic scaffolds, we propose that embedding explicit epistemic
scaffolds in implicit epistemic scaffolds is a promising way to maximize the power of support for students'
epistemic  development   in CSCL   (Figure  2). We emphasize    their relationship  as  embedded   because  explicit
epistemic scaffolds need to be situated in implicit epistemic scaffolds as well as mirror the objects of implicit
epistemic scaffolding. For example, if the implicit epistemic scaffolds focus on the coordination between claim
and evidence, the explicit epistemic scaffolds need to be provided within the implicit epistemic scaffolds, and
they also need to mirror the evidence-based nature of science.
         Some    studies on science  education   and teachers'   epistemology    have   provided  evidence  for the
importance of including both implicit and explicit scaffolds to support epistemic cognition, for example, Khishfe
and Abd-El-Khalick (2002) compared explicit and implicit inquiry-oriented approach on students' understandings
of nature of science, and found that more participants from the explicit approach improved their nature of science
views. Brownlee   et al. (2001)  employed   both implicit and  explicit approaches   to foster preservice  teachers'
epistemic cognition and also found positive results. They (Brownlee, et al., 2017) noted that to make the design
effective, explicit reflection needs to be embedded in the contexts of actual teaching practice, which aligns with
our proposal on the embedded structure of implicit and explicit epistemic scaffolding.
         We propose that synergistic epistemic scaffolding is especially important for fostering epistemic growth
in CSCL. Many of the CSCL tool and environment have been designed with epistemic underpinnings which may
serve as implicit epistemic scaffolds to help students experience alternative ways of working on knowledge and
ideas. For example,   Knowledge    Forum    was  designed   to engage   students in  collaborative  theory building
(Scardamalia, 2004);  Web-based    Inquiry  Science  Environment    (WISE)   was    designed   to support  students'
knowledge integration(Linn, 2006); and ExplanationConstructor was designed to help students build coherent
explanations (Sandoval & Reiser, 2004). However, students may not understand these underlying epistemic ideas
and therefore may not perform as expected. We argue that if we make the epistemic aim and epistemic criteria of
the designed CSCL explicit to students, it may promote apt epistemic performance.
         Some studies have provided evidences for the effectiveness of synergistic epistemic scaffolding for

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   599                                                   © ISLS
promoting epistemic cognition in CSCL. For example, Lin and Chan (2014) embedded epistemic reflection in
computer-supported  knowledge-building    environment  to  promote students' understanding    of theory-building
nature of science. They designed an epistemic model--Little Scientists Worksheet--to help students reflect on their
own inquiry experience. The worksheet included epistemic ideas such as "improvable ideas" and also graphs to
illustrate how scientists advance their community knowledge, which mirrored students' own inquiry process on
Knowledge Forum. When students used these epistemic ideas as criteria to reflect on their inquiry, their epistemic
practice were improved. In another study, Lin et al. (2018) embedded explicit epistemic reflection in students'
collective inquiry using VidyaMap, which is a new generation of CoMPASS, and found that reflecting on the
epistemic role of the tool for inquiry promoted students' inquiry and learning from VidyaMap.

Discussion and future research
This paper proposes   an epistemic  scaffolding   framework to understand the support    for fostering  epistemic
cognition in CSCL.    We  identified  two   types of epistemic scaffolding:  implicit  and   explicitly epistemic
scaffolding, and proposed that embedding explicit in implicit epistemic scaffolds might help maximize the power
of support for promoting epistemic growth. This epistemic scaffolding framework could enrich the literature on
epistemic cognition and scaffolding, broadening the research agenda in both areas. On the one hand, it could
enrich the epistemic cognition field by allowing researchers to explore a wider variety of questions informed by
scaffolding literature. For example, fading, calibrated support, and ongoing diagnosis have been regarded as the
key features of scaffolding. Future research could examine the fading of epistemic scaffolding, diagnosis of
support for epistemic cognition, and the interaction of epistemic scaffolds with other types of scaffolding. On the
other hand, it could enrich the scaffolding literature by adding a new type of support--epistemic scaffolding--to
the existing cluster of scaffolding, in parallel to procedural, conceptual, and metacognitive scaffolding, etc., which
could help us better understand the nature of support in complex learning environment.
     This is an initial attempt to conceptualize epistemic scaffolding. The distinction between implicit and explicit
epistemic scaffolding needs to be further clarified and developed in future research. More empirical studies are
needed to examine the effectiveness of synergistic epistemic scaffolds in CSCL and to understand the nature of
implicit and explicit epistemic scaffolding and their relations to other scaffolding, for example, given a certain
CSCL context, what kinds of explicit epistemic scaffolding might provide better support; how do implicit and
explicit epistemic scaffolding interact with other types of scaffolding (e.g., metacognitive scaffolding), and what
kinds of interaction might be more effective to support students' epistemic cognition and learning? These are the
questions we can further explore. We are hoping that the new questions brought up by this epistemic scaffolding
framework could help open up new possibilities for exploring ways of fostering epistemic growth in CSCL.

Selected references
Brownlee, L. J., Ferguson, L. E., & Ryan, M. (2017). Changing Teachers' Epistemic Cognition: A New Conceptual
        Framework for Epistemic Reflexivity. Educational Psychologist, 1-11.
Khishfe, R., & Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2002). Influence of explicit and reflective versus implicit inquiry-oriented
        instruction on sixth graders' views of nature of science. Jrl of Research in Science Teaching, 39, 551-578.
Lin, F., & Chan, C. K. K. (2018). Promoting elementary students' epistemology of science through computer-
        supported  knowledge-building   discourse  and epistemic reflection. International   Journal    of Science
        Education, 40(6), 668-687.
Lin, F., Chan, C. K. K., & van Aalst, J. (2014). Promoting 5th graders' views of science and scientific inquiry in
        an   epistemic-enriched  knowledge-building   environment. Paper  presented   at the  11th International
        Conference of the Learning Sciences, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
Pluta, W. J., Chinn, C. A., & Duncan, R. G. (2011). Learners' epistemic criteria for good scientific models. Journal
        of Research in Science Teaching, 48(5), 486-511.
Puntambekar, S., & Kolodner, J. L. (2005). Toward implementing distributed scaffolding: Helping students learn
        science from design. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(2), 185-217.
Puntambekar, S., & Stylianou, A. (2005). Designing navigation support in hypertext systems based on navigation
        patterns. Instructional Science, 33(5-6), 451-481.
Sandoval, W.  A., &   Reiser, B. J. (2004). Explanation-driven  inquiry: Integrating  conceptual  and   epistemic
        scaffolds for scientific inquiry. Science Education, 88(3), 345-372. doi:DOI 10.1002/sce.10130
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: A complement to emerging patterns of distributed scaffolding. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 13(3), 305-335.

Acknowledgements
This research has been funded by an NSF-DRL grant #1418044 to the second author.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  600                                                  © ISLS
