   Collaborative Remembering, Temporal Cement of Collaborative
                                        Learning: An Exploration
                                           Lucas M. Bietti and Michael J. Baker
                          lbietti@telecom-paristech.fr, michael.baker@telecom-paristech.fr
                    Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) ­ Telecom ParisTech

          Abstract:   This  theoretical     paper   explores   the   relations between    two   fields  of research:
          collaborative    remembering       and    collaborative    learning.   We     argue   that   collaborative
          remembering processes scaffold collaborative learning and that both unfold over multiple and
          complementary timescales. These timescales help to maintain joint focus and continuity over
          successive   learning   sequences.        In   conclusion,  we  discuss    implications    of integrating
          collaborative remembering research into the design of CSCL situations.

Introduction
Collaborative learning emerged as an independent field of research (e.g. Dillenbourg, Baker, Blaye & O'Malley,
1996; Dillenbourg, 1999) during the 1980's. On one hand, it can be understood as a reaction against the dominant
psychology of learning and education focused on the individual, which gave rise to new theoretical perspectives,
focused   on  the  group  (such   as the   theory   of   socio-cognitive  conflict) or  social practices   (such   as Cultural-
Historical Activity Theory, Situated Learning). On the other hand, societal changes, such as globalisation, going
hand   in hand with    the rise of   Internet, emphasized      the   possibility and necessity  of   working  in   teams.  But
educational research was not the only field to be influenced by what might be termed the "collaborative turn": it
also influenced the study of social arenas such as the workplace (CSCW) and the study of psychological functions
such as (group) creativity and memory.
          Whilst it is necessary for their development for fields of research to be pursued in a largely autonomous
manner,   the present  short  paper     is based    on the conjecture   that establishing links  between    them,   within   the
"collaborative turn" may be fruitful. We thus explore here synergies between research in two fields, Collaborative
Learning ("CL") and Collaborative Remembering ("CR") (e.g., Meade, Barnier, van Bergen, Harris, & Sutton,
2018). There are good prima facie reasons for this choice. The most basic reason is that, across diverse theoretical
frameworks, in some sense, learning is remembering. Secondly, there are many parallels between the two fields,
for example: (i) embodied communication (Hollingshead, 1998), rather than typewritten communication over the
network, produces superior CR; (ii) just as creating a "sense of community" is important in online educational
communities (Jones & Issroff, 2005), collective memories are means to create shared identities and community
(Hirst &   Echterhoff,  2012);    (iii) CR   sequences     in interaction (e.g.  Bietti & Baker,  2018b)    are  triggered   by
questions and have a structure analogous to collaborative problem sequences (Baker, 1995) and more generally,
exchange structures of grounding (Clark & Schaefer, 1989).
          . Collaboration involves taking the intentions, plans and goals of others into account (Knoblich, Butterfill,
& Sebanz, 2011). Therefore, collaboration plays a central role in guiding acts of going back in time in our minds
in social interactions. During shared remembering, collaboration influences the action and planning of interacting
partners and shapes interactive outcomes, such as when partner A asks "Do you remember the name of the
steakhouse we had lunch at last week?" B replies: "Yes, I do, its name was Cambalache", and A acknowledges
B: "Yes   you're   right, the place     with the    nice terrace near the  river".  This  short collaborative   remembering
sequence (Question => Answer => Acknowledgement) illustrates how interacting partners' intentions, plans and
goals come into play during collaborative remembering.
          We  focus  here  on   a single    aspect  that  establishes a   fundamental   link between    CL  and    CR:  that of
temporality. Remembering with other people involves re-evoking and re-creating a shared or partially shared past,
distributed amongst interacting partners (Meade et al., 2018). Such re-evoking of past experiences involves the
human     capacity for mental   `time      travel', the  "faculty  that  allows  humans   to   mentally    project themselves
backwards in time to re-live stages of their lives, or forward, to pre-live events" (Suddendorf & Corballis, 2007,
p. 299). Within the Learning Sciences, from a sociocultural perspective (Lemke, 2001), learning is understood in
terms of intersecting timescales of activity -- the hic et nunc, hours of a lesson, years, historical time -- and
trajectories of participation (Ludvigsen et al., 2011). In practical terms, from a longitudinal perspective, learning
sequences must build on previous ones and therefore on remembering them. Although such remembering is not
necessarily a collaborative enterprise, we explore here what combining CR into CL could bring to the latter. Our
main proposal is that collaborative remembering is the `cement' of collaborative learning -- that the former could
help to maintain joint focus and continuity over successive learning sequences. We firstly centre discussion on
timescales in CR, since this is less well represented in the CSCL research community. This leads to a concluding

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                          601                                                       © ISLS
discussion on temporality in CL and CR and proposals for integrating CR into (CS)CL.

Timescales in collaborative remembering
CR in CL situations involves students engaged in recalling past experiences, which may themselves have been
shared. Remembering with other people in collaborative learning situations often takes place in social interaction
unfolding over multiple and complementary timescales (Bietti & Sutton, 2015), from a micro timescale involved
in behavioural coordination processes (e.g., interactive behavioural matching) and a meso timescale responsible
for the  co-construction   of shared  memories    to  a  macro  timescale  that drives  the transmission    of   cultural
information and skills between students over longer periods of time.
Micro timescale: Coordination
When students jointly recall shared events in CL situations in the service of shared goals, there are complex
bodily, linguistic and cognitive processes unfolding in synchrony over a micro timescale. Research on specific
aspects of behavioural matching in dialogue (Pickering & Garrod, 2006) suggests that priming effects play a
central role in successful communication. In this context, successful communication refers to "the development
of similar representations in the interlocutors" (Pickering & Garrod, 2006, p. 203).    Only recently has research on
interactive behavioural matching focused on CR (Cienki, Bietti, & Kok, 2014). Bietti and Baker examined the
CR of a previous interactive encounter in which groups had to collaboratively design its dream house under certain
constraints relating to number of occupants, relationships, and funds (Bietti & Baker, 2018a). It was shown that
participants collaboratively remembered better those moments of collaborative creativity when they were more
jointly involved in elaborating the features of their design. That is, they remembered better what initially generated
most joint activity during the previous co-design phase. Based on these results, it was concluded that participants
did not necessarily collaboratively remember what was more important, but rather what initially generated most
joint activity during collaborative design.
Meso timescale: Collaboration
CR in CL goes beyond the coordination of verbal and non-verbal resources in synchronized fashion over time. At
some  point during    the collaborative activity, interactants  have to  collaboratively create  a  shared  account or
expression of the past in order to actually remember together, as distinct from doing something else (e.g. imagining
together). When  paying    particular attention   to the outcomes   of   collaboration occurring   at meso   timescale,
evidence suggests that communicative strategies and expertise determine recall performance in task-oriented
communication in collaborative tasks (e.g., Peltokorpi & Hood, 2018). For example, an experimental study that
compared   collaborative   recall performance   in   groups  of nonexpert  and  expert  pilots (Meade    et al., 2009),
collaborative facilitation was found in groups of expert pilots. This is to say that the performance of the groups of
expert pilots was better than the sum of the performances of each of their members working separately. This
positive effect was not found in the non-expert groups where collaborative inhibition was observed. Meade and
colleagues analysed the verbal interactions in both types of groups and discovered that one key factor in successful
collaboration for the expert group was the repetition of one's partner's contributions in order to make explicit
common ground and support further elaboration (Meade et al., 2009). This communicative strategy was absent in
the groups  of  non-experts   that  showed   collaborative   inhibition. The authors    suggested   that the   effective
communication found in the groups of expert pilots came from training and expertise in which the exchange of
information is crucial. The collaborative inhibition effect observed in non-experts' collaborative recall is a robust
finding  well documented    in the  literature (e.g., Barber,   Rajaram  &  Aron,  2010).   The  `retrieval disruption
hypothesis' (Basden, Basden, & Henry, 2001) has been the typical way of explaining the collaborative inhibition
effect: seeing or hearing other people's responses disrupts the way each individual organizes his/her retrieval
sequences and strategies, thus causing the collective failure to achieve potential (Barber et al., 2010).
Macro timescale: Cooperation
CR  in  CL  over a macro    timescale   (days, weeks    and months)  is  grounded both   in residual  traces of  social
interactions occurring over micro and meso timescales. Such a macro timescale deals with the transmission of
cultural information  (Sperber    & Hirschfeld,  2004)   and social learning (Bandura,   1977)  in  groups  and  larger
networks.  Bartlett's (1932)  seminal   research  on  how   individual recollections change    over repeated   retelling
provides a general framework for understanding the transmission of information and skills over time. A recent
study examined the influence of coordination (micro timescale) and collaborative (meso timescale) processes in
transmission chains (Tan & Fay, 2011) using the method of serial reproduction (Bartlett, 1932). In an interactive
condition, chains of participants interacted freely with one another to transmit narrative information from one
generation to the next. In a non-interactive condition, receivers of the information had to listen to audio-recordings
of narrations produced by senders (previous generation) and then recorded their own accounts of what they had

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     602                                                    © ISLS
listened to, which were passed on to a new generation of receivers for the same procedure. Transmission was
more accurate in the interactive condition than in the non-interactive condition, due to the effect of receivers'
behaviours, including backchannels or clarification questions.
         Transmission chains  have    also been   used  to simulate  social learning  (i.e. learning by      means of
observation of, or interaction with, another animal or its products) and the continuous improvement of cultural
artefacts (e.g. woven baskets, knots, paper airplanes, and stone tools) from one generation to the next (e.g.,
Caldwell, Atkinson, & Renner, 2016). Morgan et al. (2015) used an Oldowan tool-making task and six conditions
(reverse engineering; imitation; emulation; basic teaching; gestural teaching and verbal teaching) to investigate
the effectiveness of multiple teaching methods in social learning. The authors found that teaching helped to
improve transmissions. When compared the two conditions that involved instructed teaching (gestural and verbal
teaching), Morgan  et al.  reported  that co-present  verbal   teaching  promoted a  much   faster transmission    of
information  than gestural teaching.  The  facilitative effect of social interaction on the  accuracy     of narrative
information and skill information transmission shows that coordination and collaborative processes unfolding
over micro and meso timescales affect longer-term cooperative processes.

Concluding discussion: Temporality in collaborative remembering and
learning
Time is crucial to the analysis of learning from a Cultural-Historical Activity Theory ("CHAT") perspective
(Leont'ev, 1981), but is therein theorised somewhat differently from the account of time in CR presented above.
The micro, meso and macro levels considered above are part of "chronological" time. The link with "mental time
travel" in CR, mentioned above, is clear on this level, in that activity analysis seeks to understand how interactive
events on the micro/meso levels relate to--possibly widely separated--past and future events (Ludvigsen et al.,
2011). If complex activity systems can be considered as complex systems, this implies that learning `effects' may
(or may not) occur in a future that cannot be predicted beyond a short time-window. Lemke (2000) expresses such
a non-linear perspective as time itself becoming "folded" (ibid. p. 276). Similarly, Engeström and Toivainen
(2011) criticise most approaches to analysing interaction in learning situations as being concerned with narrowing
down analysis to the here-and-now, to very short slices of interaction with "no history and no future" (ibid. p. 35).
Furthermore, such (non-linear) chronological time in learning is distinguished from "cultural-historical" time,
which is embedded in the (knowledge) artefacts that we use and is the site of conflicts, ruptures and resulting
realignment of activity systems, corresponding to "learning by expanding" (Engeström, 1987). In sum, from a
CHAT perspective, analysing different types of learning requires relating events on different timescales and
conceptions of time. From the subjects' perspectives, too, "learning occurs when different timescales meet and
intersect, and meaning potential becomes transformed to common objects (physical and discursive)" (Ludvigsen
et al., 2011, p. 110). In collaborative situations, therefore, one way of creating such confluence of temporalities,
i.e., learning, is by collaborative remembering, that we characterise as the "cement" of collaborative learning.
         Returning to our above discussion, on the micro-level, just as CR has been shown to be an embodied,
phenomenon, integrating gesture, gaze and behavioural resonance, the same conclusion follows for CR in CL.
Furthermore,  one implication would   be   that  in computer-supported    CL/CR   across  the   Internet, facilitating
embodied social interaction would be important. On the meso-level, group memories do not go beyond the sum
of individual memories, in the case of non-experts, i.e. learners. This would imply that the possible value of CR
in CL should not be seen as simply promoting `better remembering', but rather in the elaboration of `zones' of
collective activity in which timescales coalesce. Finally, with respect to the macro-level of CR, research on social
learning via `transmission chains'  and   social networks   would  have  implications for   the organization   of  CL
between groups and possibly age-levels in schools (e.g., horizonal transmission between children). To conclude,
we have sought to establish and deepen possible links between research in CR and in CL. This has opened up
possibilities for future research on studying the integration of specifically organized collaborative remembering
sequences into CSCL, within a longitudinal approach. Since CR in the workplace enables team projects to stay
`on track', a similar function for CR in CL could occur within Project-Oriented Pedagogy.

References
Baker, M.J. (1995). Negotiation in collaborative problem-solving dialogues. In R. J. Beun, M.J. Baker, & M.
         Reiner (Eds.), Dialogue and Instruction: Modeling Interaction in Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 39-
         55). Berlin: Springer-Verlag
Barber, S. J., Rajaram, S., & Aron, A. (2010). When two is too many: Collaborative encoding impairs memory.
         Memory & Cognition, 38, 255-264
Bartlett, F. (1932). Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Basden, B. H., Basden, D. R., & Henry, S. (2001). Costs and benefits of collaborative remembering. Applied

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   603                                                     © ISLS
         Cognitive Psychology, 1, 497-507.
Bietti, L.M.   &  Baker,  M.J. (2018a).    Collaborating  to remember    collaborative   design:  An  exploratory   study.
         Memory Studies, 11 (2), 225-244.
Bietti, L.M.   &   Baker, M.J.   (2018b).   Multimodal   processes   of joint  remembering     in complex  collaborative
         activities. In M.    Meade,    A. Barnier, P. van Bergen,   C.  B. Harris   & J. Sutton   (Eds.), Collaborative
         remembering: Theories, Research and Applications (pp. 177-196). New York: Oxford University Press.
Bietti L.M. & Sutton, J. (2015). Interacting to remember at multiple timescales: Coordination, collaboration,
         cooperation and culture in joint remembering. Interaction Studies, 16 (3), 419-450.
Caldwell C.A., Atkinson, M. & Renner, E. (2016). Experimental approaches to studying cumulative cultural
         evolution, Current Directions in Psychological Science, 25 (3), pp. 191-195.
Cienki, A., Bietti, L.M. & Kok, K. (2014). Multimodal alignment during collaborative remembering. Memory
         Studies, 7 (3), 354-369.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259-294
Dillenbourg P. (1999) What do you mean by collaborative learning? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborative-
         learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches (pp.1-19). Oxford: Elsevier.
Dillenbourg,   P., Baker, M.J.,  Blaye,    A., &  O'Malley,  C.  (1996)  The   evolution  of   research on collaborative
         learning.   In  E.   Spada     &  P. Reiman   (Eds.),  Learning    in Humans     and   Machine:    Towards     an
         Interdisciplinary Learning Science (pp. 189- 211). Oxford: Elsevier.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by Expanding: An Activity-Theoretical Approach to Developmental Research.
         Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit Oy.
Engeström,    Y.   & Toivainen,      H. (2011).   Co-configurational  design   of learning instrumentalities.    In In  S.
         Ludvigsen, A. Lund, I. Rasmussen & R. Säljö (Eds.) Learning Across Sites: New tools, infrastructures
         and practices (pp. 33-52). London: Routledge.
Hirst, W. & Echterhoff, G. (2012). Remembering in conversations: The social sharing and reshaping of memories.
         Annual Review of Psychology, 63, 55-69.
Hollingshead, A.B. (1998). Communication, learning and retrieval in transactive memory systems. Journal of
         Experimental Social Psychology, 34, 423-442.
Jones,  A.   & Issroff, K.  (2005).     Learning  technologies:  Affective  and   social issues   in computer-supported
         collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 44(4), 395-408.
Knoblich, G., Butterfill, S., & Sebanz, N. (2011). Psychological research on joint action: theory and data. In B.
         Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 54 (pp. 59-101). Burlington: Academic Press.
Lemke, J.L. (2000). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities and meanings in ecosocial systems. Mind,
         Culture and Activity, 7(4), 273-290.
Lemke, J. L. (2001). The long and the short of it: Comments on multiple timescale studies of human activity.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences 10(1-2), 193-202.
Leont'ev, A. N (1981). The problem of activity in psychology. In J. V. Werstch (Ed.) The concept of activity in
         soviet psychology, (pp. 37-71). Armonk, NY: Sharp.
Ludvigsen,    S.,  Rasmussen,    I., Krange,   I, Moen,   A. &   Middleton,    D.  (2011). Intersecting    trajectories of
         participation: temporality and learning. In S. Ludvigsen, A. Lund, I. Rasmussen & R. Säljö (Eds.),
         Learning Across Sites: New tools, infrastructures and practices (pp 105-121). London: Routledge.
Meade, M., Barnier, A., van Bergen, P., Harris, C.B, & Sutton, J. (Eds.) (2018). Collaborative Remembering:
         Theories, Research and Applications. New York: Oxford University Press.
Meade, M.L., Nokes, T.J. & Morrow, D.G. (2009). Expertise promotes facilitation on a collaborative memory
         task. Memory 17, 39 -48.
Morgan, T. J. H., Uomini, N. T., Rendell, L. E., Chouinard-Thuly, L., Street, S. E., Lewis, H. M., Cross, C. P.,
         Evans, C., Kearney, R., de la Torre, I., Whiten, A., & Laland, K. N. (2015). Experimental evidence for
         the co-evolution of hominin tool-making teaching and language. Nature communications, 6, [6029].
Peltokorpi, V. & Hood, A. C. (2018). Communication in theory and research on transactive memory systems: A
         literature review. Topics in Cognitive Science. https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12359
Pickering, M.J. & Garrod, S. (2006). Alignment as the basis for successful communication. Research on Language
         and Computation, 4 (2-3), 203-228.
Sperber  D.   &   Hirschfeld, L. (2004)    The  cognitive foundations   of  cultural stability and   diversity. Trends  in
         Cognitive Sciences, 8, 40-46.
Suddendorf, T. & Corballis, M.C. (2007). The evolution of foresight: What is mental time travel and is it unique
         to humans? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30, 299-313.
Tan,    R., &   Fay,  N.  (2011).    Cultural   transmission  in  the   laboratory:  Agent   interaction   improves     the
         intergenerational transfer of information. Evolution & Human Behavior, 32 (6), 399-406.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       604                                                     © ISLS
