Embedding Computational Thinking in the Elementary Classroom:
         An Extended Collaborative Teacher Learning Experience

                    Diane Jass Ketelhut, University of Maryland, College Park, djk@umd.edu
                    Emily Hestness, University of Maryland, College Park, hestness@umd.edu
                        Kelly Mills, University of Maryland, College Park, kmills1@umd.edu

          Abstract:  We    used  design-based   research to investigate  an  extended  professional   learning
          experience    to prepare  teachers  to embed     computational  thinking  in  elementary    science.
          Opportunities to interact synchronously in a community of practice - including through in-
          person   engagement    in embodied   challenges,  discussion, and  resource  sharing,    appeared to
          productively support teacher preparedness to embed CT in their science teaching. However,
          asynchronous collaboration via an online platform was less effective. We describe planned
          adjustments for future iterations of the program.

          Keywords: community of practice, computational thinking, science teacher education

Introduction
The centrality of computing in modern science has elevated the importance of computational thinking (CT) as a
critical skill for everyone  (Wing,   2006).  Elementary   teachers  have   the potential to play  an essential role in
developing foundational CT competencies among all learners. However, there is a fundamental need for effective
approaches to supporting teacher learning in this novel domain (Hestness, Ketelhut, McGinnis, & Plane, 2018).
Because CT is heavily embedded with technological tools, we are particularly interested in the role of CSCL
environments    for facilitating teacher  learning experiences.   We    are  exploring the   research question: "What
computer   supported    design elements   can help promote     collaborative learning  for enacting   CT, a novel  and
potentially intimidating topic, in elementary science?" Because communities of practice (CoP; Lave & Wenger,
1991)    have  shown  promise    to support  novices (i.e. teachers) enact   new  practices  (i.e. CT-infused   science
pedagogies),   we   are seeking  to cultivate a  community  of  practice among    veteran  and preservice   elementary
teachers to support teacher learning related to CT integration in the classroom. To realize this goal, we created the
CT Science     Teaching    Inquiry  Group (STIGCT),  a   collaborative learning  experience   designed  to  create new
knowledge of effective strategies to embed CT in the elementary science classroom.

Methods
We adopted a design-based research (DBR) approach, entailing iterative cycles of design and analysis. For the
first iteration of the STIGCT, we designed and facilitated seven 90-minute in-person professional development
sessions that met monthly throughout the school year. The sessions began as primarily facilitator-directed, in
which members of our team led collaborative learning activities and discussion. Midway through the year, we
shifted the design of the sessions to be primarily participant-directed, in which participants worked together to
create, share, and discuss learning activities to support CT integration. Between sessions, participants were invited
to collaborate by sharing ideas and resources via an online platform (piazza.com). Participants (N=24) included
practicing teachers (n=11) and preservice teachers (PSTs; n=13) interested in learning about integrating CT into
their science teaching.
          We used qualitative research methods (Miles, Huberman, & Saldana, 2014) to analyze the session plans
and field notes for each STIGCT session, identifying key design elements included throughout the PD experience.
Next, we analyzed data including field notes, written reflections collected at the end of each session, and focus
group interviews collected at the end of the full experience. Where the focal design elements were referenced, we
coded evidence of how (or whether) they appeared to promote collaborative learning toward CT integration in the
elementary science classroom. We used the analysis to make inferences about effective strategies for PST learning
CT integration, and to inform the redesign of the STIGCT for ongoing study.

Findings
We describe how three focal design elements appeared to contribute to teacher collaborative learning related to
CT integration in elementary science. A summary and examples are provided in Figure 1.
          First, we found that collaborative engagement in hands-on activities, both computer-supported and not
computer-supported, appeared to foster collaborative learning about CT conceptually and improve participants'
perceptions of their CT understandings. However, we did not encounter clear evidence that this design element

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      605                                                   © ISLS
on its own supported teachers in transferring conceptual CT understandings into their own classroom practice.
        Second,   incorporating intentional  discussion    opportunities within    the sessions helped  participants
generate ideas about how CT concepts could relate to the teaching of elementary science curriculum topics. In
addition, preservice teachers expressed a sense of empowerment when able to learn from experienced teachers
about how they were applying (or considering applying) CT in their classrooms. We encouraged participants to
continue sharing their CT integration ideas with one another outside of the in-person sessions, but participants
rarely made use of the online platform which was set up for this purpose.
        Last, sharing resources to support CT integration helped participants design lesson plans to enact CT in
their elementary science classrooms. During initial sessions, facilitators modeled various CT learning activities
and resources. During later sessions, participants codesigned and presented original CT learning activities for
integration. We found that both forms of resource sharing appeared to promote a sense of empowerment that
participants understood and had the resources to enact strategies for applying CT in their classrooms. We noted,
however, that the participant-designed lesson plans varied in the extent to which they accurately represented CT
or integrated it into curricular content in science. As with the discussion design element, participants rarely made
use of the online platform to share resources between sessions, which was one of its intended purposes.

Table 1: Element, activity example, and example participant response

  Element          Activity examples                        Example participant response

  CT               -Teachers collaboratively                "[Problem decomposition was... a really big and
  sensemaking      manipulate an online ecosystem to        newer topic for a lot of us... I said something out loud
  through          learn about CT practice of models        to the class... I was approaching being right, but I
  collaborative    and simulations;                         was maybe 65% right, and you were like, "Um, let me
  challenges       -Teachers "program" a blindfolded        refine that." And then I was like, "Oh, okay. Now I get
  and              teammate to walk a specified path,       it a little bit more."
  debriefing       modeling problem decomposition

  Discussing       -Teachers examine science                "[At first, I wondered] how realistic is it to think that
  classroom        standards and discuss opportunities      people are implementing these things in the
  applications     for CT integration                       classroom for real? ...Seeing teachers here [in the
  of CT            -Teachers encouraged to update           STIG] that have taught for many years kind of
  concepts         each other asynchronously on CT          implementing it [CT] .... I think it just made it... seem
                   integration efforts via online           like it was more attainable."
                   platform

  Sharing          - Teachers are invited to borrow          "I really liked the activity of having people create
  resources to     educational robotics tools for use in    lessons and then teach it to us. Because... it gave
  support CT       their classrooms and report back         people the opportunity to learn from different
  integration in   - Teachers co-author and present         teachers, people they might not know. But also, I
  elementary       learning activities (lesson plans) that  really liked learning how different people might take
  science          integrate CT into elementary science     a lesson and interpret it in their own way. I thought it
                                                            was really helpful."

Conclusions and implications
The STIGCT   design elements  offered    affordances and   limitations  relevant   to promoting  a CoP  focused   on
collaborative learning of how to enact CT in elementary science. Specifically, we found that hands on experiences,
discussions and resource sharing were helpful in facilitating collaborative learning around CT. However, we
struggled to maintain our CoP virtually, with low participation in the asynchronous, online space.      We plan to
modify future iterations of the STIGCT by: 1) Retaining the collaborative design of CT-infused elementary science
lessons to promote participant-created resource sharing, with greater facilitator support and more consistency; 2)
Encouraging participants to test participant-created resources in their classroom and to share their experiences
online between   in-person sessions;  3) Considering  an    alternate, more familiar    online platform to promote
participant discussion between sessions, and incorporating the online discussion into in-person sessions; and 4)
Inviting teachers from the first iteration of the STIGCT to continue their participation in the second year and serve
as mentors for newcomers. Through our ongoing process of design and refinement, we plan to use our learning to

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   606                                                    © ISLS
develop empirically-supported resources, tools, and measures to connect physical and virtual spaces in order to
support teacher education around CT integration in elementary science.

References
Hestness, E., Ketelhut, D. J., McGinnis, J. R., & Plane, J. (2018). Professional knowledge building within an
       elementary teacher professional development experience on computational thinking in science education.
       Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 26(3), 411-435.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2013). Qualitative data analysis. Sage.
Wing, J. M. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 49(3), 33-35.

Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.1639891.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 607                                                 © ISLS
