An Initial Look at the Developing Culture of Online Global Meet-ups
   in Establishing a Collaborative, STEM Media-Making Community

                Danielle P. Espino, Pepperdine University, danielle.espino@pepperdine.edu
                      Seung B. Lee, Pepperdine University, seung.lee@pepperdine.edu
                   Brendan R. Eagan, University of Wisconsin-Madison, beagan@wisc.edu
                   Eric R. Hamilton, Pepperdine University, eric.hamilton@pepperdine.edu

        Abstract: This project examines a network of informal digital makerspace clubs with over 100
        adolescent participants across four continents. A key component to developing the community
        for collaboration was the use of online global meet-ups, or facilitated video conference sessions
        where participants  from    different sites share  projects and  feedback. Meet-ups  were  key to
        establishing social trust and motivating project collaboration across sites. This paper examines
        participant discourse at different stages of the community formation process. Data from three
        online meetings with U.S. and Kenyan students were analyzed using epistemic network analysis
        (ENA). Findings show significant changes in the patterns of discourse corresponding to the
        development   of   the community      over  time.  The  initial emphasis   on  self-awareness and
        superficial information sharing shifted toward peer teaching and knowledge acquisition after
        six months. These observations demonstrate how the depth of interactions within online global
        meet-up culture evolved into more substantive interactions towards collaborative learning.

Introduction
Technology has impacted the education space in offering both innovative mediums (such as online courses and
platforms) and tools (portable devices, tablets, web applications) for learning. As the world adjusts to further
technology development,    so  will  future learning   environments  evolve. This  study  examines how   computer
supported  collaborative learning    (CSCL)   takes  place through   an  international network of informal  digital
makerspace clubs focused on STEM topics. Participants hail from after school clubs in six countries on four
continents, using technology to interact and collaborate both synchronously and asynchronously on the creation
of STEM-oriented   digital artifacts across   borders. One key  method    of synchronous  communication    that has
emerged  from this CSCL    community    is  the online  global meet-up.   These meet-ups  have  become  critical in
fostering a sense of community within the network, enhancing the collaboration experience.
        Sense of community was defined by McMillan and Chavis (1986) as the feeling of belonging to a
particular group, whereby participants share a feeling of mutual influence and emotional connectedness as well
as the belief that their needs will be fulfilled through membership in the group. Applying this concept to the
learning setting, both physical and virtual, Rovai (2002) conceptualizes the classroom community to consist of
four components: spirit, trust, interaction, and the shared expectation of learning. Under this framework, spirit
refers to elements such as membership, cohesion and friendship that enable students to support and challenge one
another. Trust not only encompasses the confidence to rely on one another, but also the genuine interest and
concern that members have for each other. Interactions may be driven by a focus on task completion or by
socioemotional factors such as empathy or sharing of personal information. Here, social presence--the extent to
which a person is considered to be "real" in the virtual communication contexts--plays an important role for
allowing meaningful interaction and collaboration among participants (Gunawardena, 1995). Lastly, a sense of
community requires the belief on the part of the members that their learning needs are being met through their
active involvement (Rovai, 2002).

Development of online global meet-ups
Online global meet-ups are video conference calls that provide an opportunity for participants to communicate
synchronously to share, exchange and collaborate. These meet-ups are typically facilitated by a peer and become
global when participants from at least 2 different countries join. Prior to the meet-up, participants indicate their
participation by listing their name and project topics on an online agenda, then return to that agenda for the
conference call link. The facilitator uses the agenda to anticipate who will be present and what topics will be
discussed. At the end of the meet-up, participants write reflections on their experience at the bottom of the agenda.
        The idea of global meet-ups for collaboration developed spontaneously. There was a desire from both
the teachers and participants to "see" each other synchronously. Initially, these meet-ups were meant as one-time
introductory meetings. However, the desire to meet synchronously continued and more took place successfully
out of determination  from  the participants   and  teachers to coordinate.  Participants were willing  to meet  at

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    608                                                  © ISLS
inconvenient times amidst the time differences for the opportunity to connect. At initial meet-ups, examples of
previously made artifacts, such as videos, were shared by participants who were part of a previous program at
their school on media-making on STEM topics. This prompted students at other sites to work on their own media-
making  skills and  have  something  to   present at the next meet-up.  For   example,  in one club  site in Kenya,
participants who started without any experience in media-making were later able to present at least one or two
video projects consistently at meet-ups.
         Many refinements to the organizational structure of meet-ups helped to shape the current global meet-up
culture. As many participants and teachers initially encountered challenges with utilizing the video conference
software, a technology protocol was developed as a resource for participants to review in advance to minimize
technical difficulties undermining the meet-up experience. Early meet-ups had no limitation on the number of
participants nor   required advance  notice    of attendance. This   resulted in  large groups that  limited  active
participation by individuals and created large periods of silence that required increased inclusive techniques by
the facilitator. Following those experiences, Google Doc online agendas were developed as a place for participants
to indicate their participation in advance and limit the size to four to five students to allow for richer interactions
from each participant. Online agendas not only served as an organizing tool, but a common place for written
reflections immediately following the end of the meeting. By visually observing the synchronous updating of
written reflections by fellow  participants,   students and  teachers alike were  further  motivated to   write their
reflections. Initial meet-ups were facilitated by the research team, but gradually transitioned to student facilitators
after supportive training and mentoring. These adjustments allowed for predictable structural stability with meet-
ups optimized for participants to focus on their interactions with one another.
         Online global meet-ups have emerged as a key component to enhancing this CSCL community. The
opportunity for visual, synchronous communication both motivated and built social trust among the participants
which has increased the depth of interactions with time and experience. As more meet-ups took place, a shared
understanding of the culture and behavior at meet-ups emerged. This included a shared understanding of the roles
within the meet-ups, such as a facilitator that guides the conversation and presenter(s) who share their project.
Increased social trust built from meet-up experiences appeared to increase the comfort in interacting with one
another to be more collaborative and curious.

Methods
Epistemic network    analysis (ENA)    is a quantitative  ethnographic  technique   for  modeling the structure   of
connections in data. ENA assumes: (1) that it is possible to systematically identify a set of meaningful features in
the data; (2) that the data has local structure (conversations); and (3) that an important feature of the data is the
way that codes are connected to one another within conversations (Shaffer, 2017; Shaffer, Collier, & Ruis, 2016;
Shaffer & Ruis, 2017). ENA models the connections between coded constructs by quantifying the co-occurrence
of codes  within   conversations, producing     a  weighted   network  of co-occurrences,   along with    associated
visualizations for each unit of analysis in the data. ENA analyzes all of the networks simultaneously, resulting in
a set of networks that can be compared both visually and statistically. The ENA algorithm uses a moving window
to construct a network model for each line in the data, showing how codes in the current line of an utterance are
connected to codes that occur within the recent temporal context (Siebert-Evenstone et al., 2017), defined in this
model as 5 lines (each line plus the 4 previous lines) within a given conversation. The resulting networks were
aggregated for all lines for each participant.
         The data set used in this analysis came from three online global meet-ups: the first global meet-up that
took place in March 2017, and later meet-ups in May and October 2017. The March 2017 meet-up included 22
total participants across two sites in the  U.S.   and  two sites in Kenya.   The May   2017 meet-up  had    16 total
participants from one site in Kenya and two sites in the U.S. The October 2018 meet-up included four participants
from one site each in Kenya and the U.S. Meet-ups were transcribed and each line spoken by participants was
considered an utterance. Binary coding was used to code for the presence of seven constructs: CURIOSITY, SELF-
AWARENESS, FEEDBACK, CONTENT-FOCUS, PARTICIPATORY TEACHING, KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION, and SOCIAL
DISPOSITION. A total of 674 utterances were coded separately by two raters.      This was followed by a process of
social moderation, which allowed the two raters to reach agreement on the coding of each utterance in the data
(Frederiksen et al., 1998; Herrenkohl & Cornelius, 2013). The coded data was then uploaded onto the ENA web-
tool (http://app.epistemicnetwork.org) for visualization and analysis.

Results
Figure 1 presents the individual ENA network models representing the discourse patterns of the three meet-ups
held in March, May and October of 2017. The network model for the March meet-up (in red) depicts a prominent
connection between CONTENT-FOCUS in the center and SELF-AWARENESS to the left. While thinner lines link

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    609                                                  © ISLS
other constructs, including CURIOSITY, it can be seen that virtually no connections are made to KNOWLEDGE
ACQUISITION and PARTICIPATORY TEACHING. This can be attributed to the introductory nature of the March meet-
up, where students--meeting for the first time--mainly shared their interests around STEM topics. The May
meet-up   (in blue), however,     shows  strong associations between   CONTENT-FOCUS,    FEEDBACK      and SOCIAL
DISPOSITION.   Slightly   thinner  connections  can  be  observed  linking these   constructs to   CURIOSITY     and
KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION as well as to SELF-AWARENESS. The model is indicative of the increasing willingness
of participants to interact socially and to offer suggestions about each other's projects and presentations. In the
network model for October (in purple), it is possible to see that the connections to SELF-AWARENESS have all but
disappeared, whereas the most prominent associations have been made between CONTENT-FOCUS, CURIOSITY and
FEEDBACK. A relatively thick connection is shown between CONTENT-FOCUS and SOCIAL DISPOSITION as well as
PARTICIPATORY TEACHING. The model has shifted further to the right, representing a greater emphasis in the
participants' discourse on the learning and peer-teaching dimensions.
          Figure 2 displays the means of the ENA network models (squares) with their confidence intervals (dotted
lines) for the three meet-ups. The plotted points (dots) represent weighted centroid of the networks for each
participant.  The x-axis   distinguishes between  connections  to SELF-AWARENESS     on  the  left and connections
between   the codes  KNOWLEDGE       ACQUISITION, PARTICIPATORY    TEACHING,  and   CURIOSITY     on the right. The
network mean for the March meet-up is located on the left, indicating stronger linkages to SELF-AWARENESS. The
means of the May and October networks are situated further to the right of the ENA space, which signifies an
increase in the prevalence of connections made to KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION, PARTICIPATORY TEACHING, and
CURIOSITY. Statistical comparison of the location of the means--conducted through a two sample t-test assuming
unequal   variances--showed   significant  differences along  the x-axis between   the March  and   May  meet-ups,
t(35.41) = 5.34, p < 0.001, d=1.64, as well as between the May and October meet-ups, t(16.00) = 7.10, p < 0.001,
d = 1.98.

                  (a)                                    (b)                                  (c)
 Figure 1. ENA network models for three online global meet-ups in (a) March, (b) May, and (c) October 2017.

    Figure 2. Plotted points, network means, and confidence intervals for the three online global meet-ups.

Discussion
Findings from the epistemic network analysis show significant changes in the patterns of discourse corresponding
to the increase in the sense of community over time. A progressive development of the elements comprising a
sense of community according to Rovai (2002) can be identified across meet-ups from March to October 2017,
as shown in Table 1. Sharing information about themselves and their interests during the initial session--as
captured in the connection between SELF-AWARENESS and CONTENT-FOCUS--allowed the participants to build
comradery    and  foster a spirit of membership   in the group.   The interactions were  mainly    task-driven, with
discussions focusing on STEM topics. The May meet-up reflected a greater presence of pro-social interactions
among the participants (SOCIAL DISPOSITION) as well as a growing sense of trust. This can be observed in their
willingness to seek clarification and provide substantive comments about each other's projects, as demonstrated

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    610                                                 © ISLS
by the   linkages between   FEEDBACK,    CURIOSITY    and CONTENT-FOCUS.     Participation in the meet-up  has also
created learning opportunities for students (KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION). The October session presents a similar
pattern, only with    the learning dimension   displaying a  stronger emphasis on  peer  teaching (PARTICIPATORY
TEACHING). These observations demonstrate how the depth of interactions within online global meet-up culture
evolved into more substantive interactions towards collaborative learning.

Table 1: Development of elements comprising a sense of community from March to October 2017

           Elements of Sense of Community              March 2017          May 2017           October 2017
              (Adapted from Rovai, 2002)                Meet-up            Meet-up             Meet-up
      Spirit of membership                                  9                 9                    9
      Trust                                                                   9                    9
                      Task-driven                           9                 9                    9
      Interaction     Socioemotionally-driven                                 9                    9
                       Knowledge-based                                        9                    9
      Learning         Collaborative                                                               9

         These results contribute to a larger examination of learning beyond the traditional classroom experience.
Future workforce environments are likely to embody the characteristics of integrated technology use and global
interaction and collaboration embodied in this project, making the findings pioneering and relevant for future
learning environments (Marope, 2017). Learning should go beyond the passing of knowledge acquisition from
teacher to student, and be an engaged and involved process for the student (Freire, 1972). The peer-driven, CSCL
settings from this project allows students to be actively engaged in their own learning, as observed by the sense
of community developed by an online meet-up culture among participants which demonstrated increased curiosity
and participatory teaching. Research on such learning environments set the stage for future, innovative approaches
to education.

References
Frederiksen,  J.  R., Sipusic, M.,   Sherin, M., &   Wolfe, E. W.  (1998). Video portfolio  assessment:   Creating a
         framework for viewing the functions of teaching. Educational Assessment, 5, 4, 225-97.
Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Herder and Herder.
Gunawardena, C. N. (1995). Social presence theory and implications of interaction and collaborative learning in
         computer conferences. International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 1(2­3), 147­166.
Herrenkohl,   L.  R.,  &   Cornelius,  L.    (2013). Investigating elementary  students'   scientific and  historical
         argumentation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22, 3, 413-461.
McMillan,   D.   W.,  &   Chavis,  D. M.  (1986).  Sense  of  community:   A definition and   theory. Special Issue:
         Psychological sense of community, I: Theory and concepts. Journal of Community Psychology, 14(1),
         6­23.
Marope, M. (2017).     Future competences for future generations.   International Bureau of Education: In Focus, 2,
         80-87.   Retrieved from http://ibe-infocus.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/In-Focus-2017.pdf
Rovai, A. P. (2002). Building sense of community at a distance. International Review of Research in Open &
         Distance Learning, 3(1), 1­16.
Shaffer, D. W. (2017). Quantitative ethnography. Madison, WI: Cathcart Press.
Shaffer, D. W., Collier, W., & Ruis, A. R. (2016). A tutorial on epistemic network analysis: Analyzing the
         structure of connections in cognitive, social, and interaction data. Journal of Learning Analytics, 3(3),
         9­45.
Shaffer, D. W., & Ruis, A. R. (2017). Epistemic Network Analysis: A worked example of theory-based learning
         analytics. Handbook of Learning Analytics, 175­187.
Siebert-Evenstone, A., Arastoopour Irgens, G., Collier, W., Swiecki, Z., Ruis, A. R., & Williamson Shaffer, D.
         (2017).  In  search   of conversational  grain size:  Modelling semantic  structure  using   moving  stanza
         windows. Journal of Learning Analytics, 4(3), 123­139.

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge funding support from the US National Science Foundation for the work this
paper reports. Views appearing in this paper do not reflect those of the funding agency.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     611                                                  © ISLS
