Application of the IBE-UNESCO Global Competences Framework in
 Assessing STEM-focused, Global Collaborative Learning within a
                          Digital Makerspace Environment

                  Danielle P. Espino, Seung B. Lee, Lauren Van Tress and Eric R. Hamilton
      danielle.espino@pepperdine.edu, seung.lee@pepperdine.edu, lauren.vantress@pepperdine.edu,
                                        eric.hamilton@pepperdine.edu
                                           Pepperdine University

       Abstract: This paper utilizes the UNESCO International Bureau of Education's seven global
       competences    framework    for assessing  a global,  computer-supported  collaborative    STEM
       learning project. The discourse from a meet-up between students in Kenya and the U.S was
       coded with these global competences. Epistemic network analysis (ENA) is used to evaluate for
       meaningful connections between the codes. Upon analysis of the data, lifelong learning and
       trans-disciplinarity exhibit the strongest connection, which supports the fundamental goals of
       the project ­ fostering critical thinking among students globally through media-making and
       discussion of STEM subjects. Furthermore, the two groups of students ­ Kenyan and American
       ­   demonstrated different  strengths; the Kenyan   students focused on  self-agency and    using
       diverse tools, while American students were content-driven. These complementary behaviors
       collectively exemplify the seven global competences and are an example of building skillsets
       for future workforce environments.

Introduction
In the context of a rapidly changing world, future workplace environments demand evolving needs and skillsets.
In 2015, the United Nations adopted its 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, comprising 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) to address global social and economic issues. SDG #4 identifies quality education as
a means to improve quality of life and empower talent to develop solutions to the world's problems. In particular,
Target 4.4 within this quality education goal seeks to "substantially increase the number of youth and adults who
have relevant skills, including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship"
(United Nations, n.d.). Target 4.4 advocates a call for education to better prepare future generations with the skills
and knowledge for anticipated workforce needs.
       This paper focuses on a project that involves global, computer-supported collaboration within a network
of informal, digital makerspace clubs focused on science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
learning. The network is comprised of adolescent youth participants overseen by teachers that provide oversight
for the club sites. Participants engage in developing multimedia artifacts around STEM topics and engage in
online global meet-ups in their collaboration efforts. In fostering an intersection of learning, technology and cross-
cultural collaboration among the future generation, this project offers a unique opportunity to address competency
needs related to SDG4 in the context of a changing industry and workforce landscape. The global competences
identified by the International Bureau of Education  (IBE)   at the United Nations Educational,     Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) are used as a framework for this analysis.
       The    global  competences    framework    was  synthesized    following  extensive       consultation  with
internationally recognized thought leaders in education, technology, industry, and the workforce.    Published in
2017 under the title "Future competences for future generations," the framework seeks to address the anticipated
needs of the Industry 4.0 future, which involves navigating a more complex integration and optimization of
technology in the work environment and social life (Marope, 2017). This evolving industry outlook calls for a
shift in the learning paradigm to develop capacities to "interactively mobilize information, data, technology,
knowledge, skills, values, and attitudes, and then use them ethically to engage effectively and act across diverse
21st century contexts for individual, collective, and global good" (Marope, 2017, p. 86). These capacities are
reflected in the framework's seven global competences to address the need for "multifaceted, transdisciplinary,
technology savvy, and integrated competences" (Marope, 2017, p. 86). Within each global competence (also
referred to as macro-competence) is a subset of micro-competences that are adapted based on context.  The global
and micro-competences are illustrated by utterances from the transcript utilized for this paper:
   x   Lifelong learning: The adaptive micro-competences include curiosity, creativity and critical thinking.
       This is exemplified in the project as a willingness to learn through curiosity, creativity, critical thought,
       seen in devising projects, while curiosity and critical thinking are expressed through interactions, such

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  612                                                    © ISLS
       as asking questions and expressing opinions during video conference calls. Sample utterance from the
       transcript data: "Please I don't know anything about Scratch and you claim (it) is the most basic coding
       language...will you please explain the Scratch a little bit?" [Kenyan participant]
   x   Self-agency: The adaptive micro-competences include initiative/drive, motivation, responsibility, and
       endurance/grit/resilience. This is exemplified in the project as participants' eagerness to act on their
       interest, as seen through the creation/execution of media artifacts, and expressed in dialogue in video
       conference calls. Sample utterance: "Now I think okay you have the interests of making people to know
       coding and it's starts with you now that you've informed me now that you've informed me can I then
       inform another person and then..." [Kenyan participant]
   x   Interactively using diverse tools and resources: The adaptive micro-competences include impactful
       use of resources, efficient use of resources, and responsible consumption.         This is exemplified in the
       project as finding different ways to learn and accomplish a task (e.g. looking at ways to learn coding;
       making use of tools around them; discovering new ways of using resources available). Sample utterance:
       "...I think the best language to use for coding is Python because just gives you a hint on how coding is
       done so if you have a phone you can just download a version...the online version of Python and start
       creating codes." [Kenyan participant]
   x   Interacting     with  others:   The  adaptive   micro-competences     include teamwork,     collaboration and
       negotiation.    Interaction is the heart of what motivates the students to participate in the project. This is
       further    seen in  interest to work together  on  projects, listening to one another  and  giving feedback,
       negotiating roles to accomplish a task, asking for expertise and offering help and suggestions.        Sample
       utterance: "Now...you have the interests of making people to know coding and it starts with you... you've
       informed me...I then inform another person and then..." [Kenyan participant]
   x   Interacting in and with the world: The adaptive micro-competences include being local and global,
       balancing rights with privileges, and balancing freedoms with respect. This is exemplified in the project
       as raising cross-cultural awareness and recognizing and learning from what makes us the same and
       different    (e.g.  finding  commonalities   in   subject matter   regardless of   context, such  as   finding
       commonalities in their education systems). Sample utterance: "You are in an already developed country
       and we are in a third world country such as Kenya...what do you think should be implemented so that
       kids who are very passionate...to learn coding at a very tender age as you started?" [Kenyan participant]
   x   Trans-disciplinarity: The adaptive micro-competences include STEM, humanities, and social sciences.
       This is exemplified in the project as a focus on academic subject matter, making connections to the
       practical world around them (e.g. how coding helps create games to promote learning in other subjects;
       exploring the science behind music). Sample utterance: "We start with Scratch then we move to xSpace
       and then we move into Java or Python." [U.S. participant]
   x   Multi-literateness: The adaptive micro-competences include reading & writing, numeracy and digital
       literacy. This is exemplified in the project as learning expressed in action through creation of tangible
       multimedia artifacts that synthesize their knowledge and skillsets (e.g. videos, games, presentations).
       Sample utterance: "What 3D coding is we code something that turns into a virtual object and then we
       run it through a software that makes it out of plastic and it turns into a physical object." [U.S. participant]

Methods
In order to meet the needs of an evolving future workforce, education will need to go beyond the acquisition of
distinct pieces of knowledge, skills and experiences to foster environments where learners can "intelligently make
connections across elements of competence, then integrate them and apply them interactively" (Marope, 2017, p.
86-87). Therefore, it will be increasingly important for educational research to examine the interrelationships that
exist between cognitive, behavioral, affective and social competences.
       In    this context, this paper   utilizes epistemic network   analysis  (ENA),   a technique  in  quantitative
ethnography that uses visualization and statistical methods to identify meaningful patterns in discourse. ENA is a
methodology   grounded    in epistemic  frames   theory, which   posits that "learning can be characterized   by  the
structure of connections that students make among elements of authentic practice" (Shaffer & Ruis, 2017, p. 182).
ENA operationalizes this theoretical approach by modeling the connections between salient constructs in the data,
particularly by examining the co-occurrences of codes within conversations (Shaffer, 2017). ENA also allows for
quantitative comparisons     between   epistemic  network  models   through   the calculated  centroids,  which   are
determined by the strength of connections between the codes. Furthermore, in its ability to capture complex

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     613                                                  © ISLS
learning processes as  they occur,  ENA   also  provides   an effective   methodology  for conducting     learning
assessments that are both summative and formative (Shaffer et al., 2009).
         The data for this analysis was collected from an 80-minute video conference call (described in the project
as a "meet-up") held in May 2017 between 12 participants from project sites in Kenya (4 students, 1 adult) and
the U.S. (4 students, 3 adults). In the meet-up, participants shared knowledge and experiences about computer
programming tools and languages, including Scratch, Python and HTML. The discourse data was coded using
UNESCO's seven future global competences: lifelong learning; self-agency; interactively using diverse tools and
resources; interacting with others; interacting in and with the world; trans-disciplinarity; and multi-literateness. A
total of 235 utterances were coded by three raters for the presence of the seven global competences. This was
followed by a process of social moderation undertaken for each utterance, which allowed the three raters to reach
consensus on the coding of the data (Frederiksen et al., 1998; Herrenkohl & Cornelius, 2013). The ENA web-tool
was used for visualizing and analyzing the coded data.

Results
Figure 1 presents the ENA model of all participants in the meet-up, where nodes represent the global competences
and the thickness of the edges indicate the strength of connection between them. The strongest connection can be
observed between lifelong learning and trans-disciplinarity. During the meet-up, participants from both Kenya
and the U.S. frequently exhibited a keen desire for learning--as reflected by their curiosity, creativity and critical
thinking--along with  interests in acquiring skills and knowledge  in   a variety of domains    and topics. Other
significant associations can be found among self-agency, multi-literateness, trans-disciplinarity, lifelong learning
and the use of diverse tools and resources. However, the two interactional competences (interacting with others,
interacting in and with the world) have relatively weaker connections to the other constructs.

                  Figure 1. ENA network model of the meet-up discourse for all participants.

         Figure 2 shows the ENA network models for the Kenyan and U.S. participants, respectively. While key
differences can be observed between   the two  network  models,  the link  between   lifelong  learning and trans-
disciplinarity remains prominent for both groups. The x-axis is defined by connections to multi-literateness on the
left and connections to self-agency and interacting in and with the world on the right. For the Kenyan participants,
the discourse pattern shows a heavier presence on the right, with relatively stronger connections to self-agency,
lifelong learning, trans-disciplinarity and use of diverse tools and resources. This is indicative of the initiative,
motivation, and resourcefulness demonstrated by the Kenyan participants in the meeting. In contrast, the discourse
pattern for the U.S. participants is situated more to the left side of the ENA space. Multi-literateness is heavily
associated with both lifelong learning and trans-disciplinarity. This may be reflective of the students' experiences
with STEM-related activities at school, emphasizing problem-solving in an interdisciplinary setting.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  614                                                  © ISLS
                              (a)                                                     (b)
        Figure 2. ENA network models of the meet-up discourse for (a) U.S. and (b) Kenyan participants.

Discussion
The  discourse    pattern  of the  computer-supported     meet-up  shown    in Figure 1   demonstrates the    strongest
connection between the lifelong learning and trans-disciplinarity global competences. Without the use of ENA,
the overall connection between these two competences would not have been clear through their frequencies alone.
Furthermore, the connection between lifelong learning and trans-disciplinarity exemplifies the fundamental aims
of the IC4 project. The baseline goals of this project are to foster conversational and critical thinking skills coupled
with STEM      subjects between    students  across the globe.  Lifelong  learning­curiosity,   creativity, and critical
thinking­best showcases the aforementioned conversational and critical thinking skills; trans-disciplinarity covers
conversational  topics  related  to STEM    subjects,  humanities, and the  social sciences.  The  strong   relationship
between these two global competences as shown in the ENA models align these basic learning and topic-related
aims of the project, meanwhile giving the project a path towards the development of more collaborative and
interactive competences in the future. While this meet-up does include conversation between Kenyan and U.S.
participants, the two groups of students demonstrate differences in their contributions to the conversation as
reflected in their ENA network models: while the U.S. participants supply content-driven commentary (coded for
as multi-literateness), the Kenyan participants show a stronger inclination towards self-agency and the use of
diverse  tools and   resources.  Ultimately,  both  groups of  participants typify  the global  competences     through
relatively complementary behaviors, each bringing something different to the table.
          In a broader context, this project examines global collaboration in the context of a STEM-focused digital
makerspace community as way to develop and identify future learning environments in a changing workforce
industry. As   the   global   competences    represent  a framework    to address   the   needs of future    workforce
environments,   this  paper   is an initial attempt to  evaluate how   this project can   address such competences.
Participants demonstrated critical thinking and awareness that would not have necessarily been observed without
involvement in this project. Particularly, the students' computer-supported collaborative discussion of coding
demonstrates Target 4.4 of SDG #4 as the students educate each other on technically relevant skillsets. The results
discussed in this paper provide a preliminary validation of the use of the global competences as a framework for
assessment. In future analysis, ENA can be utilized to examine how the competences are addressed and how the
relationships between concepts change as the project progresses, giving rise to youth gaining skills to solve
problems globally and collaboratively together for the future.

References
Frederiksen, J. R., Sipusic, M., Sherin, M., & Wolfe, E. W. (1998). Video Portfolio Assessment: Creating a
          Framework for Viewing the Functions of Teaching. Educational Assessment, 5, 4, 225-97.
Herrenkohl,    L. R., &    Cornelius,  L.   (2013). Investigating  Elementary    Students' Scientific  and   Historical
          Argumentation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 22, 3, 413-461.
Marope, M. (2017).    Future Competences for Future Generations.       International Bureau of Education: In Focus,
          2. Retrieved from http://ibe-infocus.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/In-Focus-2017.pdf
Shaffer, D. W., Hatfield, D., Svarovsky, G. N., Nash, P., Nulty, A., Bagley, E., ... Mislevy, R. (2009). Epistemic
          Network   Analysis:    A  Prototype for  21st-Century  Assessment    of Learning.  International   Journal of
          Learning and Media, 1(2), 33­53.
Shaffer, D. W. (2017). Quantitative ethnography. Madison, WI: Cathcart Press.
Shaffer,  D. W.,  &   Ruis,   A. R. (2017).  Epistemic  Network    Analysis:   A Worked   Example   of Theory-Based
          Learning Analytics. Handbook of Learning Analytics, 175­187.
United  Nations.   (n.d.). United   Nations  Sustainable  Development   Goals:    Quality Education.  Retrieved   from
          https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/education

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge funding support from the US National Science Foundation for the work this
paper reports. Views appearing in this paper do not reflect those of the funding agency.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      615                                                   © ISLS
