SciGirls Code: Computational Participation and Computer Science
                                    With Middle School Girls
 Cassandra Scharber, Lana Peterson, Yu-Hui Chang, Sarah Barksdale, Ramya Sivaraj, Angelina Constantine,
                                                and Jennifer Englund
  scharber@umn.edu, pete6118@umn.edu, chan1173@umn.edu, barks016@umn.edu, sivar018@umn.edu,
                                     const073@umn.edu, englu061@umn.edu
                                              University of Minnesota

        Abstract: SciGirls Code is a project comprised of 16 STEM outreach programs that provided
        160+   middle   school   girls with  computational    thinking    (CT)   and coding  skills between
        September 2017- June 2018. The research study investigates the ways in which these learning
        experiences impact girls' development of CT; interest and attitudes toward computer science;
        and their understandings of how participation in creation with technology impacts themselves
        and the world around them. Utilizing a qualitative multi-site case study design, the study found
        that a connected   learning  approach   boosted   the development     of girls' CT skills,  positively
        impacted  attitudes  towards    computing   pathways/careers,     and  increased  understandings   of
        computational participation. In addition, the educational experiences happening throughout the
        SciGirls  Code    program    exemplifies   the  4E    learning model.    Implications   include how
        technology     can  be     leveraged  towards   creating   an     inherently  collaborative  setting,
        acknowledging      social, emotional,   cultural, technological,   and   cognitive   intersections in
        learning.

Major issue addressed and potential significance
Women remain significantly underrepresented in the STEM workforce within the United States, particularly
computer science. Women constitute only 25% of the computing workforce despite it being the STEM area with
the most demand (Pew Research Center, 2018). Notably, the number of women in computing occupations has
actually declined over the past 25 years (Pew Research Center, 2018). While NCWIT (2017) reports that 1.1
million computing job openings are expected by 2024, men constitute 81% of the computer/information sciences
degrees conferred in the 2015-2016 academic year. Although more bachelor's degrees are conferred to women,
computer/information sciences degrees make up only 1% of degrees conferred to women (NCES, 2017).
        The issues that contribute to the computer science pipeline deficits are complex, and they begin early.
For example, in 2018 girls represented only 28% of AP Computer Science (CS) test-takers (www.code.org).
While  this represents  a slight increase from   2017  (26%),  it demonstrates    a  continued, dramatic   discrepancy
between genders. Girls in IT: The Facts (Ashcraft, Eger, & Friend, 2012), a summary of research regarding factors
that contribute to the gender gap in computer science education, suggests these ongoing issues: 1) curriculum that
is irrelevant; 2) pedagogies that discourage collaboration; 3) lack of opportunities to take risks and make mistakes;
and 4) heavy reliance on lecturing instead of hands-on, project-based learning. Starting early with interventions
that introduce girls to computer    science  in elementary    and middle  school  can   help increase interest  in CS;
cultivating early interest is paramount because interest in STEM fields in high school, rather than achievement in
these areas, is more closely associated with pursuit of careers in computer science (Corbett & Hill, 2015).
        SciGirls Code is a project that aims to address the gender equity issue in the field of computer science
by targeting middle school girls (Blikstein, 2018), which is the age when girls begin losing interest in STEM areas
(Microsoft & KRC Research, 2018). SciGirls Code worked with 16 STEM outreach programs to provide 160+
middle school girls with computational thinking (CT) and coding skills within informal education spaces. The
project theorized that a connected learning approach, which is based on sociocultural learning theory (Cole, 1998;
Vygotsky, 1978), with the active support of trained educators and role models, would boost the development of
middle  school girls'  CT  skills, attitudes towards   computing    pathways/careers,    and understandings    of  how
participation in technology creation impacts themselves and the world around them.

Theoretical approaches

Connected learning and computational participation
The  connected  learning  model    advocates  that "the most   resilient, adaptive,  and  effective learning   involves
individual interest as well as social support to overcome adversity and provide recognition" (Ito et al., 2013, p.4).
With an emphasis in meaningful practices and supportive connections with others, this model identifies three

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     616                                                    © ISLS
contexts for learning: peer-supported,  interest-powered,   and academically-oriented.  We     applied connected
learning in this project in order to understand how girls expanded their interest within production-focused CS
activities and how they empowered their own learning within a gender-equitable, peer-supported environment.
         Connected  learning, in   combination with  computational   participation, anchors our   project and  its
research agenda. Computational participation (CP) is explained as "connecting through making, which leads to
deeper, richer, and healthier connections among online youth" (Kafai & Burke, 2014, p. 132). With sharing and
collaboration at its core, CP is described as "solving problems with others, designing intuitive systems with and
for others, and learning about the cultural and social nature of human behavior through the concepts, practices,
and perspectives of computer science" (Kafai & Burke, 2014, p. 128). CP, therefore, represents a shift from the
previous "individualistic view of computing" to a view that focuses on "sociological and cultural dimensions"
(Fields, Kafai, & Giang, 2017, p.2). Kafai and Burke (2014) suggest that computer programming "represents a
crucial beginning step", "a form of expressing oneself", and "a community practice" to approach CP (p. 128).

Computational thinking
Rooted in computer science, computational thinking (CT) is viewed as "a universally applicable attitude and skill"
(Wing, 2006, p.33) that involves analytical thinking (Bers, 2018) and the process of problem-solving (ISTE,
2016). Bers (2018) argues, based on Papert's (1980, 1999) earlier ideas of learning through making and "hard
fun," that CT is not only "involved problem solving, but also a notion of expression" (p.60). Operationally, this
study's research methods are grounded in a CT framework (Brennan & Resnick, 2012), which encompasses three
dimensions: 1) concepts (e.g., sequence, loops), 2) practices (e.g., debugging, remixing, and 3) perspectives (e.g.,
expressing, connecting). We documented and assessed girls' knowledge of computational concepts and abilities
to employ them using computational practices.

Fusion of ideas
We integrate a CP framework with connected learning in order to examine how middle school girls made sense
of their participation with respect to their social and cultural contexts as they learn to code (Kafai & Burke, 2014;
Ito et al., 2013). Burke and colleagues note that "whereas computational thinking uses an algorithmic lens toward
problem-solving, computational   participation extends this thinking beyond   the   individual to integrate social
networks and digital tools in a networked society" (Burke, O'Byrne & Kafai, 2016, p.373). Similarly, we believe
that a computational participation framework enables us to conceptualize how connected learning contributes to
various aspects of CT development as well as interest in computer science.

Methodological approaches

Overview
The research  study   investigated the ways    in which computational     learning  experiences   impacted  girls'
development of CT [RQ1: Learning]; interest and attitudes toward computer science [RQ2: Interest]; and their
understanding/appreciation of how participation in creating with technology impacts themselves and the world
around them [RQ3: Participation]. This study utilized a qualitative embedded, multi-case study design (Merriam,
2009). The 7 focal cases represent an array of settings (rural, suburban, urban) as well as a variety of programming
contexts (museums, community centers, after school). The remaining 9 sites comprise the participating cases.
         Data collection paralleled curriculum implementation at program sites occurring between late August
2017 ­ early August 2018. There were multiple data sources with different data collected at focal and participating
sites. Focal programs were visited face-to-face, and participating site participants were engaged digitally. Notably,
artifact-based interviews (in-person at focal sites) and shorts (video at participating cases) were collected from
girls at three moments in the programming (beginning, middle, and end) in order to document any changes/growth
in understandings and skills. Other data sources include girls' pre- and post-program survey, curriculum artifacts
including FlipGrid videos (https://flipgrid.com), and facilitator interviews. Approximately 88 girls across all sites
participated in all research activities during the year-long programming.

Analysis
There were two distinct stages of analysis; the first stage was the within-case analysis and the second stage was
the cross-case analysis. For the within-case analysis, each case category (focus or participating) was first treated
as its own case. Sub-unit analysis resulted in portraits of individual programs. Portraits were woven together to
develop separate case narratives for focal and participating cases (within-case analysis). Next, these narratives
were used to inform the cross-case analysis of all programs (in progress). All data were reviewed and coded first
to align with related research questions and hypotheses. Next, using research questions as the anchors, open-ended

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  617                                                  © ISLS
survey data as well as interview/short transcripts were analyzed using qualitative content analysis (Saldaña, 2013).
Open coding processes were followed by grouping open codes into analytical/interpretive codes resulting in
thematic findings (Harry, Sturgis, Klingner, 2005). Both open and analytical coding were done with common data
sets by at least two researchers who engaged in clarifying conversations during these iterative stages.

Major findings and implications
Due to this project's timing and CSCL's deadlines, this proposal briefly highlights initial findings related to our
study's third research question [RQ3: Participation].

Girls' overall attitude about teamwork
In the preliminary survey findings, girls' responses to the question, "I can do different things when I work with
others than I can when I work alone" identified that the majority of girls hold positive attitudes toward teamwork
(e.g., 68% indicated strongly agree or agree in the pre-survey compared to 75% in the post-survey). There is
evidence that some girls who shared their concerns about teamwork in the pre-survey changed their attitudes in
the post-survey.

Cross-case analysis of girls' reflections on teamwork

Teamwork is essential in CS activities
Teamwork with others is valued by girls. By the final interview, many girls reported teamwork and the ability to
work with others as the biggest takeaway from their experiences in SciGirls Code. In general, girls had an evolving
sense of how teamwork was a significant part of doing CS activities.

Teamwork contributes to growth in problem solving
Overall, girls' view of the SciGirls Code group work was positive, with girls citing building strong friendships,
growth in problem solving, and gaining teamwork skills. Despite feelings of frustration and stress, many girls
mentioned how helpful it was to have other people to work with and to assist in troubleshooting when problems
arise.

Teamwork nurtures creative freedom and ownership
Teamwork was instrumental in nurturing girls' sense of creative freedom and ownership through channeling their
friendships towards choices and decisions related to how they engaged with tasks.

Themes situated with the 4E learning model
The educational experiences happening throughout the program exemplify the 4E learning model: embodied,
enactive, extended, and embedded cognition. While the individual program sites provide unique contexts for
learning, we found central themes derived from the program design and curriculum that resulted in common
outcomes for the girls. For purposes of this paper, we situating these themes within two aspects the 4E learning
model: embodied and enactive cognition.

Embodied
Findings indicate that the participants at multiple sites wrestled with sense-making of both CT concepts and
practices while engaged in physical interactions with technologies and other aspects of their learning environment.
For example, at the end of each unit was a makeathon that challenged the girls to use the computational knowledge
and skills scaffolded throughout the unit to create an end project in teams. These products were often the highlight
of girls' experiences in the program. The teams had autonomy over their final artifact including its aesthetic,
applicability, and functionality. The process of making decisions and having independence over their creations
resulted in the  girls' ownership and pride in their  creations. Another source of pride was the success     they
experienced after facing constant challenges with the technology. Girls indicated they consistently used the CT
practices of debugging and problem solving. The physical act of examining code, (de)constructing their code to
understand the issue, and then celebrating when challenges were overcame made learning visible. "When we
figured something out, I think that we felt like, you know that feeling when the light bulb goes off in your head?"
(Hannah, Team Draco, Interview 1). The girls began to expect challenges when computing and their confidence
grew as the program went on; "I think that they have the confidence that they can problem-solve when they come
up against something they're not familiar with. I don't know that they had that before" (Adult facilitator, Canis
Major).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   618                                                 © ISLS
Enactive
Through  our multiple  interviews  with the  girls during  the year, we    were able to understand   how  the girls
conceptualized new understandings about computing over time. The dynamic interaction between each girl and
their peers, their adult facilitator, the curriculum, the physical setting, the volunteer mentors, and the technology,
resulted in transformational perspectives of themselves and their role within computing. All of the activities in
the SciGirls Code curriculum were designed with collaboration in mind and allowed girls to reconceptualize
computer science as a participatory field rather than seeing it as an isolated relationship between a person and a
computer. For instance, in the mobile app-making unit girls learned about pair programming, where one is given
the role of driver and another is the navigator. Pair programming was a popular concept many girls throughout
the sites identified as something they learned: "Pair programming--I didn't know that two people could work on
the same thing, and like help each other. I thought it was like maybe just one person and then another person just
check[s] over it" (Katelyn, Team Mensa). Emma from Team Lynx found group work to be important to the coding
process: "Yeah working in groups I feel with coding is a lot easier than working by yourself."

New models for learning 4E
Each of the  SciGirls Code program    sites serve  as uniquely  complex    system but  all sites had collaborative,
computer-supported, and interdisciplinary factors. The 4E cognition aligns with the connected learning framework
in that girls move from embodied and individual views of computing to the role of computing in society and
embedded settings (Fields, Kafai, & Giang, 2017; Ito et al., 2013, Newen, De Bruin, & Gallagher, 2018). The
result of these embedded factors included girls' increased understandings of and skills related to computational
thinking; increased interest and confidence in computer science; expanded understanding of the role of computing
in society; and how they can engage in and shape technology. We offer collaborative learning as not just a learning
phenomenon that needs to be further understood by researchers but as an essential factor for addressing gender
equity within computing.

Selected references
Blikstein, P. (2018). Pre-college computer science education: A survey of the field. Mountain View, CA: Google
        LLC. Retrieved from https://goo.gl/gmS1Vm
Brennan, K., & Resnick, M. (2012). Using artifact-based interviews to study the development of computational
        thinking in   interactive media design.    Paper presented   at annual  American    Educational  Research
        Association meeting, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Fields, D.A., Kafai, Y.B., Giang, M.T. (2017). Youth computational participation in the wild: Understanding
        experience  and  equity   in participating  and  programing     in the  online scratch   community.   ACM
        Transactions on Computing Education, 17(3), 1-15.
Ito, M., Gutierrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton-Green, J., Watkins, S.C.
        (2013). Connected learning: An agenda for research and design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media and Learning
        Research Hub.
Microsoft in partnership with KRC Research. (2018). Closing the STEM gap: Why STEM classes and careers
        still lack girls and what we can do about it. Retrieved from http://aka.ms/girls-in-stem-research
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2018). How people learn II: Learners, contexts,
        and cultures. Washington DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/24783
Newen, A., De Bruin, L., & Gallagher, S. (Eds.). (2018). The Oxford handbook of 4E cognition. Oxford, UK:
        Oxford University Press.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York, NY: Basic Book Publishers,
        Inc.
Wing, J. M. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 49(3), 33-35.

Acknowledgments
This research is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1543209

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  619                                                   © ISLS
