   Reflective Assessment for Idea Improvement Through Collective
                                             Concept Mapping
                          Hyejin Park, University at Albany, SUNY, hpark7@albany.edu
                        Jianwei Zhang, University at Albany, SUNY, jzhang1@albany.edu

         Abstract:   The  current research   investigated  Grade  5   students' reflective  discourse   during
         their  co-design of an  ecological   concept  map   as a way  to   assess collaborative  knowledge
         building. The result showed that students sustainably built on each other's ideas and inquiries
         about various ecological concepts to advance their scientific knowledge as a community. They
         also incorporated more academic and ecological terms as they participated in the co-designing
         activity. This   study  illustrated the potential   use  of  the   collective concept    mapping    to
         collaboratively  advance   knowledge    in  science  disciplines as  the  student-driven  reflective
         assessment.

Introduction
The 21st-century education needs to facilitate students' high-level agency to direct their learning and inquiry.
Research   on  knowledge   building  communities    (Chen,   Scardamalia,   &   Bereiter, 2015;   Zhang,  Scardamalia,
Reeve, & Messina, 2009) offers a model of education that engages student-directed collaborative efforts for
sustained inquiry and idea improvement (Chen & Hong, 2016; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006; Scardamalia &
Bereiter, 2010). A critical challenge is to design new classroom assessments in alignment with student-directed
collaborative knowledge building. Such assessments need to engage student-directed, ongoing efforts to reflect
on their collaborative knowledge progress and make informed decisions to refine their inquiry (van Aalst &
Chan, 2007).
         The   current  research  explores   using  a  co-designed   concept    map   to  support students'   reflective
assessments of knowledge building. In the related literature, concept maps have been used to track students'
scientific knowledge    (Novak  & Musonda,      1991)  and facilitate students'  meaningful     learning. In  particular,
concept    mapping  enhances  students'   creative  thinking  by  presenting    focal  questions  about   key concepts,
clarifying the concepts, exploring cross-links between the different concepts (Novak & Cañas, 2008). In this
study, students  worked   collaboratively to  create  the concept map    to co-organize   their  collective knowledge,
reflect on idea progress and connection, and facilitate further collaboration. We investigated students' online
and face-to-face discourse that occurred during the concept mapping activity. The research questions included: a)
How    did the students collectively design   a concept   map to  assess  their community's     shared  understandings,
through what types of reflective conversation?; and b) How did the knowledge building discourse change from
before to after the reflective assessment through collaborative concept mapping?

Data collection and analysis
The present study investigated 21 Grade 5 students' discourse during their co-design of a concept map in the
ecology unit. The data sources were students' discourse in an online discussion forum called Knowledge Forum
(KF) and videotaped face-to-face metacognitive meeting (MM). The ecology unit was covered twice a week for
14   weeks.   Students discussed  food  chain,   bees, animal   behavior,   underground,    and  plants by   theorizing,
building on ideas and raising inquiries. In the 8th week, students brought picture cards of concepts (creatures)
that they  researched  and put  them  on  a  big paper.   While building  on  ideas,   they drew  arrows    between the
creators to indicate the energy flows. They updated the concept map throughout five MMs until the end of the
ecology unit. A teacher facilitated students' knowledge building by encouraging them to build on each other's
ideas.
         Discourse in students' notes on KF was analyzed by using text analysis tools called AntConc (Anthony,
2018) and Vocabprofile (Cobb, 2018) to classify words into academic words (Coxhead, 1998; Coxhead, 2000)
and  off-list words (special words   beyond   general  and   academic  words).   Words    indexed  in  the  life science
section of Next Generation Science Standards (NSSS) were extracted (Marzano, Rogers, & Simms, 2010). The
categorized words were compared between the two time spans (before and after the initial co-design of the
concept map). Students' focal topic change was traced during the discussion in MM using AntConc (Anthony,
2018) and on KF through KBDeX (Oshima, Oshima, & Matsuzawa, 2012) to figure out the concepts with high
betweenness centrality (how a certain word is mentioned with other words as it plays a central concept in the
discourse network), respectively. In order for more in-depth analysis of students' idea improvement, Content

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     624                                                     © ISLS
Analysis was conducted in terms of questioning, theorizing/explaining, collecting evidence, referencing sources,
connecting and integrating (Tao & Zhang, 2018).

Findings

How did the students co-design a concept map to assess their community's shared understandings?
The  teacher started the initial concept   mapping by  stating  the purpose of  the  activity. She emphasized  that
students had   discussed many    different ecological  concepts  and  needed    to make connections    between the
concepts. She also pointed out making the connection between various concepts would provide students with
driving  ideas  for further research. Students continued    the collective  concept  mapping    through four  more
consecutive MMs.
         As students proceeded with the co-design of the concept map, they found the energy flows between the
creatures and connected the creatures with arrows (see Figure 1), continuing research on the concepts on KF
(see Figure 2). For instance, the left illustration in Figure 2 shows a segment of students' discourse with a stream
of discussing 12 concepts over time. In this illustration, each vertical line demonstrates the moment when each
focal concept   was  mentioned.  Students  started the discussion   about energy   and mentioned   it intermittently
throughout the discussion. S4 asked peers about where to put the sun on the concept map. Then, he constructed
his theory, "I think it starts from everything, so I think it should be connected to everything," and put the sun at
the top  of the concept  map.    As the MM   progressed,  S8   mentioned   that "Every  different  ecosystems have
different food chains." After then, students expanded the focal topic to various habitats where different species
of creatures live (e.g., desert, ocean, pine bush, woodland, forest). Around the point when students had this
conversation, students' discourse on KF contained a dramatic increase in the betweenness centrality of the focal
concepts that students discussed during the concept mapping (see Figure 2).

                              Figure 1. The concept map that students co-designed.

Figure 2. Timeline flow of focal concepts during collective concept mapping in MM (left) and dramatic increase
                         in betweenness centrality of the focal concepts on KF (right).

How did the knowledge building discourse change?

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   625                                                   © ISLS
Students used more diverse words on KF after the initial co-designing activity (see Figure 3). They used more
off-list words and words indexed in life science of NGSS in the 2nd phase while using slightly fewer academic
words. The higher mean of individual students' word use was also found in academic words and off-list words.

 Figure 3. Sum of word types (left) and mean of individual students' word types (right) before and after initial
                                                  concept mapping.

         Students' discourse in their KF postings was coded based on knowledge contribution types (Tao &
Zhang,  2018)   (see Table  1). Students   showed   the  advanced   discourse  moves    after the initial  activity of
collaborative concept mapping. They elaborated more refined and sophisticated explanations by stating opposite
opinions  and  describing  complicated   concepts.  Moreover,  they    wrote  higher-quality  writings with  personal
stories of conducting    scientific experiments,  knowledge   obtained   from  online   and  reading   resources, and
synthesis of diverse ideas. They asked questions to explore more in-depth inquiries and seek explanatory ideas
in the 2nd phase.

Table 1: Knowledge building discourse on KF before and after initial concept mapping

                                                                    1st Phase         2nd Phase
                   Questioning                                  29                 32
                     Factual question                               7                 5
                     Explanatory question                           4                 6
                     Idea-initiating wonderment                     6                 7
                     Idea deepening/elaborating question            12                14
                   Theorizing/Explaining                        36                 31
                     Intuitive explanation                          28                14
                     Alternative explanation                        4                 6
                     Refined explanation                            4                 11
                   Referencing sources                          28                 38
                   Collecting evidence                          0                  7
                   Connecting and integrating                   1                  7
                   Total                                        94                 115

Conclusion
The current research investigated Grade 5 students' reflective assessment of collective knowledge building by
co-designing   the concept map.     The results showed   that students  cumulatively   visualized  the energy  flows
between  ecological  concepts   through  the   on-going  reflection of the   community's idea    improvement.  They
expanded   the focal concepts,  built  and synthesized   in-depth  theories  and inquiries,  used reliable resources,
produced   more   academic and  scientific words,  and   continued  to discuss the concepts   in  the online learning
community.
         The findings infer that students monitored their progressive idea improvement regarding the scientific
concepts  which   they should pay    attention to during and  after the collaborative  concept   mapping.   Students'
collective designing of the concept map facilitated their conceptualization of the key ecological concepts and
their understanding of the invisible mechanism behind how the creatures survive together in the ecosystem by

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    626                                                   © ISLS
consuming other creatures (Novak & Cañas, 2008). What's more significant about this activity is that students
were the core contributors to the reflective assessment and knowledge building in the community, while the
teacher facilitated students' activity. The  future research should  assess students' on-going  idea improvement
more systematically   through   iterative and   concurrent analytics  of the learning  data  to deepen   collective
knowledge.

References
Anthony,  L. (2018).   AntConc    (Version   3.5.7)  [Computer   Software].  Tokyo,   Japan: Waseda    University.
        Retrieved Oct 25th, 2018 from http://www.laurenceanthony.net/
Chen, B., & Hong, H. (2016). Schools as knowledge-building organizations: Thirty years of design research.
        Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 266-288.
Chen, B., Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2015). Advancing knowledge-building discourse through judgments
        of promising ideas. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 10(4), 345-
        366.
Cobb, T. (2018). Vocabprofile [Computer Program]. Retrieved Oct 25th, 2018 from https://www.lextutor.ca/vp/
Coxhead,  A. (1998).   An academic      word list (English   Language Institute Occasional   Publication No. 18).
        Wellington, New Zealand: Victoria University of Wellington.
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TESOL Quarterly, 34(2), 213-238.
Marzano, R., Rogers, K., & Simms, J. (2015). Vocabulary for the New Science Standards. Bloomington, IN:
        Marzano Research.
Novak, J. D. & Cañas, A. J. (2008). The theory underlying concept maps and how to construct and use them.
        Technical Report IHMC CmapTools, 1-36.
Novak, J. D., & Musonda, D. (1991). A twelve-year longitudinal study of science concept learning. American
        Educational Research Journal, 28(1), 117-153.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge building discourse explorer: a social network
        analysis    application  for  knowledge     building  discourse.  Educational  Technology    Research  &
        Development, 60, 903-921.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer
        (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge University
        Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2010). A brief history of knowledge building. Canadian Journal of Learning
        and Technology, 36(1), 1-16.
Tao, D., & Zhang, J. (2018). Forming shared inquiry structures to support knowledge building in a grade 5
        community. Instructional Science, 46(4), 563-592.
van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2007). Student-directed assessment of knowledge building using electronic
        portfolios in Knowledge Forum. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16, 175-220.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility in
knowledge building communities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 7­44.

Acknowledgements
This research was sponsored by National Science Foundation (#1441479). We thank the teacher and students
for their creative work enabling this research.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   627                                                 © ISLS
