Advancing Elementary Students' Reading Comprehension Scores
                             Through Knowledge Building
                      Pei-Yi Lin, National Chengchi University, hanapeiyi@gmail.com_1
                  Huang-Yao Hong, National Chengchi University, hyhong@nccu.edu.tw_2
                       Leanne Ma, University of Toronto, leanne.ma@mail.utoronto.ca

        Abstract: This study employs Knowledge Building pedagogy and Knowledge Forum technol-
        ogy to advance reading literacies in a third-grade elementary reading class in Taiwan. We hy-
        pothesized that sustained engagement in idea-centered discussions surrounding reading materi-
        als would lead to higher levels of reading comprehension (i.e., interpretation, and integration).
        Using a quasi-experiment design, we collected: (a) students' online Knowledge Building be-
        haviors, (b) group reading discussions, and (c) students' reading comprehension assessment.
        Our findings reveal that the experimental group (Knowledge Building) outperformed the con-
        trol group (direct instruction) on the comprehension assessment. Additionally, we found that
        the Knowledge Building intervention supported the development of students' higher-level read-
        ing comprehension.

        Keywords: Knowledge Building, Knowledge Forum, reading comprehension.

Introduction
Digital technologies have vastly redefined what it means to be literate in an open information world, offering new
opportunities and challenges for students to engage with multimedia representations of information (Coiro et al.,
2014; Goldman   & Scardamalia, 2013).  It is common  nowadays    for students to navigate  search engines,    sift
through multiple webpages, and participate in online communities in order to exchange ideas and information
online (Leu et al., 2004). From an education perspective, the challenge for literacy education is engaging students
in sustained collaborative work with their ideas toward enriching learning and understanding (Resta & Laferrière,
2007; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991). Since online reading is becoming increasingly more important, this study
aims to explore how educators can help elementary students read, comprehend, and interpret reading materials
effectively ­ furthermore, construct meaning,   make inferences,   integrate  and evaluate   information     in a
Knowledge-Building environment.

Literature Review
Knowledge Building is a principle-based pedagogy (Scardamalia, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2010) that aims
to enculturate students in idea-centered discussions and sustained idea improvement through the process of co-
constructing community knowledge (Hong & Sullivan, 2009; Zhang et al., 2011). Knowledge Forum (KF), was
developed to integrate technology and pedagogy to improve students' reading skills in a Knowledge Building
community (Bereiter, & Scardamalia, 1991). KF represents a community space for students to engage in high
levels of epistemic agency and collective responsibility for developing questions they care about, exchanging
conceptual resources with peers, and building on one another's ideas. Knowledge Building unfolds as sustained
knowledge advancement in KF (Bereiter, 2002). Previous studies have indicated that elementary school students'
reading, writing, and related activities on KF were positively related with vocabulary growth (Chen et al., 2015),
reading skills (Zhang, & Sun, 2011), and essay writing performance (Lin et al., 2018).
        Building on these studies, the current study aims to address a better understanding of students' reading
comprehension within KF. More specifically, we conducted a quasi-experimental study to explore whether stu-
dents improve their reading skills via Knowledge Building activities in a third-grade reading class. Our three
research questions are: (1) How were students involved in online reading activities in KF? (2) How did the dis-
cussions on KF unfold? (3) Did the KB group or the comparison group do better on reading comprehension?

Method

Research context and participants
The current study took place in an elementary school in Taipei, Taiwan. The sample included 51 third-graders
from two classes: 24 students were in the experimental group with a teacher using Knowledge Building pedagogy,
and 27 students were in the control group with a teacher using the traditional teaching method. The typical Chinese

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  632                                                  © ISLS
literature class in Taiwan is taught in a lecture-based and teacher-centric styled, with students' reading compre-
hension assessed based on mastery of textbook contents. On the other hand, in the Knowledge Building class, the
teacher encouraged students to engage in collaborative reading and writing to sustain idea improvement. To un-
derstand students' reading comprehension in both conditions, we compared their comprehensive skills at the end
of the intervention.

Pedagogical design
The current study took place over one semester (14 weeks). Although the two teachers used different teaching
methods, they used the same regular reading articles (11 articles/lessons in total in the textbook). Each reading
lesson was taught over 6 periods (40 minutes per period).

The experimental group
The teacher in the experimental group has five years of teaching experiences (including two years of Knowledge
Building teaching experiences). The class activities were divided into two parts: face-to-face (i.e., lectures, text-
book reading, and class discussion etc.) and online activities (i.e., students' online collaborative reading). The
online activities were designed and guided by Knowledge Building principles to collaboratively question and
discuss ideas as a reading community. The students participated in the following Knowledge Building activities
in KF: (1) summarized their main ideas after reading based on the lesson from textbook; (2) asked questions to
one another; (3) further elaborated/clarified their initial ideas and/or integrated various ideas by addressing the
questions being asked by others. The teacher encouraged the students to summarize and ask questions based on
the texts, as well as integrate their classmates' comments with their initial ideas in order to advance the community
knowledge.

The control group
The teacher in the control group has more than ten years of teaching experiences. In the control class, the reading
activities were teacher-led, well-structured procedures. The teacher acted as the sole authoritative knowledge
source ­ she gave lectures for every article and then asked students to individually respond to factual questions
based on the texts. Each lesson followed the same script over the 14 weeks.

Data sources
Data was collected from KF and the pre-post reading comprehension test scores. For research question 1, we
collected students' online collaboration, which included the number of notes contributed, read, and built on in KF.
For research question 2, we analyzed the content of the discussion according to four different levels (low to high)
of comprehension skills: (1) retrieving explicitly stated information (2) making straight forward inferences (3)
interpreting and integrating ideas and information and (4) examining and evaluating contents and textual ele-
ments. For research question 3, we surveyed pre-post reading comprehension tests, which were obtained from
PIRLS literacy passages (i.e., 28 multiple choice questions and several open-ended essays). We analyzed these
according to the PIRLS scoring guideline to evaluate students' reading comprehension on four levels (same as
RQ2). 30% of the open-ended essay questions were randomly selected to calculate the inter-rater reliability (using
Spearman's, r = .839, p < .01).

Results

Students' online reading activities in Knowledge Forum
The result showed that the amount of activities that students were involved in on KF was increased over the 14
weeks. We divided online reading activities into two phases (7 weeks per phase). Our statistical analyses show
that the number of notes contributed (first phase: M = 12.42, SD = 3.63, second phase: M = 16.42, SD = 3.91; t =
-5.35, p < .001), number of notes read (first phase: M = 92.63, SD = 46.22, second phase: M = 161.17, SD =
106.76; t = -4.15, p < .001), number of keywords used (first phase: M = 9.17, SD = 4.03, second phase: M = 11.67,
SD = 3.74; t = - 3.49, p < .001) and number of scaffolds used (first phase: M = 11.25, SD = 4.33, second phase:
M = 15.75, SD = 4.10; t = -5.21, p < .001) significantly increased from the first phase to the second phase. These
results indicate that students were more engaged in posting their thoughts online and interacting with others in the
later phase of the semester. However, the number of notes built-on, which means the number of replies to peers,
was not shown to be significantly different (first phase: M = 8.29, SD = 3.46, second phase: M = 8.50, SD = 2.62;
t = -0.34, p > .05) between the two phases of the semester.

Students' reading comprehension in Knowledge Forum

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   633                                                © ISLS
Figure 1 shows a KF view that students extended what they read in the Chinese literacy class -- Hynobius for-
mosanus (an endangered species in Taiwan). In the beginning, their discussions were focused on understanding
characteristics of hynobius formosanus; content of these notes were basically retrieved from the textbook and the
Internet. Their discussion then shifted toward bigger issues, such as the decline of hynobius formosanus in Taiwan
and what people can do to conserve them, which indicates that students were integrating and interpreting previous
information (i.e., characteristics and living habits etc.) into authentic problems for them. Students were discussing
ideas to propose possible solutions to conserve the species in Taiwan. Moreover, Figure 1 shows that students
marked their notes with problems and keywords to identify their ideas and information, and in turn, used scaffolds
to organize their notes ­ features specifically designed for enhancing idea-centered discussions in KF.

Figure 1. A KF view shows students' discussion the   Figure 2. Students' notes related to questions and an-
reading topic.                                       swered questions in four comprehensive levels on KF.

       For our analyses, we divided all Knowledge Forum notes into questions they discussed and answered.
We furthered coded notes' content according to four reading comprehension levels: (1) retrieving explicitly stated
information (e.g., S15: The hynobius formosanus has white spots on the skin.) (2) making straight forward infer-
ences (e.g., S1: The hynobius formosanus is a threatened species, its kin mucus is toxic that could protect it from
danger.) (3) interpreting and integrating ideas and information (e.g., S24: The hynobius formosanus is a rare
species and it lives in the high-altitude habitats. Their habitat is lost and degraded when global warming is in-
creasing so that they cannot live there.) and (4) examining and evaluating contents and textual elements (e.g.,
S18: The hynobius formosanus lived since Ice Age, it can only live in high mountains. We should protect their
habitats, the most important thing is to prevent global warming from becoming worse. As a result, they will not
become endangered.). As shown in Figure 2, we also ran t-tests and showed that questions of level 1 (t = 2.07, p
< .05) and level 2 (t = 2.08, p < .05) decreased significantly in the second phase (i.e., less retrieving explicitly
stated information and making straightforward inferences). On the contrary, the questions of level 3 (t = -3.28, p
< .01) and level 4 (t = -2.15, p < .05) positively increased in the second phase (i.e., more interpreting and integrat-
ing ideas and information and examining & evaluating content and textual elements). Our statistics revealed that
that students' discussion progressed from basic comprehension levels (level 1 and 2) in the first phase to deep
comprehension processes (level 3 and 4) in the second phase.

Comparison of students' reading comprehension
We examined whether our Knowledge Building intervention enhanced students' reading comprehension. Firstly,
the pretest showed no differences between the experimental and control groups with respect to students' reading
comprehension (F = 2.697, p = 0.107). Next, MANOVA indicated that the posttest scores were statistically sig-
nificant at the .05 level. The experimental group outperformed the control group (experimental versus control: M
= 26.29, SD = 0.65; M = 23.11, SD = 0.61; F = 11.924, p < .001) on the PIRLS, confirming our hypothesis.

Discussion and future directions
In this study, we examined Knowledge Building activities and reading comprehension development of third-
graders in a Chinese literacy class. First, we examined the experimental group's online collaborative Knowledge
Building activities in KF. Notes written, notes read, keywords used, and scaffolds used significantly increased
during the semester. Second, we analyzed the experimental group's KF discussion and coded it along 4 levels of
comprehension skills. We found that in the earlier phase, students were mainly focused on basic comprehension
level (retrieving explicitly stated information and making straight forward inferences), whereas in the later phase,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 634                                                  © ISLS
their discussion turned to deeper comprehension (interpreting and integrating ideas and information and examin-
ing and evaluating contents, languages and textual elements). Third, we compared the reading comprehension of
students in the experimental and control groups and found that Knowledge Building pedagogy and technology
significantly advanced students' reading comprehension scores.
    Previous studies on literacy education place an emphasis on explicit teaching strategies to provide effective
instruction for students' reading comprehension (e.g., Guthrie    et al., 2004). Based on this perspective, the
teacher's role is to implement and manage instructional practices while monitoring student understanding. Our
study, on the other hand, provides support for teachers adopting a principle-based approach to literacy instruction
(i.e., identifying authentic problems, making use of authoritative texts to improve students' ideas, connecting ideas
and building community knowledge through collective responsibility). Our findings suggest that when students
engage in reading activities with appropriate Knowledge Building pedagogical and technological supports, stu-
dents benefit in a way that advanced high-level reading comprehension. This is an important implication for em-
bodying students' reading ideas during the Knowledge-Building process in a computer-supported collaborative
learning environment. More specifically, our study shows that KF supports are especially helpful for engaging
young students in deep and productive discussions surrounding complex ideas. Future work should aim to explore
over extended periods of time the evolution of group knowledge processes that facilitate the development of
students' higher-level literacy skills during Knowledge Building.

References
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Chen, B., Ma, L., Matsuzawa, Y., & Scardamalia, M. (2015). The development of productive vocabulary in
       knowledge building: A longitudinal study. In Proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative
       Learning (CSCL) Conference 2015, Volume 1 (pp. 443-450). Gothenburg, Sweden: The International
       Society of the Learning Sciences.
Coiro, J., Knobel, M., Lankshear, C., & Leu, D. J. (Eds.). (2014). Handbook of research on new literacies.
       Routledge.
Goldman, S. R., & Scardamalia, M. (2013). Managing, understanding, applying, and creating knowledge in the
       information age: Next-generation challenges and opportunities. Cognition and Instruction, 31(2), 255-
       269.
Guthrie, J. T., Wigfield, A., Barbosa, P., Perencevich, K. C., Taboada, A., Davis, M. H., ... & Tonks, S. (2004).
       Increasing reading comprehension and engagement through concept-oriented reading instruction. Jour-
       nal of educational psychology, 96(3), 403-423.
Hong, H. Y., & Sullivan, F. R. (2009). Towards an idea-centered, principle-based design approach to support
       learning as knowledge creation. Educational Technology Research and Development, 57(5), 613-627.
Lin, P.-Y., Ma, L., Chang, Y.-H., Hong, H.-Y., & Lin. C. P. (2018). Improving Elementary Students' Literacy
       through Knowledge Building. In Kay, J. and Luckin, R. (Eds.). Rethinking Learning in the Digital Age:
       Making the Learning Sciences Count, 13th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS)
       2018, Volume 3 (pp. 1527-1528). London, UK: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Leu, D. J., Kinzer, C. K., Coiro, J. L., & Cammack, D. W. (2004). Toward a theory of new literacies emerging
       from the Internet and other information and communication technologies. Theoretical models and pro-
       cesses of reading, 5(1), 1570-1613.
Resta, P., & Laferrière, T. (2007). Technology in support of collaborative learning. Educational Psychology Re-
       view, 19(1), 65-83.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),
       Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society (pp.67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building: A challenge
       for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the learning sciences, 1(1), 37-68.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2010). A brief history of knowledge building. Canadian Journal of Learning
       and Technology/La revue canadienne de l'apprentissage et de la technologie, 36(1).
Zhang, J., Hong, H.-Y., Scardamalia, M., Teo, C. L., & Morley, E. A. (2011). Sustaining knowledge building as
       a principle-based innovation at an elementary school. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(2), 262-
       307.
Zhang, J., & Sun, Y. (2011). Reading for idea advancement in a Grade 4 knowledge building community. Instruc-
       tional Science, 39(4), 429-452.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  635                                                 © ISLS
