   Using Digital Interrupted Case Studies for Whole Class Inquiry in
                                             Life Sciences
                  Leslie Schneider, Berri H Jacque, Jessica Henry, and EmilyKate McDonough
 leslie.schneider@tufts.edu, berri.jacque@tufts.edu, jessica.henry@tufts.edu, emilykate.mcdonough@tufts.edu
                        Center for Translational Science Education, Tufts Medical School

      Jim Slotta, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, jim.slotta@utorontu.ca

        Abstract: This short paper describes BioScann, a high school STEM inquiry curriculum that
        uses a CSCL environment to support an interrupted case studies (ICS) method. This technology-
        enhanced     curriculum  supports  autonomous,     sustained    student  engagement,      scientific
        argumentation,   conceptual understanding,   and  the development   of  student   self-efficacy and
        career  awareness. The   BioScann    technology  platform scaffolds   student  activities, collects
        student artifacts, and helps the teacher advance the curriculum through various stages. We
        discuss  how  our designs were   improved   across multiple  pilot  studies, including two  major
        versions of the curriculum and technology. Each new pilot allowed us to improve the materials
        and   technology   environment,   as well   as  student  engagement,     career   awareness,    and
        collaborative data-based decision-making.

Major issues addressed
Scholars, visionaries, and policymakers have called for education that prepares students to face the complex
challenges of an increasingly technology-driven "knowledge society" (OECD, 2016; Pellegrino, & Hilton, 2013).
In response to such calls for change, STEM education has generally shifted away from the memorization of facts
toward engaging students in authentic science inquiry and scientific argumentation.
        Researchers have advanced problem-based learning (PBL) as a pedagogical framework to develop 21st
century competencies and to increase student understanding of science (Slotta, 2010; Bell, 2010). Our work is
concerned with one such approach, called case-based learning (e.g. Riesbeck, & Shank, 1989; Foran, 2001) first
developed for students in medical education. In case-based learning, students are engaged within peer groups to
deliberate on carefully constructed "cases"  (e.g., cases  of medical   scenarios)   that provide  opportunities  for
analytical thinking and application of concepts to real-world scenarios. Case-based learning can also integrate the
evaluation of evidence and data-based arguments ­ skills that are critical for 21st-century health literacy. Our
team (Jacque et al., 2015) has advanced a more structured model of case-based learning called interrupted case
studies (ICS). By structuring cases into a clear progression, ICS provides "interruption points" that (1) allow teams
of students  to stay in sync and  (2) give   teachers an  opportunity   for planned   or  spontaneous   whole-class
discussions.
        ICS can be challenging for teachers who must keep track of student progress, monitor their ideas, and
ensure that the case itself remains at the center of attention. To support teachers and students, we combined ICS
and CSCL methods to build on the advantages of technology-enhanced learning environments (Slotta, 2010) to
help track student ideas, scaffold their learning activities, and prompt them for reflection. The ICS method also
advances CSCL methods by opening the door for the design of CSCL "scripts" (Dillenbourg & Jermain, 2010)
that provide teachers with strategic opportunities to pose questions, review student responses, and to use those
responses to address student misconceptions and model answering questions appropriately (Herreid, 2005). In this
way, the combination of ICS and CSCL methods has a synergistic effect, allowing for more control over the
technology environment and more support for both students and teachers. To support the use of ICS in high school
settings, we have developed a technology environment called BioScann that engages students in collaborative
STEM inquiry explorations. Students document their thinking and work in BioScann's collective knowledge
base/shared workspace and teachers use the digital records to lead discussions and help students debate issues.
        With CSCL environments ­ even those enhanced by ICS like BioScann ­ there is a substantial risk that
the teacher will spend inordinate time ensuring the technology is functioning smoothly and keeping students "on
task". We are finding that teachers are challenged to coordinate such complex forms of interaction and that the
technology   environment, while critical (e.g., in providing  materials and  collecting   student  responses), is an
additional source of complexity and strain on the teacher's capacity to guide meaningful student inquiry. This
paper reports on our efforts to improve the BioScann environment based on early classroom pilots and teacher
interviews. At the time of paper submissions, we have completed multiple rounds of pilots and revisions, with a
major iteration of the technology to be completed by the time of the conference in June 2019. Sections below

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  636                                                     © ISLS
describe the theoretical perspective and specific approach and materials supported by BioScann, as well as our
iterative designs of the technology environment, together with findings about teacher orchestration and student
experience.

Potential significance of the work
We recognize the fit of our work to this year's conference theme: A wide lens: Combining Embodied, Enactive,
Extended, and  Embedded   Learning        in Collaborative    Settings. Preparing  students   with vital  21st century
competencies  (Scardmalia et al., 2015)      will necessitate a wide    range of interactions for  learning, including
collaborative forms of inquiry. To accomplish this, CSCL environments and materials must be able to support
complex forms of inquiry that transform the nature of learning and teaching.
       To achieve this goal, we produced a suite of innovative technology-enhanced curricula and tools that can
be integrated into existing science courses offered in high schools. The robust and flexible web-based platform
and ICS authoring toolkit, BioScann.org, enables classrooms to scaffold scientific inquiry in the form of ICS
pedagogy. Our objective was to develop a learning environment and curricula capable of engaging underserved
high school students' in scientific inquiry, addressing the challenges of a learning community approach, as well
as increasing STEM career interest and awareness and retention in science. Such an environment will work best
when it supports the teacher in orchestrating the curriculum.
       Finally, we have developed and tested innovative professional development approaches for high school
teachers to support implementation. At present, we are engaged in a substantive trial with 25 classrooms with over
600 students, with whom we hope to develop knowledge of and interest in bioscience careers.

Theoretical and methodological approaches pursued
From a theoretical perspective, BioScann employs a multi-role ICS approach set within a web-based, interactive
environment to integrate conceptual learning with competency building and the development of awareness about
STEM careers. The BioScann curriculum was guided by design principles from problem-based learning (PBL)
and CSCL.   PBL offers a pedagogical perspective that is well suited to students' development of critical 21st
century competencies, long-term retention of content and improved critical thinking skills (Bell, 2010; Kolodner
et al., 2003; Strobel & Van Barneveld, 2009). CSCL complements this view, allowing the design of environments
and activities that foster critical scientific inquiry and work-life skills, such as collaborative problem-solving with
shared decision-making (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994; Means et al., 2015). By combining these perspectives
with the ICS approach, BioScann cases reveal new information (data) that is critical for solving the problem facing
the class at defined interruption points. In this way, BioScann models the processes of scientific discovery while
simulating participation in STEM careers, as students become a workforce team collaborating to solve authentic
inquiry-based problems.
       BioScann was created using a design-based research (DBR) approach, in which the designed innovation
is itself one of the outcomes to be analyzed as a source of findings relating to the research questions (The Design-
Based Research Collective, 2003). A co-design model was applied, involving education researchers, biomedical
scientist and teachers (e.g., Roschelle & Penuel, 2006). This ensured that teachers have been deeply involved in
the design process, that their values of pedagogy and practice are incorporated within the design, and that they
emerge from the process with a full sense of ownership and familiarity with all aspects of the innovation. This
method has been shown to improve the viability of designs in diverse school settings and ultimately leads to
increased adoptability and adaptability (Voogt et al. 2016; Jacque et al., 2013, 2015).
       The   Bioscann   curriculum and       technology were  designed   and  developed   in  parallel by a  team   that
included six high school biology teachers, researchers, content experts, and technologists over a period of two
years (Roschelle & Penuel, 2006).   They went through multiple cycles of `design, enactment, analysis, and
redesign' (Collins et al., 2004) to assess the quality as well as the effectiveness of both the design and its theoretical
underpinnings. This included: (1)  initial    testing by co-designers    in   laboratory and  classroom   settings; (2)
refinement of any features, functions or interfaces; (3) testing in settings with a second cohort of classrooms by
teachers who are not members of the co-design team; (4) further refinements. In this way, we tried to rigorously
address any emerging problems with implementation. From a research perspective, the design-based process also
uncovered new areas of research.

Materials, findings, and discussion
The original goal of BioScann was to create a technology platform that could be used independently by students
to work through interrupted case studies allowing the teacher to lead extemporaneous interactions. Version One
(v1.0) of BioScann.org contained all the content needed to participate, guiding each student team through the
activity. BioScann v1.0 was a four-day curriculum that placed students into teams of 3-4 students and each team

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     637                                                    © ISLS
in the class worked independently to design a new drug to combat HIV ­ a scenario that provides real-life context
and is highly engaging at the high school level. On Day One, students learned about the HIV life cycle and worked
as a team to consider the pros and cons of four drug candidates with the goal of selecting the best one to test. On
Day Two each team learned about cell culture and animal models to test their drug for efficacy and toxicity. On
Days Three and Four students learned about Phase I-III Clinical Trials for testing efficacy and safety of drugs in
humans. Each day of the curriculum required that students understand experimental designs and utilize results in
the form of graphs to make decisions that would set the stage for the next step of the ICS. Based on the group
decisions, teachers would manually release the next step of the ICS on bioscann.org. Students received career
information through infographics.
         In our initial pilot testing of BioScann v1.0 with 19 public school students, we documented the need for
improving the usability of the technology to a) allow for more student interaction within groups and as a class and
b) to simplify teacher facilitation. Students felt the overall BioScann experience was positive, commenting: "It
was fun to have a first hand on how being a scientist works." "If all tech problems are fixed, this program can be
used without a problem and people can learn something new." "Program was great and a lovely experience."
Analyzing observation and interview data, we identified five key challenges to consider in the re-design: One,
running the case required more teacher facilitation than expected. Two, using the technology to regulate individual
group workflow required more support than expected. Three, students requested additional time for small group
and class discussions. They wanted to review and debate each other's work as a class in addition to within their
individual teams. Four, students wanted to do more work off-line using paper rather than the computer. Five,
although a pre-post survey indicated that student's knowledge and awareness of bioscience careers increased
(paired t test, p = <.001), student feedback indicated that they needed more context to understand and assess the
careers.
         Version Two (v2.0) allowed more flexibility to a) increase student interaction within groups and as a
class and b) to simplify teacher facilitation. Specifically, we developed a new script whereby students are placed
into five "expert" groups, each of which is given a distinct role as a member of a drug discovery team with career
relevant information and role-specific data to contribute to a team decision. Mirroring how interdisciplinary teams
solve complex scientific challenges, students then work in "jigsaw" teams, integrating information (data) from
the five career-focused perspectives. To support data-based discourse and class-based decision-making, we added
a "results page" to the BioScann platform.     Expert group data and discussion posts are shared via the results page
and students use their  posts to  contribute   their  expert perspective in  the jigsaw  groups, informing    the ICS
progression. Throughout  this iterative workflow      (Figure 1), students  practice  data  interpretation, data-based
decision-making, and  group   communication      - critical STEM   mastery   skills.  As well, we created a student
workbook to support student accountability. Finally, we developed a teacher power point to help them guide
students through the  lesson  and enable adaptability    to  support different student  populations. This    re-design
reduced teacher facilitation of asynchronous group work, creating a single point of regulation to release the next
step in the ICS in bioscann.org, rather than multiple steps for each group during class. It also brought the whole
class together for critical decisions and it further integrates career roles and encourages collaboration between
groups. Together, these changes have resulted in a multi-role ICS authoring tool (Figure 1).
         BioScann responds    to the challenges    of enacting ICS   by: (1) allowing   for multidirectional  decision
making ­ in which students can choose their own path of inquiry; (2) providing distinct content to each group to
encourage classroom discourse; (3) utilizing interactive technologies for group decision-making and reporting to

                              Figure 1. BioScann v2.0 - multi-role ICS approach.
the class; (4) creating a common data and results workspace that supports teacher-led discourse. The platform
affords scaffolding that emulates scientific discovery and practices, while providing instructors with opportunities
to manage discussions by posing questions, reviewing student responses, and using those responses to address
student misconceptions. Preliminary analysis of classroom observations and interviews revealed that BioScann
v2.0 is usable and adaptable across a range of classroom settings ­ from advanced classes in exam schools to

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     638                                                   © ISLS
special education classes. However, the use of the results page varies across implementations and the depth of
data-driven decision making differs greatly across teachers and students. Preliminary data from pre-post testing
indicates that student's data interpretation skills (paired t test, p < 0.017) and awareness of bioscience careers
increases (paired t test, p < 0.0001). That said, we are not yet able to relate aspects of the curriculum, technology
or implementation to student-level outcomes.

Conclusions and implications
The iterative design process has enabled us to refine BioScann into a flexible technology-enhanced curriculum
that fosters career awareness and engagement in authentic scientific inquiry as students make collaborative, data-
driven decisions using multidisciplinary perspectives. When looking at the impact of the BioScann intervention,
we identified several important design implications. The addition of a "results page" was critical to scaffolding
discussions and data-based decision-making as it made student artifacts the centerpiece of discourse. The design
of a new workflow that moves students from an expert group to a multi-role jigsaw group deepened the quality of
the data-informed decision-making. Finally, integrated career-based role playing significantly improved career
awareness and interest.

Relevant scholarly references
Bell, Stephanie. (2010). Project-Based Learning for the 21st Century: Skills for the Future. The Clearing House.
         83. 39-43. 10.1080/00098650903505415.
Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. The
         Journal of the learning sciences, 13(1), 15-42.
Dillenbourg,  P., &  Jermann,  P.  (2007).  Designing    integrative scripts. In Scripting Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning (pp. 275-301): Springer US.
Design-Based   Research   Collective. (2003). Design-based    research: An emerging   paradigm  for  educational
         inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5­8.
Foran, J. (2001). The case method and the interactive classroom. Thought and Action, 19(1), 41-50.
Herreid, C. F. (2005). The interrupted case method. Journal of College Science Teaching, 35(2), 4-5.
Jacque, B., Malanson, K., Bateman, K., Akeson, B., Cail, A., Doss, C., . . . Galego, M. (2013). The Great Diseases
         Project: a partnership between Tufts Medical School and the Boston public schools. Academic medicine:
         Journal of the Association of American Medical Colleges, 88(5), 620.
Jacque, B., Koch-Weser, S., Faux, R., & Meiri, K. (2015). Addressing Health Literacy Challenges With a Cutting-
         Edge  Infectious Disease Curriculum   for the   High School  Biology   Classroom. Health  Education &
         Behavior, 43(1), 43-53.
Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., ... & Ryan, M. (2003). Problem-
         based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Putting learning by
         design (tm) into practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495-547.
Means, B., Shear, L., & Roschelle, J. (2015). Using technology and evidence to promote cultures of educational
         innovation: The example of science and mathematics education. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
OECD, D. S. E., Unemployed, N. E. E. T., & Inactive, N. E. E. T. (2016). Society at a Glance 2016.
Pellegrino, J.W. & Hilton, M.L. (Eds.). (2012). Education for Life and Work: Developing Transferable Knowledge
         and Skills in the 21st Century. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Roschelle, J., & Penuel, W. R. (2006, June). Co-design of innovations with teachers: Definition and dynamics.
         In Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Learning sciences (pp. 606-612). International
         Society of the Learning Sciences.
Riesbeck, C. K. & Shank, R.C. (1989). Inside case-based reasoning. Psychology Press.
Scardamalia, M & Bereiter, C. (1994) Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-2984.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2015). Education in an open informational world. In R. Scott, and S. Kosslyn
         (Eds.). Emerging trends in the social and behavioral sciences. Wiley Online Library.
Slotta, J. D. (2010). Evolving the classrooms of the future: The interplay of pedagogy, technology and community.
         In K. Mäkitalo-Siegl, F. Kaplan, J. Zottmann & F. Fischer (Eds.). Classroom of the Future. Orchestrating
         collaborative spaces. (215-242). Rotterdam: Sense.
Strobel, J. & van  Barneveld, A.  (2009)   When  is PBL    more Effective?    A meta-synthesis of meta-analyses
         comparing PBL to conventional Classrooms. Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-based Learning, 3(1),
         4.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  639                                                 © ISLS
