 Longitudinal Analysis and Visualization of Participation in Online
               Courses Powered by Cohesion Network Analysis
               Maria-Dorinela Sirbu, University Politehnica of Bucharest, maria.sirbu@cti.pub.ro
           Mihai Dascalu, University Politehnica of Bucharest, Cognos Business Consulting S.R.L.,
                                              mihai.dascalu@cs.pub.ro
                         Scott A. Crossley, Georgia State University, scrossley@gsu.edu
                      Danielle S. McNamara, Arizona State University, dsmcnama@asu.edu
         Stefan Trausan-Matu, University Politehnica of Bucharest, Cognos Business Consulting S.R.L.,
                                              stefan.trausan@cs.pub.ro

         Abstract:   Online  learning   environments   are  increasingly used  by  students and instructors.
         Cohesion  Network      Analysis   (CNA)   can  be  employed  by  instructors  to analyze discourse
         structure in terms of cohesive links in order to model student participation and interactions in
         collaborative   learning  environments.   This paper  presents  an  extended  longitudinal analysis
         together with corresponding visualizations of participation generated for an online math course,
         powered by CNA. Multiple interactive views centered on the evolution of participation and of
         interactions between students clustered into three layers are generated using the CNA indices
         provided  by  the   ReaderBench    framework.   Two   types of  sociograms   are used to show  the
         interactions between     learners in the  two  course  weeks   that exhibited extreme   conditions,
         namely: a) week 6, when a dramatic decrease of participation was identified, and b) week 16,
         when the highest number of participants and contributions were logged. In addition to the views
         centered on participants, we introduce a heatmap depicting the evolution of keyword relevance
         over  time,  as well   as a   Chord  diagram   for visualizing  concept  maps  based  on   semantic
         relatedness. Our analytics dashboard can be used by tutors to monitor students throughout the
         term and to better ascertain the correlation of course material, schedule, and deadlines with the
         participation of students, as well as their interactions among themselves and with the tutor.

Introduction
Online courses have become a useful learning platform due to their accessibility in terms of distance and time
management. These platforms help students learn through collaboration and interactions with peers.         However,
tutors are faced  with   the difficult task  of tracking a  large  audience; thus, automated   analyses of students'
participation are required.   This  paper   relies on  Cohesion   Network    Analysis (CNA)   (Dascalu,  McNamara,
Trausan-Matu, & Allen, 2018) to automatically assess students' participation. Going beyond Social Network
Analysis (SNA) (Scott, 2017) that considers the number of exchanged messages, CNA indices are used to evaluate
interactions between participants based the cohesion graph (e.g., out-degree indices reflect a higher participation,
in-degree indices indicate a higher collaboration). CNA considers the content of the discourse and participants'
interactions by examining semantic cohesion of the links between student forum posts.
         This article is a continuation of the studies conducted by Sirbu et al. (2018). The paper introduces a
longitudinal analysis and detailed visualizations of participation useful for gaining a better understanding of how
students interact  during    an online   math   course.  The   ReaderBench    framework     (Dascalu, Trausan-Matu,
McNamara, & Dessus, 2015) was used to generate multiple CNA indices and to extract keywords, which were
afterwards used to generate different views to model trends in student participation using the d3.js library, as well
as concept maps relying on the semantic relatedness between keywords found in the discussion forums.

Method
Our corpus    was collected   from  a  discrete math   course  for undergraduate   students in a  Computer   Science
Department (Crossley, Barnes, Lynch, & McNamara, 2017). The course combined standard lectures with the
support of online tools, which include a standard online question-answer forum. The total number of students on
the forum was 250, out of which 169 had at least one contribution. Altogether the students produced more than
2000 posts. The class lasted for 18 weeks (Aug 23, 2013 - Dec 24, 2013).
         The ReaderBench framework was used to analyze the interactions between participants and to evaluate
their contribution by generating multiple CNA indices. Using the method proposed by Nistor, Panaite, Dascalu,
and Trausan-Matu (2017), we clustered the members based on CNA indegree and outdegree into three clusters in
descending order of the average of their indegree scores defined as central, active, and peripheral scores. A
hierarchical clustering algorithm was applied using the Ward Criterion for minimizing variance after the merging

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      640                                                 © ISLS
of clusters. Based on the indices provided by the ReaderBench framework and the clustering method, we created
multiples types of views and graphics to illustrate interactions among participants, trends in their participation
over time, as well as the most relevant topics discussed.
         A  longitudinal  analysis based on CNA           was performed  to visualize different       interactions patterns
throughout the course. The visualizations from Figure 1 presents the evolution of participation using Line Chart
and Trend Chart. Figure 1.a presents the number of participants (orange line) and contributions (green line)
throughout the course, where the X axis represents the period, and Y axis the corresponding number of participants
or contributions. A large number of participants/contributions can be observed at the beginning of the course (first
2 weeks), followed by a drastic decrease in the 6th week, and an accelerated increase in the final weeks, with a
maximum number of participants and contributions in the 16th week. Figure 1.b presents the density of the
community network calculated as m/(n*(n - 1)), where m is the number of edges between participants, and n is
the number of participants. We also generated a line chart to observe changes in participation over time for specific
individuals. Figure 1.c shows the evolution of participation for 10 randomly chosen students. Patterns similar to
Figure 1.a are observed, including a decrease at the beginning of the course followed by an increased involvement
towards the end (see participant with ID 564600000 marked with yellow). Figure 1.d presents the median weekly
participation values for all participants, together with 5th and 95th percentiles in order to depict the course trends.

 a. Overall evolution of the counts for participants and       c. Specific participants' evolution.
 contributions.

 b. Density evolution.                                         d. Trends in terms of median CNA participation
                               Figure 1. Longitudinal Analysis of participation.
         In addition to the previous participant-centered views, we examined which topics were most frequent by
using the keywords extraction mechanism from ReaderBench. We used a Heatmap visualization presented in
Figure 2 to represent the 10 most relevant keywords from each week identified in participants' discussions. Words
such as "grade", "exam", and "assign" are used intensively in the last 4 weeks of the course, "homework" is
present during the weeks in which homework was due, while "number", "post" and "proof" were used throughout
the entire course.
                                                            Keyword

                                    Figure 2. Keywords used by participants.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        641                                                     © ISLS
  Week
The semantic similarity between the most relevant 20 keywords is represented using a Chord diagram (see Figure
3) in which the external circle is populated with concepts and edges reflect the similarity between two concepts
above an imposed threshold (i.e., edge width is proportional to semantic relatedness between concepts). Three
concepts were not included in the diagram (i.e., "lab", "section", and "post") because these concepts were isolated
in relation to the other extracted keywords. Figure 3.a presents the similarity between the remaining 17 concepts.
Mouseover on  the concept grade    results in Figure 3.b,  which isolates the visualization to concepts  that are
semantically related with grade within the discussion board comments.

          (a) Keywords similarities.                       (b) Semantically related concepts to "grade".
               Figure 3. Concept maps relying on the semantic similarity between concepts.
       In addition,   different sociograms    are used to  observe  the interactions between    participants, the
participants' distribution over the three clusters, and the evolution of participation over time. Weekly snapshots
are generated to examine how participation in the community evolves from one week to the next. Two types of
interactive sociograms are generated to display interaction patterns between participants. First, the Clustered Force
Layout presented in Figure 4 shows the position of each participant in the hierarchical structure using circles
proportional to their CNA participation scores. The sociograms from Figure 4 reflect the participation of course
members in week 6 (when a drastic decrease occurred) and in week 16 (when the highest number of participants
and contributions was observed). Dark red nodes represent the central participants, active participants are colored
in dark grey, whereas light grey denotes peripheral members.

                       (a) Week 6.                                   (b) Week 16.
                                      Figure 4. Clustered Force Layout.
       Second, the interactions between participants are modeled using Hierarchical Edge Bundling sociograms.
Figure 5 presents the dependencies between participants in Weeks 6 (left) and 16 (right) in a radial manner. Similar
to the previous type of sociograms, the participants are grouped into their corresponding cluster, whereas the
dependencies are grouped into spline bundles. The incoming and outgoing links are displayed on mouseover as
follows: incoming links are colored in dark blue, whereas outgoing links are marked in red.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  642                                                 © ISLS
                          (a) Week 6.                                (b) Week 16.
                                    Figure 5. Hierarchical Edge Building.

Discussions
This paper introduces a longitudinal analysis and new visualizations based on CNA for an online math course
generated with the ReaderBench framework. The evolution of participation is depicted using Clustered Force
Layouts and Hierarchical Edge Building models, while the most frequently used keywords and their semantic
similarity are visualized using heatmaps and Chord diagrams.
       The provided visualizations facilitate the understanding of course dynamics over time and can be used
to derive specific characteristics, namely that: a) peripheral members tend to dominate the interactions ­ most
students had singular inquiries and responses, without being engaged in multiple discussion threads; b) the degree
of participation grows from peripheral members to active and central ones; and c) the course is not dominated by
a single participant. Our tools are designed to ensure an in-depth longitudinal analysis of course participation
based on discourse and text cohesion, while focusing on interaction patterns, clustering of students based on their
participation, and monitoring course trends.
       As follow-up directions, we plan to integrate the learning analytics tools within the ReadME platform
(Botarleanu et al., 2018) in order to facilitate interactions, monitor students, and to automatically identify changes
in the community structure (e.g., participants who exceed the peripheral layer and gain a more central role).

References
Botarleanu, R.-M., Dascalu, M., Sirbu, M.-D., Crossley, S. A., & Trausan-Matu, S. (2018). ReadME ­ Generating
       Personalized Feedback for Essay Writing using the ReaderBench Framework. In 3rd Int. Conf. on Smart
       Learning Ecosystems and Regional Development (pp. 133­145). Aalborg, Denmark: Springer.
Crossley, Scott, Barnes, Tiffany, Lynch, Collin, & McNamara, Danielle S. (2017). Linking Language to Math
       Success in an On-Line Course.
Dascalu, M., McNamara, D. S., Trausan-Matu, S., & Allen, L.K. (2018). Cohesion Network Analysis of CSCL
       Participation. Behavior Research Methods, 50(2), 604­619. doi: 10.3758/s13428-017-0888-4
Dascalu, M., Trausan-Matu, S., McNamara, D.S., & Dessus, P. (2015). ReaderBench ­ Automated Evaluation of
       Collaboration   based  on  Cohesion    and Dialogism.   International  Journal of Computer-Supported
       Collaborative Learning, 10(4), 395­423.
Nistor, N., Panaite, M., Dascalu, M., & Trausan-Matu, S. (2017). Identifying Socio-cognitive Structures in Online
       Knowledge Communities (OKCs) using Cohesion Network Analysis. In 9th International Symposium
       on Symbolic and Numeric Algorithms for Scientific Computing. Timisoara, Romania: IEEE.
Scott, John. (2017). Social network analysis. London, UK: Sage.
Sirbu, M.-D., Dascalu, M., Crossley, S. A., McNamara, D. S., Barnes, T., Lynch, C. F., & Trausan-Matu, S.
       (2018). Exploring Online Course Sociograms using Cohesion Network Analysis. In 19th Int. Conf. on
       Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED 2018), Part II (pp. 337­342). London, UK: Springer.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the README project "Interactive and Innovative application for evaluating the
readability of texts in Romanian Language and for improving users' writing styles", contract no. 114/15.09.2017,
MySMIS  2014 code     119286, the FP7 2008-212578    LTfLL    project, the National Science Foundation (DRL-
1418378) and the Office of Naval Research (N00014-17-1-2300). We would like to thank Tiffany Barnes and
Collin Lynch for their help in conducting the previous experiments.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  643                                                 © ISLS
