    Embedding Microblogging Technology to Support Classroom
                                                        Dialogue
           Anja Amundrud, Department of Education, University of Oslo, anja.amundrud@iped.uio.no
       Ingvill Rasmussen, Department of Education, University of Oslo, ingvill.rasmussen@iped.uio.no

          Abstract:    It's crucial  for teachers   to  support the  development    of students'  dialogic   skills.
          Such skills refer to the students' use of language as a tool to enable understanding of each
          other's  knowledge,     which  creates    the possibility of constructing   new   knowledge   together.
          Digital technology in classroom activities can support this form of dialogue, but it must be
          embedded into a classroom's complex ecosystem to be beneficial. This paper explores how a
          group   of seventh     grade   students   were  taught   dialogic skills  through  the   integration of
          microblogging in the classroom. The data analysed consists of video from the classroom, and
          the study is grounded in sociocultural theory. Findings suggest that integrating microblogging
          in classroom activities increased participation and made students' contributions more visible,
          thus creating the opportunity for students to build on each other's knowledge. However, this is
          dependent on the teachers' facilitation of the activities.

Introduction
This paper reports on a study of embedding new technology into classrooms to support and develop students'
dialogic skills during group discussions and whole-class discussions. Dialogic skills refer to the specific use of
language   as a   tool to   enable  understanding    of  one  another's   knowledge    and  perspectives.  It  is a  way  of
reasoning  that  creates  understanding    based    on  one's perceptions   while  allowing  other ideas  and  opinions   to
adapt  or integrate  into   one's  own   thinking.  Participants  in this type of   dialogue learn to think   together  and
construct new knowledge and ideas as a collective (Mercer, 2002). Students' dialogic skills can be an important
predictor of academic achievement (Applebee, Langer, Nystrand, & Gamoran, 2003; Howe & Abedin, 2013).
Thus, we argue that it is valuable that teachers can support the development of students' dialogic skills. The use
of digital technology in classroom activities may enhance new forms of dialogue (Rasmussen & Ludvigsen,
2010). Within the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) community, research has shown that it
is not technology itself that increases quality in classroom discussions; technologies need to be integrated into
the teacher's practices and task design (Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fisher, 2009). Research has also shown the
importance of establishing norms and ground rules that are defined and regulated in the context of the classroom
to productively handle the presence of technologies (Rasmussen, Lund, & Smørdal, 2012). To date there is little
in-depth research on the use of hybrid technologies to support classroom dialogue. Hybrid technologies here
refer to technologies that are designed to support synchronous, collocated interaction, such as microblogging
tools. Despite the fact that few studies have examined this type of technology in a classroom context, some
findings indicate that the format of microblogs may enhance engagement and increase participation (Gao, Luo,
&  Zhang,    2012; Luo    &  Gao,   2012)  and  that    using tools like  Twitter  in classroom  discussions   can   support
collaborative  learning,    encourage    reflective thinking   and  help  initiate conversations,  (Gao   et al., 2012).  In
addition, it can be used to explore and bring new information into conversations (Thoms, 2012).
          In this  paper,   we   investigate how    students   in a  Norwegian     seventh-grade   classroom   were   taught
dialogic skills during a Norwegian language and literature class with the use of a microblogging tool called
Talkwall.  The    data consists   of videotaped     student-teacher  and  student-student   interactions  from    a  primary
school class  that   took   part in  a design-based     research  (DBR)   project   called Digital Dialogues   Across    the
Curriculum (DiDiAC) where 21 teachers and their students from Norway and the UK took part. The study is
grounded in a sociocultural approach to learning, and here dialogue is understood as a specific use of language
to help people Interthink in order to understand each other's knowledge and perspectives (Mercer, 2002). To
guide  the analysis,   we   asked;  In what  ways    can  the  microblogging   tool   Talkwall facilitate  the teaching   of
dialogic skills?

Research context
In the DiDiAC      project,  the  participating  teachers  were    encouraged  to   use the  material from    the    Thinking
Together approach (Mercer, 2002) and to experiment with Talkwall as a means to support the development of
dialogic skills. Talkwall (see Figure 1) is a microblogging tool specifically designed to promote and support
student participation in classroom dialogues. Talkwall draws on the microblogging approach of using only short
messages to communicate, using this to encourage students to engage in learning and share their developing

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         648                                                      © ISLS
ideas, in turn, promoting   productive  classroom  dialogues.  Short  texts/messages     can be   produced  either
collectively or individually and are shared on digital devices. These texts can be sorted using hashtags (#) to
make it easier for students to follow specific topics or selected concepts.
        The participants presented in this paper were one teacher and a class of 25 primary school students (N
= 25), aged 11­12 years. In the beginning of the project, this class and their teacher created and agreed to a set
of ground rules for talk as part of the project intervention. The ground rules are examples of suggested strategies
used as scaffolds to promote dialogic skills (Rojas-Drummond et al., 2003). The class focussed on two or three
rules at a time. In the example presented here, they focussed specifically on being a good listener and building
on each other's ideas. The ground rules were applied to the different subjects. The presented data in this paper
is from one lesson in the subject Norwegian language and literature lesson.

Figure 1. The use of Talkwall in classroom interaction. Students can write on individual or shared devices. Their
                                   contributions appear on the whiteboard.

Methods and data analysis
The data analysed is part of the material from the DiDiAC project. In this paper we have chosen to focus on one
specific episode of whole class discussion to illustrate some of the main findings from the qualitative analysis of
the whole material. All the data collected in the research project was coded on a minute by minute level for an
overview of the whole corpus. This allowed us to see the data set selected for this paper in relation to the lager
corpus. The data set selected consists of three research lessons recorded over a six months period   in a primary
school in Oslo (seven hours of video: three and a half hours each from a camera focussing on group discussions
and a  camera   focussing on the teacher and teacher-student   interactions).   In order to  explore key  features
concerning the interactional work performed to teach and develop students' dialogic skills, excerpts of teacher-
student interactions were selected for detailed analysis using techniques from a microanalytical approach (Derry
et al., 2010). The interaction analysis applied involved a sequential analysis of the interactions between the
participants. Each utterance in the selected excerpt was analysed in relation to the previous utterance, and the
focus was not on a single utterance but on how meaning was created within the discourse (Jordan & Henderson,
1995).

Findings
As  mentioned,  the episode  presented was selected because   it illustrates   some of the  main  findings. These
findings indicate that embedding Talkwall in the classroom with the support of the Thinking Together material
can: 1) provide insight into the knowledge of peers, 2) act as a starting point for the teacher to initiate whole-
class discussions based on the students' contributions, and 3) engage the students in whole-class discussions by
extending the voices of the individuals from a small group conversation.
        The excerpt chosen (see Figure 3) shows some characteristics of how Talkwall can be embedded in
both group and whole-class discussions. In the lesson analysed, the students were engaged in a larger learning
activity about different literature genres. The genre in focus was self-biography, and the task was to discuss the
theme `what you cannot live without' as preparation for writing their own self-biographies. To prepare for this
discussion, students individually wrote five things that they cannot live without on a Talkwall created by the
teacher. In the classroom, the teacher divided the class into groups of three to discuss their opinions about this
theme and then to hashtag the different contributions of their peers with #opinion or #fact using an iPad. Each
group had to engage in discussion before assigning the hashtags. The discussion was strictly directed by the
teacher and by the ground rules the class previously agreed on. The teacher reminded the students several times
that they were expected to contribute to the discussion and that they were not allowed to decide the hashtags
before everyone  in the group had  the opportunity  to state their opinions.    They were   also expected to give
reasons for their opinions. These expectations were among the ground rules the class had developed. In addition
to following the expected ground rules, the teacher focussed specifically the on helping the students follow the
ground rules; being a good listener and building on each other's ideas in this lesson.
        During the group discussions, the teacher walked around the in classroom listening to all the groups'

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  649                                                   © ISLS
discussions. In addition, the teacher used her own computer to read the appearing contributions from the groups
on Talkwall, both   via the feed   and also  via  the  participants    walls (see Figure  2). When  all  the groups  had
hashtagged  the Talkwall    contributions,  the   teacher started    a class-wide  discussion  concerning  one  group's
Talkwall (see Figure 3).

Figure 2. Talkwall on both the groups' iPads and on the whiteboard. Group contributions on Talkwall with #fact
                                                       or #opinion.

        The  teacher    displayed  the  group's   Talkwall   contributions    on  the whiteboard    (see Figure 2)   and
encouraged the students in the selected group to share their discussion with the class. The teacher asked the
group to elaborate on why they chose the hashtags and what they discussed the most. One group member, Lina,
said that clothes were the biggest subject of discussion in their group. She then offered the group's reasoning,
saying that clothes could be an opinion because people can survive without them, but they could also be a fact
because humans need to protect their bodies. Lina concluded that it depends on where one is in the world (see
Figure 3, lines 2­7). On their Talkwall, Lina and her group wrote that clothes are a #fact when it is cold (see
Figure 2).

                                  Figure 3. Excerpt from whole-class discussion.

        The group's Talkwall contributions were displayed to the whole class on the whiteboard (see Figure 2),
and other  students  signalled  to the teacher    that they wanted     to comment  on  this group's  contributions.  The
teacher called on Cindy, who elaborated on what Lina had said and what Lina and her group wrote on Talkwall.
Cindy elaborated on why you need clothes: not only because it can be cold, but also `to protect the body from
snakes  and so  on'  (see  Figure  3, lines 11­14).    Here, Cindy     built on Lina  and her  group's   contributions in
Talkwall by elaborating, providing a reason, and providing an example.
        The teacher used the Talkwall contributions as a starting point for directing the whole-class discussion
by displaying and leading attention to one group's Talkwall. Using Talkwall in this way enabled the teacher to
get insight into what the groups were discussing. This insight was possible because of the ability to read the
groups' contributions   in real time  as they  were    appearing   on  Talkwall.  In addition, this activity created the
opportunity for other students to build on the ideas their peers expressed in the Talkwall contributions and to
elaborate  further, thereby  developing     their dialogic   skills. Furthermore,    the visualisation of the  Talkwall
contributions and the display of the outcomes of the group discussions extended the voices of all the group
members to the whole class. This was made possible because they all had to contribute to the group discussion
due to the ground rules that obligated everyone to participate.

Conclusion and implications
Research has demonstrated that embedding technology in classroom activities may support the development of
students'  dialogic skills (Rasmussen    &  Ludvigsen,      2010).   For  example, the   microblogging   technology  has
potential to support students building on each other's thinking and also to increase participation in classroom
discussions (Gao et al., 2012; Luo & Gao, 2012). However, research on CSCL settings has shown that digital

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       650                                                   © ISLS
technologies in the classroom are not beneficial in and of themselves; they need to be embedded in the design of
the activities (Dillenbourg et al., 2009).
         By using detailed microanalysis of classroom interaction, this study contributes to existing research by
illustrating how digital artefacts--when embedded in the activity design--can provide new opportunities for
students to develop dialogic skills. Based on our analysis, we argue for the importance of the design of the
learning activity. Moreover,    we   argue that   the teacher's role  in orchestrating  the  complex  ecosystem   of  the
classroom is crucial  for   the realisation    of the potential of  a digital artefact, such as Talkwall.  The   case  of
Talkwall demonstrates how this digital artefact provide new possibilities by making visible written contributions
from students, thus providing the teacher with access to developing knowledge and ideas that can be used as a
starting point for continuing whole-class discussion. Furthermore, how technology can facilitate the engagement
of more students by extending group conversation through blog-contributions that make visible segment of each
individual voice that contribute to the building of a collective knowledge base for the whole class.
         This study has certain limitations, it is work mentioning that the teacher in this case is experienced both
in teaching  and   with the  use    of digital technologies  in the   classroom  which   has implications  on how     she
designed the learning activity. Also, Talkwall opens up the possibility to gain insight into the knowledge of
peers, further studies are necessary to obtain more empirical documentation of how this information is being
used to for e.g. build on each other's knowledge. Third, to provide a deeper understanding and also to get a
broader perspective on how this technology can support the development of students' dialogic skills will require
more investigation  of  different   teachers   design  of  learning activities and    how they adapt the tool in their
classrooms.
         The teacher    in this case   creatively  adapted both  the  technology  and   the material from the Thinking
Together approach    to further  develop    her   teaching repertoire  and facilitate students' dialogic skills, i.e. the
process through which they learn to reason, discuss, argue, and explain their developing knowledge and ideas
(Mercer, 2002). As such, this study contributes to the existing body of CSCL research with knowledge about
what it takes to successfully embed technologies in classroom activities to enhance learning opportunities.

References
Applebee, A., Langer, J., Nystrand, M., & Gamoran, A. (2003). Discussion-based approaches to developing
         understanding:    Classroom    instruction   and  student  performance  in   middle and high  school  English.
         American Educational Research Journal, 40(3), 685­730.
Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Ricki, G., . . . Sherin, B. (2010). Conducting
         video research    in   the learning   sciences:  Guidance    on selection, analysis,  technology, and   ethics.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19, 3­53.
Dillenbourg, P., Järvelä, S., & Fisher, F. (2009) The evolution of research on computer-supported collaborative
         learning: From design to orchestration. In N. Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen, T. de Jong, A.
Lazonder, & S. Barnes (Eds.), Technology-Enhanced learning: Principles and products (pp. 3-19). Springer.
Gao, F., Luo, T., & Zhang, K. (2012). Tweeting for learning: A critical analysis of research on microblogging in
         education published in 2008­2011. British Journal of Educational Technology, 43(5), 783­801.
Howe, C., and M. Abedin. 2013. "Classroom dialogue: A systematic review across four decades of research."
         Cambridge Journal of Education 43 (3): 325-356.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 4(1), 39­103.
Luo, T., & Gao, F. (2012). Enhancing classroom learning experience by providing structures to microblogging-
         based activities. Journal of Information Technology Education: Innovations in Practice, 11.
Mercer, N. (2002). Words and minds: How we use language to think together. Routledge.
Rasmussen, I., & Ludvigsen, S. R. (2010). Learning with computer tools and environments: A sociocultural
         perspective. In K. Littleton, C. Wood, & J. K. Staarman (Eds.), International Handbook of Psychology
         in Education (pp. 399­433). London: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Rasmussen, I., Lund, A., & Smørdal, O. (2012). Visualisation of trajectories of participation in a Wiki: A basis
         for feedback and assessment? Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy, 1(2012), 21­35.
Rojas-Drummond, S., Pérez, V., Vélez, M., Gómez, L., & Mendoza, A. (2003). Talking for reasoning among
         Mexican primary school children. Learning and Instruction, (13), 653­670.
Thoms, B. (2012). Student perceptions of microblogging: Integrating Twitter with blogging to support learning
         and interaction. J Inf Technol Educ, 11, 179­197.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Research Council of Norway [FINNUT/Project No: 254761].

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       651                                                   © ISLS
