     Families and Media Multi-tasking: Reorganizing Collaborative
                                            Learning at Home
                           Deborah Silvis, University of Washington, dsilvis@uw.edu

        Abstract:      As the  number    of tools  available  for learning   within  computer-based      tasks
        proliferates, so too do the tasks. This paper describes how families use technology and new
        media for multi-tasking in order to collaboratively accomplish many routine tasks around their
        homes.    Families    employ   a number    of   approaches   to   media   multi-tasking,     and their
        sociotechnical practices reflect how children learn to multi-task, learn through multi-tasking,
        and    learn despite multi-tasking. I draw   on these practices   to explain how    families  manage
        shared- and divergent -objects of activity at home, and how technology is implicated in this
        maintenance work. I offer a multi-dimensional framework for multi-tasking that suggests how
        determining what is consequential for learning with technology is often contingent on a number
        of tools, tasks, purposes, and people.

Introduction
On a bright April day, after nine-year-old twins Oscar and Eddie had returned home from school, I interviewed
their mom Steph about her sons' technology routines. After detailing their "daily media round", or all the routine
places people go and things they do with media and technology (Taylor, Takeuchi & Stevens, 2017), Steph
described some of the activities they did as a family on a more infrequent basis. For example, she participated in
several community organizations, and the twins usually accompanied her when she attended weekly or biweekly
meetings. Steph gave the following account of her sons' involvement during such family outings.

        If they want to take off the headphones and engage in the dialog at the meeting, they can
        participate and soak things in. Sometimes in the car on the way home they start to talk about
        what the adults were discussing. Even though they are [playing] on their tablets or with their
        headphones, they are still soaking in what's going on around them. They are obviously multi-
        tasking, because they will reengage in the conversation [emphasis added].

Later in this paper I will describe how the twins (and their mom) accomplished such multi-tasking, a phenomenon
I observed across all the families I studied. This paper examines how families' approaches to media engagement
allow learners to "soak in what's going on around them" despite multiple demands on their attention.
        In any given day, families must accomplish meal prep and eating, clean-up and chores, commuting,
attending school, paid work, homework, community meetings and parties, shopping, sports or music practice,
paying  bills, worship,  play  time, pet  care,  bedtime, and    more.  The   work   is never  done,    and  in today's
socioeconomic context, families are busier than ever (Ochs & Kremer-Sadlik, 2013). But, as Graesch (2009)
suggested, "busier   families are not  necessarily   working  harder   or longer  hours,   but instead   are  having to
reconfigure their lives around a growing number of bids for their attention" (p. 86). How is it that families manage
to do more in the same amount of time? How is technology involved in reconfiguring family life? What material
and human resources must they collaboratively assemble to manage it all? This paper examines multi-tasking as
one response to these questions and explores how it is part and parcel of learning in new media ecologies (Barron
et al., 2009).
        The current paper represents a condensed version of a longer dissertation chapter analyzing media multi-
tasking in the context of family life. In what follows, I address the question: what forms of collaborative activity
does multi-tasking    make   possible, and  how    do   families  collaboratively  contribute   to   what   ends being
consequential for learning? Drawing on three instances of families' media multi-tasking, I interrogate school-like
notions of being  "on  task"  and instead   take the perspective  that multi-tasking    is intrinsic to  most everyday
activities. I elaborate dimensions of multi-tasking that bear on learning: how tasks involve arranging for multiple
sub-tasks, multiple tools, multiple purposes, and multiple people. Analyzing instances of families' multi-tasking
across these dimensions showed how families collaboratively organize activities to learn through, learn to, and
learn despite multi-tasking.
        At stake across all these elements of multi-tasking is a question of whose perspective on a task matters

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    65                                                      © ISLS
for learning. Children and adults have different views of what they want to accomplish during precious hours
spent at home (Goodwin & Cekaite, 2018). Likewise, their objectives within a shared task can vary; adults may
see media engagement as useful for one purpose, while for children, it serves an entirely different aim. Children
frequently choose the course of their media engagement; however, doing so in ways that conform to families'
shared rules and norms can necessitate children's multi-tasking. Multi-tasking then becomes a lens through which
what is consequential for learners becomes visible, opening up endogenous perspectives with the potential to
expand what counts as meaningful media engagement and learning and for whom (Hall & Jurow, 2015; Stevens,
2000). Viewed in this way, routine tasks are sites of on-going negotiation in families, where multi-tasking can
resolve- or renew- tensions over technology use. As the current analysis will show, home is a powered place,
where decisions about sociotechnical practices are charged and pivot around multiple tools, people, objectives,
and tasks.

Conceptual framework
According  to some   researchers, young people  are  both  the biggest multi-taskers and the  ones  least likely to
perform well while multi-tasking (Rosen, Carrier & Cheever, 2013). Because multi-tasking performance has
consistently been found to improve with age, teaching and learning has been a major focus of multi-tasking
research. And perhaps unsurprisingly, in recent years, given the proliferation of mobile media and screen-based
learning designs, there has been renewed interest in multi-tasking research. Lin and colleagues (2011) have
produced a number of studies of media multi-tasking (MMT), which they define in terms of dual-tasking, as
"engaging in multiple media and tasks simultaneously" (P. 183), for example reading a news story while watching
a video (Lin, Mills, Ifenthaler &, 2016). The bulk of literature has pointed to negative effects of media multi-
tasking on studying at home (Rosen et al., 2013), classroom learning (Wood et al., 2012), and social success of
young people (Pea et al., 2012).
       Studies    of families' multi-tasking  leave  the  distinct impression  that  children either are  primary
distractions (for parents) or they are primarily distracted by media (Craig, 2016). While there may be some truth
to this gloss on family multi-tasking, it neglects how children's learning might be involved in new forms of media
multi-tasking or how learning may be supported through collaborations with other family members (Shapiro et
al., 2017; Silvis, Taylor & Stevens, 2018b; Lin et al., 2016). Recently, Mejía-Arauz and colleagues (2018) have
examined   collaborative learning  at home,    distinguishing  between   task objectives  that  are  met   through
"negotiation," completed individually and then combined together, and those achieved "collaboratively," through
joint synchronous activity. This work points to how families' collaborative activities frequently exhibit multi-
tasking during culturally valued routines like cleaning, cooking, care-giving, or conversing, though this was more
normative in families from non-dominant backgrounds, such as Mexican heritage families.
       In   other research   with  families, joint media   engagement   (JME)  may   also provide    a supportive
collaborative context for multi-party media multi-tasking (Takeuchi & Stevens, 2011. Studies of JME have by
and large looked at how multiple people arrange for learning around single devices or media, which are generally
digital. However, in today's dynamic media ecologies, digital technologies are not the sole means of multi-tasking
(e.g. Andrade, 2010). A significant amount of paper-based activities persist in homes and are interleaved with
screen-based activities. Therefore, multi-tasking not only involves doing multiple tasks at once, it also represents
a multi-tooled approach to tasks. As collaborators, whose labor is distributed, draw these materials together in-
task, the task itself may break down into multiple sub-tasks, with separate objectives that must be articulated and
coordinated (Stevens, 2000).
       The nature of task objectives is a central issue in research on multi-tasking. A single task may achieve
multiple aims (Engeström, 2001). Take for example a routine activity like checking email. Because many different
topics and tasks sit within different email messages, the objects of an activity such as "checking email" can range
from coordinating a meeting with colleagues to getting the latest deals on produce from the local grocery store.
Task objectives proliferate in complex media environments, even within a single task. Engeström suggests how
"the object of activity is a moving target, not reducible to conscious short-term goals" (p. 136). There is no "task"
only "task(s)" as people and objects co-construct them. Or, as Erickson (2016) has commented, "in any human
interaction, there is always more than one thing going on at the same time." Relatedly, activities that serve one
person's objectives may engage someone else in the family for a variety of different reasons, only some of which
are shared among collaborators. Managing interactional "floors" (i.e. interactional spaces for establishing topics
or tasks), then requires balancing dynamic tasks and topics across time and space (Erickson, 2004). Multi-tasking,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   66                                                  © ISLS
therefore, is not only a means of accomplishing multiple discreet tasks or sub-tasks with multiple tools, it is also
multi-party and responds to the multiple purposes of different participants.

Study design and methods
In this analysis, I take a situated view of learning (Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989; Lave & Wenger, 1991) and
draw on data collected in an ethnographic study of family life at home as it is currently being transformed by new
(especially mobile) forms    of media    and technology. Participants included   eighteen  focal children  in twelve
families from diverse racial, ethnic, geographic, and socioeconomic backgrounds. Participants were recruited from
local youth-serving organizations, camps, and other places where young people between the ages of nine and
thirteen years old spend time; this period of development is significant for media engagement because it is about
the time when children get their own devices (Rideout & Katz, 2016).
        Data collection in this ethnographic study of families "daily media rounds" (Taylor, Takeuchi & Stevens,
2017) took place over two years in two separate US cities, and methods included the following: semi-structured
interviews with parents and children (48 total); video recorded observations conducted during home visits, some
of which were recorded by children using point-of-view cameras (i.e. GoPros®) (approx. 100 hrs); experience
sampling  through nightly   phone  calls  (90  total calls), and a novel   research activity for digital mapping  of
participants' technology    use (Silvis, Taylor &    Stevens, 2018a), which  was    also video recorded   (16 digital
artifacts). To answer the research questions- how families' media multi-tasking organizes learning arrangements-
I drew on ethnographic and interaction analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). I produced multi-modal transcription
of the talk, gesture, gaze, coordination of body movements (or lack thereof), uptake of tools, use of space, and
other aspects that played into moment-to-moment interactions (Tulbert & Goodwin, 2011).

Analytic findings
A wide variety of everyday tasks took place across families participating in the study. I analyzed a number of key
instances where multiple people, tools, tasks, and aims were being configured and re-configured, as opposed to
those where a child was independently engaged with a single task for a period of time (i.e. reading a book or e-
book for thirty minutes without interruption, doing math homework at the kitchen table before moving on to play
time). Looking across tasks that were multi-tooled, multi-party, multi-purpose and involved multiple sub-tasks, a
number of patterns emerged. I found that families approaches to multi-tasking supported children learning through
multi-tasking, learning to multi-task, and learning despite multi-tasking. These patterns reflect the dynamics of
multiple dimensions of multi-tasking in-task (i.e. multiple tools, people, tasks, and aims). In what follows, I focus
on three instances of children multi-tasking, emphasizing the role of collaboration in each case. Each of these
examples serves as a representative case of three ways in which multi-tasking relates to learning.

Learning through multi-tasking using a single device
Because wired digital technologies afford endless possibilities for media engagement, a single device can organize
a space for a great deal of media multi-tasking. Katherine, a ten-year-old girl whose family had recently moved
to a large city in the Northwest US from Shanghai, was rarely without her prized possession, a MacBook Air.
According to her mom, when she was not participating in a summer program, taking ballet lessons, or making
plans to attend her new school in the fall, Katherine was inseparable from this mobile device. She relied on the
tool for a myriad of activities including: tasks assigned by her Mom (e.g. researching animal shelters where they
could adopt a family dog or places where they could go to explore their new city); homework assigned by teachers
(e.g. mythology reading, poetry writing); preparing for school in the fall (e.g. checking summer reading list,
studying for a gifted program placement test); learning about topics of interest (e.g. receiving a video from a
friend in her  Kitchen Chemistry    class,   receiving email  from  a list serve about   "science-y" cooking);  and
independently surfing websites for news or videos (e.g. watching an old episode of Pokémon on YouTube, reading
articles in her news feed).
        During one visit to her home, I observed how Katherine used her laptop over the course of an hour for a
number of separate and simultaneous activities, a practice I call "single-device multi-tasking." Zeroing in on this
observation alone illustrates the density of media multi-tasking Katherine engaged in during more than an hour
spent using her laptop. As she worked, a single device provided the means of easily multi-tasking by tabbing back
and forth between active windows, continuously checking the status of uploads, or opening new windows and
programs in order to accomplish a task at hand. When I joined her in her bedroom work site on this day, Katherine
was already busy working on a video she had animated in QuickTime the previous evening. She was uploading it
to a site called Magisto.com, that hosts videos for sharing or publishing on social media. While this underlying
activity progressed in the background, she busied herself with a number of other tasks (Figure 1).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     67                                                   © ISLS
Figure 1. Single device multi-tasking. Timeline (in minutes) of all the separate, overlapping, tasks Katherine
 engaged in during a single observation. *Except for Mythology reading, all of these tasks utilized only her
                                               laptop.
         After about thirty minutes (and at least seven discreet tasks), Katherine began composing a poem in a
Google Doc that she shared with her summer program writing teacher, who provided her with virtual feedback.
A few minutes into her poetry writing, Katherine opened Google Images in a separate tab, something she said she
sometimes did "for inspiration." She referred to several images of poems, tabbing back and forth between these
and the one she was authoring, and eventually positioning multiple windows in order to simultaneously view
multiple poems on screen. When she hit an impasse in her writing, she opened up another tab to search on
Thesaurus.com, which she identified as her "favorite website." In the course of writing the poem, she managed
the display by juxtaposing- and tabbing back and forth between- these multiple tabs and windows. Configuring
multiple resources on-screen enabled her to navigate sub-tasks in a way that supported learning through multi-
tasking.
         After working on the poem for fifteen minutes,    she resumed    watching an episode of Pokémon       on
YouTube that she had interrupted to write the poem, and later moved on to do some research on Animal Farm,
which was on her summer reading list for school next fall. However, she kept open the multiple tabs she had used
to write the poem, so it was possible to return to the task later on. Katherine's multi-tasking led her across multiple
sites and platforms to engage in multiple tasks using a single device. She was able to learn about poems, literature,
vocabulary, and much more through her multi-tasking and also with the help of virtual collaborators. In the course
of my observations, she interacted with her friends, her mom, and her dance teacher via email. At any given time,
a wired laptop gives young people multiple avenues for interaction, and who they choose to connect to shifts as
the focal task changes. Consequently, learning through single-device multi-tasking is not adequately characterized
as a solo activity, nor does it simply serve as a means of individual efficiency or personal productivity. Media
multi-tasking is mutually monitored by multiple collaborators (Goodwin & Cekaite, 2018)- albeit virtually and
asynchronously. Even when a single person uses a single device, multi-tasking demands- and is a response to
demands for- collaborative learning across tools, people, and tasks.

Learning to multi-task by mixing tools and negotiating objectives
For Katherine, a single tool became a site for organizing learning through multi-tasking across heterogeneous
objects of activity. Conversely, it was often the case for the families I studied that a single task became a site for
learning to multi-task across multiple tools and task objectives. In today's media ecologies, families have many
options for equipping and jointly accomplishing routine tasks. Often, family members' purposes for performing
tasks vary and need to be negotiated amongst people and devices. Placing a multi-tasking lens on a single task
can surface the often hidden sociotechnical work required to stabilize a task so that people can jointly accomplish
their aims with multiple technologies (Star, 1990; Stevens, 2000). Learning to multi-task becomes necessary when
task-objectives diverge, when tools are distributed, or when one person delegates their task to another.
   Such was the case when Natalie, an eleven-year-old who lived with her grandmother and mother Gina near a

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  68                                                   © ISLS
large Midwestern US city, helped her mom complete an Excel spreadsheet containing information from a survey
Gina had distributed at work at a local service organization. Gina introduced the task to Natalie as work they could
do together, enlisting her daughter in her own work as a valued coparticipant. Barron and colleagues (2009)
referred to this arrangement   as "parents  as employers,"  a situation that arises when parents "entrust  their
technologically skilled children to perform technical services for them" (p. 69). Rifling through the questionnaires,
Gina told Natalie that they needed to make a spreadsheet and that Natalie could do the data entry. When Natalie
was unsure of what this meant and feigned resistance, claiming it was a weekend and she shouldn't have to work,
her Mom reassured her by playfully smacking her arm and announcing that Natalie was going to learn something
new. What for adults may seem mundane (e.g. building a spreadsheet, doing data entry) presents productive
challenges and novel tasks for young learners, who may have very different task objectives and motives than their
adult collaborators.
    It is also important to note here that Natalie was recruited by her Mom to do this work, which is a different
starting point for the delegation of young people's computer-based work that typically originates outside the home
in school. As opposed to homework assigned by a teacher, where a single task is undertaken for the putative
purpose of completing an assignment (or earning a grade), building an Excel spreadsheet was more multi-purpose;
this contributed to the pair approaching their task with divergent objectives. Gina reported that she often recruited
Natalie into tasks for her job if technology was involved, in order to teach her daughter new technical skills. For
Natalie, spending time with her Mom during their free time on a Saturday was a powerful motive for completing
data entry, a task that adults may view as thankless grunt work and some children might regard as a pointless
chore. Learning to build a spreadsheet entailed learning to negotiate multiple people's objectives in-task and to
coordinate their separate sub-tasks. Therefore, in addition to learning to use Excel, Natalie was also learning to
multi-task.

  Figure 2. Multiple tools within a task. (Left to right) Natalie's mom reports information from paper-based
 surveys; Natalie enters data into Excel spreadsheet; they collaborate over the screen; they collaborate over
                                                   paper.
         Learning to multi-task meant drawing on multiple material means of mediation as well. As they began
the spreadsheet  together on  the couch  in the living room,  Gina  held the paper  surveys, while Natalie    was
responsible for computer data entry (Figure 2). Despite the proliferation of digital means of doing domestic tasks,
there is continued need to mix multiple types of tools together to accomplish a task (Silvis et al., 2018b), and
paper is still a widely used resource for collaborative knowledge work (Brown & Duguid, 2017). The mixing of
technologies within a single task was pervasive in children's activities across all the families we observed; this
spreadsheet multi-tasking literally spread the task out across sheets of paper, software, and screens and fractured
the single task into sub-components made visible through an emergent division of labor. Learning to build a
spreadsheet meant learning to multi-task by drawing on- and drawing together- multiple material means and
multiple learning objectives.

Learning despite multi-tasking as domestic complexity multiplies
The complexities of maintaining everyday routines and organizing family life are compounded when multiple
people employ multiple technologies across multiple tasks, timeframes, and spaces. A family of three, with jobs,
hobbies, school, and close family who lived nearby, multi-tasking was typical in the Hernandez household. This
was  exemplified  one  day after  school when   nine-year-old twins Eddie    and Oscar completed   a homework
assignment with their mother's assistance. In this example, multi-tasking was multiplied through the complex
spatiotemporal and material arrangements, whereby people accomplish a number of different tasks together at
home. When I arrived to observe them one day after school, Oscar and Eddie were already immersed in their
typical after-school routine: watching TV, completing homework, and playing video games. Their homework

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   69                                                 © ISLS
assignment on this particular day was an on-going project in their language arts class that asked them to create a
book cover for their favorite book. Both Eddie and Oscar had chosen to create book covers based on Pokémon
Deluxe   Essential  Handbook,   an encyclopedia   of over   seven hundred   Pokémon,    thoroughly  dog-eared    and
annotated by the twins, who each had their own copy.
         Rounds    of working   on homework,   which  the   boys  completed   primarily at the kitchen   table, were
punctuated by "technology breaks," a strategy their family implemented in the afternoons each day after school.
The twins' breaks occurred at different times, creating a dynamic task environment in which tasks were not
entirely distinct. For example,  the TV   stayed on  in the background   while they worked     on their  homework,
compelling the twins to engage in dual-tasking and splitting their attention during tasks (Lin et al., 2011). For his
part, Eddie designed and colored his book cover illustration while watching cartoons, and later continued watching
TV while taking a technology break and playing Angry Birds on his tablet. However, with multiple people engaged
in multiple tasks simultaneously, multi-tasking quickly multiplied. The living room was usually reserved for
technology breaks, but Steph made an exception so that Oscar could research a Pokémon illustrator for the back
flap of his book cover at a moment when Eddie's work crowded the kitchen table. Oscar and Steph sat comfortably
together in a side-by-side configuration, co-viewing her laptop screen while he worked (and stole glances at the
TV), a prototypical configuration of bodies during JME (Takeuchi & Stevens, 2011).
         As in any complex learning environment, there are always multiple things going on at once (Erickson,
2016). While the twins did their homework, their mom was busy coordinating the delivery of new furniture for
their bedroom. Steph had told the boys that she wanted them to each tip the movers one dollar for assembling
their furniture, and she placed two one-dollar bills in the threshold between the kitchen and living room, directly
in the pathway  the   twins would  likely travel (Figure 3). She  likened this to tipping  the pizza guy,  and   she
emphasized to them that "I want you to tip them because they're providing a service." The boys meanwhile
remained unresponsive and continued gazing at the TV from the kitchen table where they worked. A short time
later, Oscar and Eddie raced down the hall after snatching up the bills, and they diligently tipped the movers who
subsequently departed. Mom immediately noticed that the movers had left their drill in the entrance hallway and
chased after them down the driveway. Eddie wryly commented "maybe that is a tip for us," referring to the drill.
This re-voicing of his mother's task directive indicates how he had heard and understood her words in a way that
allowed him to recycle them in an entirely different context (Goodwin, 2018). Whereas, several weeks prior, Steph
had reported  how   the twins were   able to "soak   things in" despite their multi-tasking, in this instance   they
demonstrated how this looks in practice. Despite their media multi-tasking, Eddie and Oscar learned valuable
lessons about what it means to contribute to household routines and collaborations, where multiple tasks vie for
people's attentional resources.

         Figure 3. Multiplying media multi-tasking. Mom and Eddie both discuss "tipping" the delivery guys,
               despite the demands of multiple tasks, people, and tools in their home media ecology.

Conclusions and implications
Across these three cases, I have shown how media multi-tasking supports learning at home and some forms that
multi-tasking can take, including single-device multi-tasking, mixing materials and multiple purposes within a
single task, and multiplying multi-tasking by adding more tasks and people to the task setting. I have used these
examples to elaborate how children learn through, learn to, and learn despite multi-tasking. Families' designs for
learning  at home    support these  forms  of multi-tasking,  and  this takes  sustained   interactional work    and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    70                                                  © ISLS
intergenerational collaboration. Media multi-tasking is common in families, and we can see vividly how multi-
tasking multiplies quickly as people move themselves and their tasks around their homes. Even in the case of
Katherine and Natalie, relatively stable (seated) sites of single tasks can quickly expand into sub-tasks using
networked devices.
          Prevailing perspectives on multi-tasking caution against it, for how it distracts learners, divides attention
(and families), and threatens successful task completion. As a response, this analysis contributed to a different
perspective on  multi-tasking:  media  multi-tasking is a  significant and  pervasive sociotechnical  practice, and
children engage in many forms of multi-tasking in diverse learning environments. I have suggested a multi-
dimensional model for multi-tasking that supports analysis of the multiple tasks, tools, objectives, and people
entailed by many everyday learning activities. Understanding how these are multiply configured from multiple
perspectives contributes to an expansive view of multi-tasking, widening the lens on what counts as valuable
learning arrangements, where and when this takes place, and who decides.
          Whereas conventional multi-tasking research finds that adults are better than children at multi-tasking
and then uses this to justify cautionary narratives about children's media multi-tasking, I am arguing that adults
are important supporters of learning through, to, and despite children's multi-tasking. Because most of us do
frequently multi-task, it is worth considering how children come to be multi-taskers and to design for this. Simple
exposure to multiply mediated learning environments is insufficient for learning to multi-task; Natalie was quite
proficient using her laptop but needed her Mom's assistance to learn to multi-task on it. As with children's
development of other technological competencies, learning to multi-task benefits from parental support, and is a
sociotechnical achievement (Barron et al., 2009).
          In the current analysis, I treated home environments as especially conducive to learning while multi-
tasking, and I focused on families' designs for multi-tasking. In response to anxious or nostalgic narratives that
eschew multi-tasking as a valued learning practice, I believe much can be learned from understanding families'
approaches to learning through, to, and despite multi-tasking. At the same time, I do not see these three approaches
to multi-tasking as entirely distinct. It was often the case that learning to manage multiple tabs on a screen, for
example, also involved learning about whatever content was contained in those windows. Furthermore, families'
multi-tasking organized learning such that background processes- like watching TV, monitoring other family
member's activities, or uploading a video- intermittently became the central focus of activity. This suggests that
task objectives at home are better characterized as moving targets than as categorically "focal" or "background"
tasks.
          Distinguishing background from foreground is a paradigmatic problem of perspective. What one person
(i.e. a parent or teacher) thinks is important to do at any given time may not be valued by children and vice versa.
Keying into how tasks serve multiple purposes points to how assigning and distributing tasks over time, space,
people, and materials is frequently a powered practice. While school-like versions of attention often emphasize
individuals "staying    on task," home media  ecologies   are rich sites for multi-party multi-tasking  where   the
objectives of tasks- and their means of completion- originate from more equitably distributed starting points. My
analysis supports the suggestion by Lin and colleagues (2016) that collaborative learning is enhanced by multi-
tasking because of the excitement of engaging in more than one task at once, a learning configuration often
forbidden  in  formal learning settings. Instead of barring  learners  from  using multiple media  and  devices  to
accomplish tasks in school, designs for learning might incorporate more people, technologies, and tasks in order
to simulate how children immerse themselves in dynamic home media ecologies and to stimulate interest-driven
learning.

References
Andrade, J. (2010). What does doodling do? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24:100-106.
Barron, B., Martin, C. K., Takeuchi, L., & Fithian, R. (2009). Parents as learning partners in the development of
          technological fluency. International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 55-77.
Brown,   J.S., Collins,  A., Duguid,  P. (1989).  Situated  cognition  and  the culture  of learning.  Educational
          Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Brown, J.S. & Duguid, P. (2017). The social life of information. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press.
Craig, L. &    Jenkins, B. (2016). The   composition of parents' and   grandparents'  child-care time: gender   and
          generational patterns in activity, multi-tasking, and co-presence. Aging & Society, 36, 785-810.
Engestrom, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization. Journal of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    71                                                 © ISLS
         education and work, 14:1, 133-156.
Erickson, F. (2004). Talk and social theory: Ecologies of speaking and listening in everyday life. Polity Press.
Erickson, F. (2016). Learning to Look and Listen: Group Viewing Session. Spencer Foundation Conference,
         Arizona State University.
Goodwin, C. (2018). Co-operative action. NY: Cambridge University Press.
Goodwin, M.H. & Cekaite, A. (2018). Embodied family choreography: Practices of control, care, and mundane
         creativity. London: Routledge.
Graesch, P.A. (2009). Material indicators of family busyness. Social Indicators Research, 93, 85-94.
Hall, R. & Jurow, S. (2015). Changing concepts in activity: Descriptive and design studies of consequential
         learning in conceptual practices. Educational Psychologist, 50:3, 173-189.
Jordan, B. and Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences 4 (1), 39-103.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991) Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
         University Press.
Lin, L., Lee, J. & Robertson, T. (2011). Reading while watching video: The effect of video content on reading
         comprehension and media multitasking ability. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 45(2).
Lin, L., Mills, L.A. & Ifenthaler, D. (2016). Collaboration, multi-tasking and problem solving performance in
         shared virtual spaces. Journal of Computers in Higher Education, 28, 344-357.
Mejía-Arauz, R., Rogoff, B., Dayton, A., and Henne-Ochoa, R. (2018). Collaboration or negotiation: Two ways
         of interacting suggest how shared thinking develops. Current Opinion in Psychology, 23:117-123.
Ochs, E. & Kremer-Sadlik. (2013). Introduction. In E. Ochs & T. Kremer-Sadlik (Eds.), Fast-forward Family:
         Home, Work, and Relationships in Middle-Class America. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Pea, R., Nass, C., Meheula, L, Rance, M, Kumar, A., Bamford, H... & Zhou, M. (2012). Media use, face-to-face
         communication, media multitasking, and social well-being among 8-12-year-old girls. Developmental
         Psychology, 48:2, 327-336.
Rideout, V. & Katz, V. (2016). Opportunity for all? Technology and learning in lower-income families. A report
         of the Families and Media Project. New York: The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop.
Rosen, L.D., Carrier, L.M. & Cheever, N.A. (2013). Facebook and texting made me do it: Media-induced task-
         switching while studying. Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 948-958.
Shapiro,  B., Hall,  R., &  Owens,     D. A.  (2017). Developing  &    using interaction geography  in  a museum.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12, 377­399.
Silvis, D.,  Taylor,  K.H.,   Stevens,  R. (2018a).   Community   technology   mapping:   Inscribing  places  when
         `everything  is on   the move.'   International Journal of Computer-supported    Collaborative   Learning,
         13(2), 137-166.
Silvis, D.,  Taylor,  K.H.  &  Stevens,   R.  (2018b).   Reassembling  home-work:   Mixing   "newer"   and  "older"
         technologies in home learning environments. In J. Kay & R. Luckin (Eds.), Proceedings of International
         Conference   of  the  Learning   Sciences (CLS)   2018. London,     England: International Society  of the
         Learning Sciences.
Star, S.L. (1990). Power, technology, and the phenomenology of conventions: On being allergic to onions. The
         Sociological Review, 38(1), 26-56.
Stevens, R. (2000). Divisions of labor in school and in the workplace: Comparing computer and paper-supported
         activities across settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 373-401.
Stevens,  R.  (2010). Learning    as a members   phenomenon:    Toward   an  ethnographically  adequate science  of
         learning. National Society for the Study of Education, 109:1, p. 82-97.
Takeuchi, L., & Stevens, R. (2011). The new co-viewing: Designing for learning through joint media engagement.
         A report of The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop and LIFE Center.
Taylor, K.H., Silvis, D. & Stevens, R. (2017). Collecting and connecting: Intergenerational learning with digital
         media. In   E.  Gee, L.M.   Takeuchi  &  E.  Wartella (Eds.), Children and   Families in the Digital Age:
         Learning Together in a Media Saturated Culture. NY: Routledge.
Taylor,  K.H., Takeuchi,    L. &     Stevens, R. (2017).  Mapping   the  daily media   round:  Novel  methods   for
         understanding families' mobile technology use. Learning, Media and Technology, 1-15.
Tulbert, E. and Goodwin, M.H. (2011). Choreographies of attention: Multimodality in a routine family activity.
         In J. Streeck, C. Goodwin, & C. LeBaron (Eds), Embodied Interaction: Language and Body in the
         Material World. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Wood, E., Zivcakova, L., Gentile, P., Archer, K., De Pasquale, D. & Nosko, A. (2012). Examining the impact of
         off-task multi-tasking with technology on real-time classroom learning. Computers & Education, 58,
         365-374.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     72                                                 © ISLS
