        BacToMars: A Collaborative Video Game for BioDesign
                            Clarissa Verish, Wellesley College, cverish@wellesley.edu
                    Amanda Strawhacker, Tufts University, amanda.strawhacker@tufts.edu
                       Lauren Westendorf, Wellesley College, lwestend@wellesley.edu
                        Christina Pollalis, Wellesley College, cpollali@wellesley.edu
                       Amanda Sullivan, Tufts University, amanda.sullivan@tufts.edu
                            Anna Loparev, Wellesley College, aloparev@wellesley.edu
                              Marina Bers, Tufts University, marina.bers@tufts.edu
                              Orit Shaer, Wellesley College, oshaer@wellesley.edu

        Abstract: We present BacToMars, a collaborative multiplayer educational video game that
        engages elementary school children in creative bio-design. We describe the design of the game,
        its learning goals,  and findings from   its preliminary  evaluation when     deployed in informal
        settings accompanied by a curricular intervention. Our findings shed light on how children play
        a collaborative multiplayer game while co-located, and on the potential of collaborative video
        games as a tool for teaching biological engineering to young children and for making a positive
        impact on their attitudes towards science.

Introduction
Bioengineering is an emerging area at the forefront of science and technology, with far-reaching consequences
for addressing important real-world problems related to space travel, food production, energy, and medicine. To
date, concepts related to bioengineering are not yet introduced in school curricula until late middle school or high
school (National Research Council, 2013). However, introducing children earlier to this burgeoning field at the
intersection of science and engineering could foster interdisciplinary thinking and positive attitude towards STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and math) (Strawhacker et al., 2018). To expose children in primary school to
the excitement, challenges, and core ideas of biology engineering, we developed a collaborative video game,
BacToMars, to engage elementary school children in biodesign activities, giving them a playful way to learn
concepts that were traditionally considered too complex. We describe its design and implementation in detail and
share findings from its evaluation.

Background
Bioengineering is a multidisciplinary field at the intersection of engineering and biology, which produces biology-
based solutions to real-world problems. Despite the importance and promise of bioengineering, its foundational
concepts are not introduced to students until at least middle school (National Research Council, 2013). Young
children are able to learn core concepts surrounding bioengineering (Bers, 2017; Clements & Sarama, 2003) and
can engage meaningfully in foundational concepts of engineering design (Auerbach & Silverstein, 2003; Bers,
2012). Researchers have created engineering toys that are screen-free, tangible, interactive platforms that leverage
children's ability to learn-by-doing (Ainsworth, 2006; Bers, 2012; Strawhacker & Bers, 2015; Verish et al., 2018).
Bioengineering is a promising field for engaging young students' imaginations because it combines the open-
endedness of engineering with the constraints of a modular building system.

Related work

Bioengineering concepts
Elementary-aged    children (2nd-5th graders) are    at a prime  age  to understand   key  foundational concepts of
bioengineering. Bioengineering combines STEM concepts that are already required in most learning standards
for this age range (National Research Council, 2013; Common Core State Standards Initiative, 2013). In spite of
the evidence about developmental readiness, bioengineering is likely not taught at this age due to a lack of teaching
tools available to educators. The   few existing educational    tools and initiatives that teach bioengineering  are
designed for students in high school and beyond (Barone et al., 2015; Kafai et al., 2017).

Collaborative game-based learning
Children can master complex content when learning tools are designed to leverage their intuitive understanding
and logic about the world (Druin, 2010), to maximize learner engagement and understanding by offering open-
ended problems requiring creative solutions (de Freitas, 2006; Hoffmann, 2009), and to avoid issues of traditional

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     652                                                 © ISLS
academic  structure and    inflexibility (Sandford et al.,   2018). Game-based     learning  can  be  supported  by
collaborative interactions (de Freitas,  2006; Steinkuehler,  2006, Okerlund    et al., 2016). Multi-player science
games can offer opportunities for playfulness, collaboration, and motivation (Kao et al., 2002), foster use of
collectivist and positive language (Wise et al., 2017), and encourage emergent leadership styles (Sun et al., 2017).

Design goals
BacToMars is based upon a research paper that explores how bioengineering can be used to facilitate manned
exploration missions to Mars (Menezes et al., 2015). BacToMars allows children to create genetic programs for
bacteria to sustain human life on the planet. Through collaboration with educators, we have identified specific
learning goals for elementary school students (2nd-5th grade) to engage with bionengineering concepts: (L1)
Introduce basic concepts of genetics, focusing on genes and DNA; (L2) Facilitate the design of genetic programs
that include input and output; (L3) Introduce the foundations of biological engineering methods and scientific
protocols to solve real-world problems; (L4) Demonstrate the principles of abstraction; and (L5) Engage players
in creative problem-solving of critical challenges related to survival on Mars.
        Our design goals for BacToMars were informed by these learning goals and influenced by theories of
Constructionism (Papert, 1980) which view "microworlds" as fertile ground for children to cultivate ideas, test
hypotheses, and construct new artifacts based on that learning: G1) Facilitate the development of inquiry skills
through a hands-on playful experience where users can construct knowledge and apply creative problem-solving;
G2) Provide feedback and guidance within the game; and G3) Present opportunities for collaborative learning.

Design of BacToMars
The current version of BacToMars is a result of an iterative design process and close collaboration with both
educators and children. Following, we describe the main design of the game.

Goal of the game
Players are tasked  with helping  a team   of astronauts survive on  and escape    from  Mars  after their biodome,
supplies, and spaceship are destroyed in a dust storm. To do so, players are guided by the main game character, a
biological-engineer astronaut, to design bacteria that produce various materials (products) by combining input
and output BioBricks, visually represented by interlocking blocks. Input BioBricks make the bacteria consume
readily-available resources on Mars, such as carbon dioxide, while output BioBricks produce particular products,
such as oxygen. Some combinations are more effective than others.

 Figure 1. The game space of BacToMars. In the first level (left), players are shown how to play the game. The
final, multiplayer interface (center) adds complexity and requires collaboration to complete the game. Children
              played the multiplayer game at adjacent computers to encourage collaboration (right).

        The game space is organized into two main areas, as shown in Figure 1: the Mars landscape with the
astronauts' biodome, natural resources, and product levels; and the workbench, where players can access resource
and product BioBricks to engineer bacteria, view combination feedback, and see their score and character. Players
must keep track of the product levels as they play so that the astronauts do not run out of any supplies. Figure 1
shows the game screen in a beginner level and an advanced level.

Gameplay
We developed   BacToMars    as  a multi-player  collaborative  game   with a curricular   supplement  consisting of
educational videos and minigames to explain the key concepts behind the game. Gameplay starts with a character
selection screen, where players can create their character. Single-player scaffolding was integrated in the game,
as shown in Figure 1. Players start by making oxygen using carbon dioxide, then are lead through more complex
combinations. Once each player completes the scaffolding, all players are asked simultaneously whether they
would like to collaborate. If they choose to collaborate, the Build a Launchpad level begins. Gameplay ends when

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    653                                                  © ISLS
the team has successfully created a launchpad and spaceship. Players are then shown their final scores and team
contributions. Throughout gameplay, players can view their individual score and character representation and that
of their collaborators. Players work collaboratively in a single biodome to create products, and can view the
product yield of all players so each may evaluate the effectiveness of each combination.

Evaluation

Procedure
The BacToMars game was tested during a 3-day informal bioengineering workshop. The research team observed
N = 9 children (5 girls, 4 boys) in 4th and 5th grade as they explored bioengineering content through digital and
traditional learning activities such as physical games, picture books, and robotic construction. Children were
divided into groups of three for the collaborative game and sat at adjacent computers, as shown in Figure 1. One
group consisted of all girls, one of all boys, and one of mixed gender. In each group, children played the single-
player scaffolding levels for approximately 10 minutes, and then continued to play the multiplayer extension for
another 10 minutes. Researchers made qualitative observations, videotaped the interactions, and collected pre-
and post-task questionnaires, which included questions about the key concepts, an attitudes questionnaire, and
questions about their subjective enjoyment. We coded video transcripts for verbal content-specific themes.

Results

Multiplayer gameplay
When children encountered the prompt to either continue to play alone or play collaboratively, all of them chose
to play with others and urged their teammates to choose that option. On average, groups played the single-player
levels for about 10 minutes, and multiplayer levels for about 8 minutes. In all three groups, the total utterances in
the multiplayer levels were greater than in the single-player levels. Both planning (discussion of tasks or roles)
and narration (statements of actions or observations) dramatically increased from single-player to multi-player.
Questions asked during gameplay were split into two groups: questions asked about how to play the game; and
questions about concepts. Explanations were coded as players answering questions for each other. The number of
positive interactions (statements of affirmation or excitement) increased between the single- and multiplayer
levels. Competitive utterances, such as comparison of scores, also increased.
        Usage of content key terms, such as "plasmid" or "bacteria," were tallied for each group during single-
and multi-player game play. In addition, children were asked to define these terms in their pre- and post- task
questionnaires. None of the children in our preliminary evaluation used a key term during gameplay, however the
percentage of correct definitions did increase in the post-task for five of the six key terms. We also assessed
science attitudes before and after gameplay. Average responses for all children, and for boys and girls separately,
increased after gameplay. Children were asked a series of free response questions about what they enjoyed most
about the week. Multiple children highlighted that they enjoyed the collaborative game the most.

Discussion
The multiplayer aspect  of BacToMars    facilitated engagement    and  collaboration, as    demonstrated through
increased utterances, planning and narration, and positive interactions. We saw an increase in correct definitions
of key concepts after completion of the curricular component and gameplay, indicating that young children can
indeed learn advanced concepts when presented with developmentally-appropriate curricula and tools. Attitudes
scores improved for all children, but the increase in attitudes for girls as a group is promising. Overall, the design
of BacToMars  was  effective  at supporting children's engagement,    enjoyment,  and    learning. Our design  of
BacToMars  demonstrates  that collaborative games   about   real-world challenges  are   effective learning tools.
Research on educational videogames can benefit from the current findings, indicating that providing open-ended,
creative play experiences can inform children's attitudes about learning content. Future work should focus on
engaging children through  a variety of digital media,  including   tangible  interactions, and should focus  on
collaborative play as a way to foster bioengineering learning.

Conclusion and future work
Through collaborative gameplay, BacToMars encourages children to place themselves in the role of a bioengineer
in order to help a team of astronauts. In conjunction with the educational videos and minigames, BacToMars
increased children's knowledge of key bioengineering concepts. We plan to further develop    curricula and  novel
interfaces to bring the burgeoning area of bioengineering to primary schools.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  654                                                  © ISLS
References
Ainsworth,    S.   (2006).     DeFT:  A     conceptual    framework    for  considering  learning  with     multiple
         representations. Learning and instruction, 16(3), 183-198.
Auerbach, C., & Silverstein, L. B. (2003). Qualitative data: An introduction to coding and analysis. NYU press.
Barone, J., Bayer, C., Copley, R., Barlow, N., Burns, M., Rao, S., Seelig, G., Popovic, Z., & Players, N. (2015).
         Nanocrafter: Design and Evaluation of a DNA Nanotechnology Game. In FDG.
Bers, M. U. (2012). Designing digital experiences for positive youth development: From playpen to playground.
         Oxford University Press.
Bers, M. U. (2017). Coding as a playground: Programming and computational thinking in the early childhood
         classroom. Routledge.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2003). Strip mining for gold: Research and policy in educational technology--A
         response to "Fool's Gold". AACE Journal, 11(1), 7-69.
Common Core State Standards Initiative (2010). Common Core State Standards for Mathematics and English
         Language Arts. http://www.corestandards.org/read-the-standards/.
De   Freitas, S. I. (2006).    Using  games     and simulations    for  supporting  learning. Learning, media   and
         technology, 31(4), 343-358.
Druin, A. (2010). Children as codesigners of new technologies: Valuing the imagination to transform what is
         possible. New Directions for Youth Development, 2010(128), 35-43.
Hoffmann, L. (2009). Learning through games. Communications of the ACM, 52(8), 21-22
Kafai, Y., Telhan, O., Hogan, K., Lui, D., Anderson, E., Walker, J. T., & Hanna, S. (2017). Growing designs with
         biomakerlab in high school classrooms. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design
         and Children (pp. 503-508). ACM.
Kao, L., Galas, C., & Kafai, Y. B. (2005). " A Totally Different World": Playing and Learning in Multi-User
         Virtual Environments. In DiGRA Conference.
Loparev, A., Westendorf, L., Flemings, M., Cho, J., Littrell, R., Scholze, A., & Shaer, O. (2017). BacPack:
         exploring  the   role of tangibles in  a museum   exhibit for  bio-design. In Proceedings of   the Eleventh
         International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (pp. 111-120). ACM.
Menezes, A. A., Cumbers, J., Hogan, J. A., & Arkin, A. P. (2015). Towards synthetic biological approaches to
         resource utilization on space missions. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 12(102), 20140715.
National Research Council (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC:
         The National Academies Press.
Okerlund, J., Segreto, E., Grote, C., Westendorf, L., Scholze, A., Littrell, R., & Shaer, O. (2016). Synflo: A
         tangible museum exhibit for exploring bio-design. In Proceedings of the TEI'16: Tenth International
         Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (pp. 141-149). ACM.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc..
Sandford, R., Ulicsak, M., Facer, K., & Rudd, T. (2006). Teaching with games. COMPUTER EDUCATION-
         STAFFORD-COMPUTER EDUCATION GROUP-, 112, 12.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2006). Massively multiplayer online video gaming as participation in a discourse. Mind,
         culture, and activity, 13(1), 38-52.
Strawhacker,   A., &   Bers,   M. U. (2015).   "I want  my  robot  to  look for food":  Comparing  Kindergartner's
         programming comprehension using tangible, graphic, and hybrid user interfaces. International Journal
         of Technology and Design Education, 25(3), 293-319.
Strawhacker, A., Sullivan, A., Verish, C., Bers, M. U., & Shaer, O (2018). Enhancing children's interest and
         knowledge     in bioengineering  through   an interactive videogame.   Journal of Information  Technology
         Education: Innovations in Practice, 17(1), 55-81.
Sun, J., Jackson,  J., Burns,  M.,  & Anderson,    R.  C. (2017).  Children's Emergent  Leadership  and  Relational
         Thinking in Collaborative Learning. Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Verish, C., Strawhacker, A., Bers, M., & Shaer, O. (2018). CRISPEE: A Tangible Gene Editing Platform for Early
         Childhood.    In Proceedings  of   the Twelfth   International Conference   on Tangible,  Embedded,    and
         Embodied Interaction (pp. 101-107). ACM.
Wise, A. F., Antle, A. N., & Warren, J. (2017). Explanation-Giving in a Collaborative Tangible Tabletop Game:
         Initiation, Positionality, Valence and Action-Orientation.

Acknowledgments
This work is funded by NSF IIS-1563932. A special thank you to the members of the Wellesley HCI Lab and the
Tufts DevTech Lab.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     655                                                 © ISLS
