      Digital Badges for Capturing, Recognizing, Endorsing, and
             Motivating Broad Forms of Collaborative Learning
                       Daniel T. Hickey, Christopher D. Andrews, Grant T. Chartrand
                    dthickey@indiana.edu, andrewch@indiana.edu, gchartra@indiana.edu
                                              Indiana University

        Abstract:  Traditionally, schools   have measured,    compelled,      credentialed, and   accredited
        achievement.  The   practices for  doing so   are  opaque,      analog, expensive,  inefficient,  and
        entrenched. This  makes   schools  resistant  to embodied,      enactive, extended, and   embedded
        collaborative learning. Digital badges can contain (a) specific claims about such broad learning,
        (b) web-enabled digital evidence supporting those claims, and (c) information about how that
        evidence was obtained. Badges can then circulate this information readily in social networks
        where they can gain additional meaning. This paper explores how CSCL goals might be served
        by using badges to shift towards capturing, recognizing, endorsing, and motivating learning,
        and doing so for a much broader range of learning than otherwise possible.

Open digital badges are a new kind of credential that were introduced in 2012 in an initiative of the MacArthur
Foundation. The Badges for Lifelong Learning competition was introduced by the US Secretary of Education and
was widely reported. The initiative supported 30 efforts to develop digital badges for diverse educational programs
and the Open Badges metadata standards that allowed digital badges to become interoperable and extensible.
        Despite significant interest  among   others, digital badges     have   received little attention in Learning
Sciences venues (i.e., Davis & Bell, 2016; Hickey & Chartrand, 2018; Tran, Schenke, & Hickey, 2014) and
apparently have never been represented in a CSCL venue. Some skepticism towards digital badges likely follows
from their conflation with gamification (e.g., Duncan, 2011), competency-based education (e.g., Metzger, Lubin,
Patten, & Whyte, 2016) and extrinsic incentives (e.g., Resnick, 2012). This paper argues that digital badges need
not be used in these ways, and that doing so obscures their significant untapped potential for supporting the
broader participatory and collaborative learning that is valued in the LS and CSCL communities, and supporting
the embodied, enactive, extended, and embedded learning that is the focus of CSCL 2019. This is because badges
can contain broad evidence of learning along with detailed information about how that evidence was obtained,
and do so in a way that allows viewers who are interested and willing to interrogate this information

Four potentially transformative functions of digital badges
This paper is organized around the four potentially transformative functions of digital badges. It illustrates these
functions using a badge system that was designed within a "Big Open Online Course" on Educational Assessment
that was completed by hundreds of students over three years. This badge system was designed to take advantage
of key features of Open Badges while exploiting the potential synergy between badges and digital portfolios. With
funding from Google and using Google CourseBuilder, the "Assessment BOOC" used expansive framing (Engle
et al., 2012) to support participatory collaborative learning at scale.

From measuring achievement to capturing learning
The first set of potentially transformative functions associated with digital badges concerns assessment. Much of
the evidence that badges  might   contain  is generated   by  typical    classroom   assessments,   such  as  quizzes,
performance  assessments, portfolios, etc. While badges    might also     include  scores from   formal   standardized
achievement tests, scores on such tests typically can "speak for themselves" and therefore are ill-suited for badges.

Capturing richer evidence of the context of the learning
The Assessment Principles Expertise badge, which one student earned by completing the second module in the
BOOC included links for each of the three "wikifolio" activities that were completed, including the prompts for
each element and response to each prompt (Endnote 1). This allows badge viewers to "drill down" into this
information without getting lost; the information in the badge and the annotations on the hyperlinks help viewers
know what they are clicking on and how it relates to the competencies asserted in the criteria of the badge. For
the interested viewer, even more information about the learning context can be accessed from those links. All this
information can make the actual "evidence" more meaningful to badge viewers who value this information.

Capturing evidence of broader learning

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  656                                                      © ISLS
The Expertise badge mentioned above states that the earner scored over 80% on the module exam. These were
rigorous time-limited exams that included "best answer" items that were difficult to look up in the allocated time.
Meanwhile,    the linked wikifolios   reveal both   the prompt   and  the response   to three reflections that provide
evidence   of consequential   engagement     (Gresalfi,  Barab,  Siyahhan,   &   Christensen,  2009).  Arguably,   this
additional information provides stronger support for proficiencies claimed in the badge. In this way, badges are a
promising response to the problem of CAMEO cheating (Copying Answers from Multiple Existences Online;
Northcutt, Ho, & Chuang, 2016) that plague MOOCs. In situations where the value of the badge was very high,
such nuanced evidence may be quite valuable. It is worth noting that several students at other universities were
able to use their BOOC badges as evidence for earning "independent study" credits.

Capturing evidence of collaborative learning
The first proficiency listed in the Expertise badge is Productively discuss classroom assessment principles with
professional peers. Illustrating how badges address a crucial challenge in assessing collaborative learning, the
badge provides further evidence of this collaborative competency by the number and nature of comments on the
individual wikifolios.  Rather  than  formally   assessing representations    of collaboration, these   assertions and
representations   of collaboration  allow  viewers   for whom    this evidence   has value  to examine    the evidence
themselves and to do so in a manner that is commensurate with the viewers' value of the claims and evidence.

Capturing evidence from open learning pathways
Learners who earned all three module badges in the Assessment BOOC were issued an Educational Assessment
Expertise  "metabadge"   that contained    hotlinked images   of the  three module   badges   (Endnote  2). This   is an
example of an "open learning pathway" introduced by Otto (2017) and formalized in the most recent Open Badges
2.0 Specifications.  Such   arrays  offer useful pathways  into  learning  as well   as during learning,  by  capturing
evidence of accomplishment of smaller goals that are still meaningful.

From credentialing graduates to recognizing learning
While related to the capturing aspect, digital badges also serve distinct functions associated with the recognition
of learning. Recognition functions correspond more with credentialing practices associated with assigning grades
and awarding   certificates and degrees.   Recognition   functions are  particularly relevant  when   using   badges  to
catalyze broader transformations of educational ecosystems considering the broader functions of credentials (i.e.,
human capital, screening & filtering, signaling, control, cultural capital, institutional, and credentialism; Bills,
2003). The following recognition functions can be considered apart from the capturing, motivating and endorsing,
which in turn helps reveal the complex but important interactions between these functions.

Recognizing learning openly
Some have raised concerns over open recognition with badges and the corresponding lack of traditional security
measures (e.g., Mathews, 2016). This is presumably because the transformative potential of open recognition is
not readily obvious to many observers. In response, the Bologna Open Recognition Declaration asserted that
"Open Badges, the open standard for the recognition of learning achievements has proved the power of a simple,
affordable, resilient and trustworthy technology to create an open recognition ecosystem working across countries,
educational   sectors, work,  social environments    and  technologies"   (Open   Recognition   Alliance,   2016). The
anthropological notion of boundary objects illustrates the potential of open recognition. Boundary objects are
produced in one context but can be used in other contexts by other people, for different purposes. Consider, for
example, that the same badges that an instructor might issue in a course can also be shared by the earner on their
Facebook or LinkedIn account. The instructor might "stack" that badge into a learning management system (by
recording the URL of the badge) and associate it with a grade and private feedback (information which must be
strictly protected). But that same badge might also circulate publicly in the earners social networks where it gains
"likes" and comments, which give the badge further and different meanings.

Recognizing a broader range of competencies
Badges are well-suited for recognizing so-called "21st Century" competencies associated with networked digital
learning. Such highly contextual competencies are difficult to assess and even harder to measure in standardized
ways. The ability to recognize broader competencies has previously been ascribed to ePortfolios (e.g., Gibson &
Barrett, 2002)  and  even   earlier with  portfolio assessment.  Unfortunately,   objective   studies have  shown  that
portfolios alone often fail to serve intended formative and summative functions (e.g., Lam, 2017). The obvious
question is whether the combination of ePortfolios and digital badges has the potential to overcome the challenges
of recognizing the broader range of CSCL competencies. Including threaded discussions contained in the BOOC

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     657                                                    © ISLS
badges along with information about the context in which those discussions occurred make it possible to recognize
collaborative learning in ways that otherwise would be quite difficult.

Recognizing a broader range of proficiency of a competency
Traditional credentials are hard-pressed to recognize the range of proficiency for given competencies beyond
grades, grade point averages, and honors achievements. For the same reasons that badges can recognize a broader
range of competencies, badges can also recognize a broader range of proficiency for a specific competency. The
BOOC module badges and the learning pathways discussed above provide one example of how digital badges
facilitate the recognition of broader range of competency. This function was also exemplified by the way that
earning a passing score on the final exam transformed the Educational Assessment badge into the Educational
Assessment   Expertise badge. This  recognition   potential is particularly relevant  for highly contextual  "21st
Century" competencies. This is because an individual's level of proficiency with these competencies is ultimately
recognized in terms of the nature and number of contexts in which such competencies are demonstrated. Some
viewers  of the badge  might find  the number  of comments     on each  wikifolio to be   enough evidence of  this
competency; others might click on the links and examine discussions. This recognition function is particularly
significant when combined with the endorsement functions described below.

Recognizing opportunities for learning
Another important function of digital badges is helping potential learners recognize opportunities to learn. In the
case of the Assessment BOOC, badge earners were strongly encouraged to share their badges over Facebook,
LinkedIn, Twitter, and any relevant interest-driven professional networks; those badges invited viewers to submit
their email addresses and place themselves on the distribution list. Additionally, clicking on the course URL on
the first line of each badge took the viewer to the course homepage, which included a link that allowed new
learners to enroll in the course. The course survey confirmed that some learners discovered the BOOC this way.

From compelling achievement to motivating learning
Space limitations preclude full discussion of the many complex ways badges might motivate learning. To reiterate,
some have characterized badges as "extrinsic incentives" which undermine intrinsically motivated learning. This
rekindled debate over extrinsic incentives is discussed at length in a new handbook chapter (Hickey & Schenke,
2019).  That chapter  argues that: (1) digital badges are   inherently  more meaningful    than grades  and  other
credentials, (2) circulation in digital networks makes Open Badges particularly meaningful, (3) the negative
consequences of extrinsic rewards are likely overstated, and (4) consideration of motivation and badges should
focus primarily on social activity and secondarily on individual behavior and individual cognition.

From accrediting schools to endorsing learning
A fourth set of transformative functions associated with digital badges concerns what is traditionally associated
with accreditation, where external "third parties" review and verify the quality of schools and programs and the
achievement represented by their degrees and credentials. Existing accreditation practices are analog, opaque and
intransigent (Gallagher, 2016). Arguably, traditional accreditation is an obstacle to participatory and collaborative
learning in many schools. Newly available "Endorsement 2.0" standards promise a shift towards more open and
transparent endorsement of learning (Hickey & Otto, 2017). Two Assessment BOOC features illustrate what open
endorsement practices might look like.

Endorsing learning with peer endorsement
To encourage    informal review of  wikifolios by classmates,   a peer  endorsement   feature was  added  to each
assignment in the Assessment BOOC. Participants were asked (but not required) to endorse at least three of their
classmates' wikifolios for being "complete." As shown in the Assessment Principles badge, these endorsements
were tabulated on the module badge for each completed wikifolio assignment.

Endorsing learning with peer promotion
Each wikifolio assignment asked (but did not require) students to promote one (and only one) of their peers'
wikifolio each  week  for being "exemplary."   Unlike peer  endorsement,    students were required  to provide an
endorsing statement describing what made the work exemplary. These promotions were also tabulated on the
module badge, while the endorsing statements are displayed on the linked wikifolio. Students clearly valued the
endorsements strongly and complained when course practices made it harder for them to earn endorsements. A
search feature let participants locate widely promoted peer work completed by peers with similar professional
roles.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  658                                                  © ISLS
Discussion and future directions
This paper illustrated how a single digital badge system was used to capture, recognize, motivate, and endorse
broad forms of conventional, participatory, and collaborative learning. We contend that these functions might be
similarly useful for many other (but certainly not all) forms of CSCL. This seems particularly promising when
coupled with the idea that the evidence contained in those badges could be readily examined in light of the claims
made by those same badges in order to examine the effectiveness of the larger learning-assessment ecosystem.
Innovators in the CSCL and LS communities and beyond are encouraged to consider adding digital badges to
their efforts and exploring the transformative potential of the functions introduced here.

Endnotes
(1) https://eabooc.appspot.com/badges/evidence?id=15102006
(2) https://eabooc.appspot.com/badges/expert_evidence?id=11022008

References
Bills, D. B. (2003). Credentials, signals, and screens: Explaining the relationship between schooling and job
         assignment. Review of Educational Research, 73(4), 441-469.
Davis, K., & Bell, A. (2016). Co-designing a digital badge system: Supporting learners' science identities through
         participatory design. Symposium presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences,
         Singapore.
Duncan, A. (2011, September 15). Digital badges for learning: Remarks by Secretary Duncan at the Launch of
         the MacArthur Foundation's 4th Annual Digital Media and Learning Competition. Washington, DC: US
         Department of Education. Retrieved from: https://www.ed.gov/news/speeches/digital-badges-learning
Engle, R. A., Lam, D. P., Meyer, X. S., & Nix, S. E. (2012). How does expansive framing promote transfer?
         Several proposed explanations and a research agenda for investigating them. Educational Psychologist,
         47(3), 215-231.
Gallagher, S. R. (2016). The future of university credentials. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Educational Press.
Gibson,  D., & Barrett,  H. (2002). Directions   in  electronic portfolio development.     Contemporary Issues in
         Technology and Teacher Education, 2(4), 556-573.
Gresalfi, M., Barab, S., Siyahhan, S., & Christensen, T. (2009). Virtual worlds, conceptual understanding, and
         me: Designing for consequential engagement. On the Horizon, 17(1), 21-34.
Hickey, D. T., & Chartrand, G. (2018, June).  Recognizing competencies vs. completion vs. participation: Ideal
         roles for web-enabled digital credentials. In the Proceedings of the biennial meeting of the International
         Conference of the Learning Science, Volume 3 (pp. 792-799)
Hickey, D. T., & Otto, N. (2017, February 13). Endorsement 2.0: Taking Open Badges and e-credentials to the
         next level. EDUCAUSE Review.
Hickey, D. T., & Schenke, K. (2019). Open digital badges and reward structures. In K. A. Renninger, & S. E Hidi
         (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook on motivation and learning (pp, 209-237). Cambridge MA: Cambridge
         University Press.
Lam, R. (2017). Taking stock of portfolio assessment scholarship: From research to practice. Assessing Writing,
         31, 84-97.
Mathews, C. (2016, September 22). Unwelcome innovation. Inside Higher Ed.
Metzger, E. C., Lubin, L., Patten, R. T., & Whyte, J. (2016). Applied gamification: Creating reward systems for
         organizational professional development. In D. Ifenthaler, N. Bellin-Mularski, & D.-K. Mah (Eds.),
         Foundation of digital badges and micro-credentials (pp. 457-466). Switzerland: Springer.
Northcutt, C. G., Ho, A. D., & Chuang, I. L. (2016). Detecting and preventing "multiple-account" cheating in
         massive open online courses. Computers & Education, 100, 71-80.
Open Recognition    Alliance  (2016). Bologna    Open      Recognition Declaration  [Webpage].   Retrieved  from
         https://www.openrecognition.org
Otto, N. (2017, January 5). Open pathways connect badges to what you care about [Blogpost]. Retrieved from
         https://www.concentricsky.com/articles/detail/open-pathways-connect-badges-to-what-you-care-about
Resnick,  M.     (2012,    February   27).    Still   a     badge   skeptic   [Blog   post].    Retrieved   from
         http://hastac.org/blogs/mres/2012/02/27/still-badge-skeptic
Tran, C., Schenke, K., & Hickey, D. T.  (2014). Design principles for motivating learning with digital badges:
         Consideration  of contextual factors of    recognition and assessment.  In the    Proceedings of the 11th
         Biennial International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Boulder CO (pp 1027-1031).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   659                                                  © ISLS
