         Embodied collaboration to foster instrumental genesis in
                                              mathematics
                  Anna Shvarts, Rosa Alberto, Arthur Bakker, Michiel Doorman, Paul Drijvers
         a.y.shvarts@uu.nl, r.a.alberto@uu.nl, a.bakker4@uu.nl, m.doorman@uu.nl, p.drijvers@uu.nl
                                               Utrecht University

         Abstract: As cognitive science reports joint action requiring tight intercorporeal coordination
         between two partners, we aim to evaluate the role of this coordination in computer-supported
         instrumental genesis for mathematics. In our dual eye-tracking design study we developed an
         embodied activity that potentially contributes to technologically extended problem solving in
         trigonometry. We tested three versions of the design: (a) individual sensorimotor enactment
         only, (b) individual and then collaborative enactments, and (c) individual enactment and then
         collaborative  description  followed by   enactment.   As  our  first case  showed,   the required
         sensorimotor   coordination was  developed  but   never used  in the  following  problem    solving
         when   a  student  worked   alone.   In   contrast, in  both collaborative     cases the    relevant
         sensorimotor coordination became a part of instrumented action scheme. Future research is
         needed to investigate if intercorporeal coordination with the other is crucial for the transfer of
         sensorimotor coordination from their original source to instrumental activity in mathematics.

Following an embodied turn in cognitive science, the design study presented here is a deliberate attempt to
design a computer-supported environment for trigonometry so as to make explicit and observable the embodied
and  extended   mechanisms    of mathematical    learning.   There is a   long  tradition of  research    on  learning
mathematics with technology that extends student's thinking processes, including research on the teacher's role
in its introduction (e.g., Drijvers, Doorman, Boon, Reed, & Gravemeijer, 2010); and growing body of literature
on embodied mathematical learning. However, the interaction in CSCL has rarely been promoted and studied
from an embodied and extended perspective, especially when it comes to more sophisticated mathematics such
as trigonometry. In the tradition of an embodied interactive action-based design genre (Abrahamson, 2014), we
designed tasks  that invite students to establish  new sensorimotor   coordinations     and later enact   them   within
instrumented trigonometry problem solving. This design study focuses on the necessity and the preferred form
of collaboration with a more knowledgeable other in the progress from pure motor activity to mathematics.

Theoretical framework
At the intersection of CSCL, E-approaches to cognition, and mathematics education, one can draw on multiple
bodies of literature. Here we zoom in on embodied collaboration, computer-supported embodied design, and
instrumental genesis as a prerequisite for technologically extended problem solving.

Embodied collaboration
In line with sociocultural traditions, we assume a student and a more knowledgeable other form a functional
system when solving a problem task, with actions and cognition contingently distributed between the partners
(Newman,   Griffin,  &  Cole, 1989). Cognitive   science has   distinguished   multiple embodied     mechanisms   that
maintain the operation of this intercorporeal distributed system, such as fine adjustment to the trajectory of the
other's action  (Schmitz,   Vesper,  Sebanz,  &   Knoblich,   2017),  or  fine-grained  predictions    of the  other's
movements (Vaziri-Pashkam, Cormiea, & Nakayama, 2017). In mathematics education we can find traces of
embodied coupling as tutors monitor a student's actions: the tutor's eye-movements reveal tight coordination
with the  student's  movements    (Shvarts,  &   Abrahamson,    under   review).  Alternatively,   the role   of more
knowledgeable other in embodied collaboration might be seen in a reciprocal multimodal revoicing of a student
that provokes gradual transformation from personal embodied experience to socially established mathematical
objects (Flood, 2018).   The  versions of the computer-supported     activity  that were  tested  in this study  were
designed to distinguish the influence of embodied joint action from verbal description, thus stressing the role of
intercorporeal functional system versus collaborative naming in the genesis of a mathematical instrument.

Mathematical instrument and embodied instrumental genesis
In instrumental approaches to mathematics education an instrument is introduced as constituted from two sub-
systems: an artifact and instrumented action schemes. A scheme is understood as "dynamic functional entity" in
the complexity  of  its components   such as  "the goals and   the anticipations, the rules   of action,  gathering of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   660                                                      © ISLS
information, control-taking and the operative invariants" (Trouche, 2004, p. 286). For example, if a child uses a
spoon (the  artifact) to make sound   on  drums or  to hit a nail   (instrumented  action schemes),    the observable
sensorimotor coordinations are similar, but the schemes are different as the goals of actions differ. The process
in which a learner appropriates an artifact for a specific type of tasks is called instrumental genesis. Clinical
studies make obvious the emergence of new sensorimotor coordinations in instrumental genesis: manipulation
with a stick immediately enlarges peripersonal space, a blind person literally senses through a white cane (see
de Vignemont, 2018, for broader discussion). With an eye on embodied CSCL, we focus on involvement of
previously elaborated sensorimotor coordinations into mathematical instrumented action schemes.

Action-based design genre
Informed by embodied cognitive science, Abrahamson (2014) suggested a new genre of educational design for
learning mathematical concepts with interactive technology, where a student is required to keep the screen green
while moving her hands, thus developing new sensorimotor coordinations, traced in repetitive eye-movements
in goal-oriented embodied activity (Duijzer, Shayan, Bakker, Van der Schaaf & Abrahamson, 2017). While at
the  beginning   new  coordination emerges   as the   solution of   a   motor  problem,   later it is  transformed to
mathematical conceptualization through collaboration with a tutor (e.g. Flood, 2018; Shvarts, & Abrahamson,
under review). In this paper we question the necessity and investigate the form of this collaboration, in so doing
we address the following research questions: How does collaborative versus solo performance influence the
involvement of emergent sensorimotor coordinations into the future instrumental activity? How do perception,
multimodal   utterances  and  actions in a technological   tutorial differ between  embodied     joint actions  versus
collaborative description of a student's embodied experiences?

Methodology and materials
For our design study we have chosen trigonometry as a mathematics topic that requires spatial articulation, thus
providing us with an opportunity to investigate motor and sensory activity by videography and eye-tracking.
Unit circle is an artifact that contributes to understanding the trigonometric functions as having the same value
appearing twice in each period (e.g.,                          ). The instrumental genesis stage consisted of a set
of four sensorimotor problems with color feedback, belonging to an action-based design genre (Abrahamson,
2014). Each task led the students to an embodied discovery in establishing new sensorimotor coordination in
accordance to task constrains. In the series the additional mathematical notations were progressively added. As
can be seen from Figure 1, the promoted embodied discoveries were: (task 1) keeping the hands at the same
level (a and b); (task 2) keeping the colored angles the same size (c and d); (task 3) keeping the measures of two
angles to be       in sum (not depicted here), and (task 4) keeping projection on the y-axis at the same height
(e and f). The problem solving stage consisted of four trigonometry problems (e.g.,                      ). We hoped
to see that the artifact used to solve the forth motor-problem (Figure 1d, e) would next extend the students'
thinking and come to serve as the instrument for solving trigonometry equations.

Figure 1. Figures a, b provide an idea of motor activity in task 1. Each pair of pictures represents two states: the
                      target state with green feedback and incorrect state with red feedback.

This paper compares three versions of activity designs for undergraduate students learning. A graduate student
in mathematics education program (Wes, all names are pseudonyms) took the role of more knowledgeable peer.
Tim went through the motor problems of the instrumental genesis stage without any collaboration. For Rachel
the individual sensorimotor practice was followed by a collaborative phase in which she performed the required
embodied actions together with Wes (each one controlled one point and Rachel had to explain what to do).
Diana, after her individual practice, had to answer the question about the rule that determines green feedback
(the standard  procedure  for action-based  design)  and then  also   performed  embodied   joint   action with  Wes.
Afterwards,  all students went  through  the same   problem  solving    stage. So, we trace three     possible designs
variations: individual practice (Tim),   individual practice with   the following  embodied     joint action (Rachel),
individual practice with the following collaborative description of the rule and further joint action (Diana).
        We used dual eye-tracking and videography to trace sensorimotor activity. In dual eye-tracking studies
of CSCL often the interaction is limited to the speech channel and shared picture on the monitors, as remote

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   661                                                     © ISLS
eye-trackers are used (e.g., Sharma, Jermann, Nüssli, & Dillenbourg, 2013). In this research we used two head
mounted Pupil-Labs eye-trackers that were calibrated on the surface of an interactive whiteboard. Later gaze
paths were   aggregated  in one  video. A   micro-ethnographical  analysis  was  conducted   with    the focus  on the
intercorporeal coupling between participants and on differences in instrumental activity between the cases.

Results and discussion
In accordance with previous findings (Duijzer et al., 2017), as students acquired fluent performance in each
motor  task, the iterative  patterns of  their  eye-movements    evidenced  the emergence    of   new    sensorimotor
coordination. The eye-movements of the more knowledgeable peer as he was monitoring students' performance
revealed tight coordination   of his eye-movements    with   students' movements     thus  evidencing    intercorporeal
coupling between the tutor's perception and the student's action (cf. Shvarts & Abrahamson, under review).

Stage 1. Collaboration on instrumental genesis
Although both Rachel (embodied joint action) and Diana (collaborative description) needed to explicate their
individual performance, their utterances were remarkably different.

   Figure 2. Rachel (a,b) and Diane (c,d,e,f) describe their embodied experience to Wes. The student's eye-
 movements are red, and those of the tutor are blue. On Figures a, b and d the right hand belongs to the tutor.

         Rachel: Move    that way   (Figure 2a) ... and and... I need  to think how   to  explain it <...>
                 Just keep going that way, slowly <...> A bit slower [than me]
         Diana:  We wanna keep the angle ... between this line (Figure 2c). The middle line ... and
                 our point, this angle, <...> we want them both to be equal (Figure 2d). <...> we
                 want this angle between the middle line and our points to be the same (Figure 2e).

Rachel repetitively uttered   "that way" and   "slowly" and   pointed  to the target direction. These    rather vague
references were sufficient though to sustain successful joint action. Apparently, their natural ability to predict
(Vaziri-Pashkam  et al., 2017)   each  other's  movements    and  adjust  (Schmitz et al., 2017)  to  them  provided
sufficient ground for joint task-efficient performance. Diana on the other hand used mathematically relevant
descriptions of  angles, supplemented    by  iconic gestures.  So in  her case, the  description  request   led to an
elaboration of culturally meaningful references (cf. Flood, 2018). Both students traced the joint performance by
repetitive eye-movements (Figure 2b, f), thus contributing to intercorporeal coupling within distributed system.

Stage 2. Trigonometry problem solving
When they were asked to solve trigonometric equations, the usage of the digital artifact between the students
trained in the individual (Tim) versus collaborative design versions (Diana and Rachel) was strikingly different.

      Figure 3. Diana enacts the target sensorimotor coordination as she solves                      equation.
                    Eye-movements are in red. Blue arrows inserted to illustrate movements.

         Figure 4. Tim invents a new instrumental action scheme as he solves                      equation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    662                                                    © ISLS
Diana    and Rachel  immediately    engaged  in   the sensorimotor   coordination   that  was  established   in the four
embodied tasks of the instrumental genesis stage: They positioned two points on the circle so that the sinus
value of two angles became equal (Figures 3a, b) and then moved the points, keeping them at the same level
(Figure 3c, d, e) until one angle became 3 times bigger than another one. Tim on the contrary did not use the
artifact in  the proposed   way. After   some   unsuccessful   attempts    he invented   his  own  instrumented   action
scheme: He moved the points to track two angles so that one would be three times larger than the other (Figures
4b, c, d) until the sinus value of the two angles became equal (Figures 4d, e).
          Problem solving processes were very similar among all students who worked on collaborative versus
individual versions of the design beyond the cases presented here. So the established sensorimotor coordination
being relevant for problem solving became part of the instrumental action scheme for the technological artifact
only when it had been enacted earlier or discussed in collaboration with the other.

Conclusions
In our design study we traced collaborative actions within an embodied computer-supported activity as well as
dyads' multimodal utterances and eye-movements, and generated some novel hypotheses based on our results.
We  may     expect individual sensorimotor    coordinations    as they  emerge   in   a solution  of interactive  motor
problems to be insufficient for instrumental genesis for mathematics. The comparison of the design versions
suggested that a collaborative process is important for incorporation of the initial coordination into instrumented
action schemes (Trouche, 2004): In both collaborative cases the students involved sensorimotor coordination,
provoked by our embodied activities, in their technologically extended problem solving. In these cases, data
revealed coupling between a student and a more knowledgeable other when the student and the other co-acted
and when     the other only  observed   the student's    performance.   The   results contribute  to  understanding    of
embodied collaboration as forming an intercorporeal distributed functional system. Further research is needed
to establish  whether  this intercorporeal  coupling  in joint action   leads to the  transfer of the initial embodied
coordination to the mathematical domain, or whether a collaborative mathematical description of the student's
experience is required. Unlike the explicit verbal description, the performance of embodied joint action did not
require enculturated referencing and articulated iconic gestures. We propose that our design study contributes to
understanding    how embodied    collaborative  learning  might   lead  to extended   problem   solving, and    generates
hypotheses that deserve investigation with a larger test group and the quantitative measures of gaze alignment.

References
Abrahamson, D. (2014). Building educational activities for understanding: An elaboration on the embodied-
          design framework and its epistemic grounds. Int. Journal of Child-Computer Interaction, 2(1), 1­16.
de Vignemont,    F. (2018).  The Extended    Body     Hypothesis: Referred    Sensations   from  Tools to   Peripersonal
          Space. In A. Newen, L. De Bruin, & S. Gallagher (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of 4E Cognition.
Drijvers, P., Doorman,  M.,   Boon, P., Reed,  H., &   Gravemeijer,  K. (2010).  The  teacher and the  tool: Instrumental
          orchestrations in the technology-rich mathematics classroom. Educ. Studies In Mathematics, 75(2), 213­234.
Duijzer, C. A. C. G., Shayan, S., Bakker, A., Van der Schaaf, M. F., & Abrahamson, D. (2017). Touchscreen
          tablets: Coordinating action and perception for mathematical cognition. Front. in Psychology, 8, 144.
Flood, V. J. (2018). Multimodal revoicing as an interactional mechanism for connecting scientific and everyday
          concepts. Human Development, 61, 145­173.
Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1989). The construction zone: Working for cognitive change in school.
          New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Schmitz, L., Vesper, C., Sebanz, N., & Knoblich, G. (2017). Co-representation of others' task constraints in
          joint action. Jour. of Exp. Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 43(8), 1480­1493.
Sharma,   K., Jermann,  P.,  Nüssli, M.-A.,   &   Dillenbourg,    P. (2013).  Understanding    Collaborative    Program
          Comprehension: Interlacing Gaze and Dialogues. In Proceedings of CSCL. Madison, WI, USA.
Streeck, J., & Mehus, S. (2005). Microethnography: The Study of Practices. In K. L. Fitch & R. E. Sanders
          (Eds.), Handbook of Language and Social Interaction (pp. 381­404). Mahwah, NJ, LEA
Shvarts,  A., &   Abrahamson,    D. (under  review)    Dual-eye-tracking    Vygotsky:   A  microgenetic   account   of a
          teaching/learning collaboration in an embodied-interaction technological tutorial for mathematics.
Trouche,  L.  (2004).  Managing   the   Complexity    of Human/Machine        Interactions in  Computerized     Learning
          Environments:     Guiding     Students'  Command        Process     through   Instrumental   Orchestrations.
          International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 9(3), 281­307.
Vaziri-Pashkam,    M.,  Cormiea,    S., &   Nakayama,    K.   (2017).   Predicting  actions   from   subtle  preparatory
          movements. Cognition, 168, 65­75.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     663                                                     © ISLS
