         Collaborative Uncertainty Management While Solving an
                                Engineering Design Problem
                               Navneet Kaur, Aastha Patel, and Chandan Dasgupta
                  navneetkaur@iitb.ac.in, aasthapatel1997@gmail.com, cdasgupta@iitb.ac.in
                                       Indian Institute of Technology Bombay

         Abstract: Uncertainty plays a crucial role in making engineering design decisions. It directly
         impacts both the design process and the final design output. It is important for learners to
         develop the skill of managing uncertainties effectively. However, there is a lack of research
         investigating how    students manage    uncertainties during  a collaborative design   process and
         how effective uncertainty management skills may be developed in the learners. In this paper,
         we   present  the    results  of  a  pilot  study  investigating  how   middle  school   students
         collaboratively manage uncertainties while solving an engineering design challenge. We also
         discuss issues related to the management strategies used and reflect on how these issues can
         be addressed using a computer-supported collaborative learning environment.

Introduction
Engineering design problems are ill-structured and encompass uncertainties that arise due to the open-ended
nature of the problems as well as the collaborative design process (Dym, Little, Orwin, & Spjut, 2009). In this
paper, uncertainty refers to the cognitive feeling that encompasses subjective experiences of wonder, doubt or
being unsure (Clore, 1992). The ways in which the uncertainties are managed collaboratively affect the overall
design process and thus have implications for how and what students learn about engineering design (Jordan &
McDaniel Jr, 2014). In this paper, we investigate how middle school students manage uncertainty while solving
an engineering   design   challenge   in  a  collaborative environment.   We   also discuss   issues  related to the
management     strategies used  and   reflect on how     these issues can be  addressed  in   a computer-supported
collaborative learning environment aimed at developing learners' uncertainty management skills.

Method
In this pilot  study, we   conducted   an   after-school robot  design workshop   for  seventh-grade  students   in a
metropolitan city in India. Five seventh grade students (three girls and two boys) participated in the study. We
divided the students into two teams randomly. One team (Group A) consisted of two students (one boy and one
girl) and the other team (Group B) consisted of three students (two girls and one boy). The workshop had two
parts; first four hours consisted of basic training with the LEGO MindstormsTM kit since students did not have
any prior experience with it. In the next four hours, teams solved a design challenge competing with each other.
Teams had to design a robot that cleaned at least two of the following materials- paper bits, LEGOTM pieces,
water droplets, eraser dust, and pencil dust. They used LEGO MindstormsTM kit and materials provided to them,
such as mop and sponge, to construct the robot. Every construction material had an associated cost. The teams
were asked to optimize the cost of their design.
         We collected data from each team using audio and video recorders. We also conducted semi-structured
interviews at the end of the design challenge and collected students' design artifacts and the workbooks given to
them for taking  notes    and making   sketches. We   transcribed the  video and  audio data  and  noted  the verbal
conversations, gestures, interaction with objects, and gaze, in the transcript. Next, we analyzed the transcripts
using the content analysis technique (Mayring, 2015). To ascertain the occurrence of uncertainty we used the
coding scheme developed by Jordan et al. (2014), which focuses on the use of hedges, probability statements,
hypotheticals, questions,  and  various   nonverbal   indicators during  student interaction.   Next, we  iteratively
analyzed the uncertainty episodes to identify various management strategies based on our previous work (Kaur
& Dasgupta, 2018).

Findings
Teams reduced, suppressed or maintained the uncertainty during the design process. Strategies used by teams
for reducing uncertainty were­ Analysis, Argumentation, Brainstorming, Experimentation and Trial & Error,
Ask and Apply, and Observe and Replicate. Students suppressed uncertainty by ignoring them. Strategies used
by teams to maintain uncertainty was­ Delay Action. Comparing the two teams, we found that during the entire
design process, for group A, there were 31 episodes of uncertainty, whereas for group B, we found 40 episodes
where the team faced uncertainty. We found differences in the way the two teams managed these uncertainties.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     664                                                  © ISLS
Group A used the Ask and Apply and Ignore strategy the most (23% each), followed by Experimentation and
Trial &  Error  (19%).   Group   B used  the  strategy   of Analysis the most   (22%), followed   by   strategies like
Brainstorming (20%), and Argumentation (17%). Use of strategies like Delay Action and Ask and Apply was
negligible (2%   each).  We   now  share representative   instances  of how these   strategies played  out, and   then
discuss possible computer-supported solutions to scaffold these strategies.

Analysis
This  strategy  includes actions  like making   sketches  and  diagrams, troubleshooting,  and  separating  available
information into parts. For example, consider the following episode:

         B1:   We will   have two  motors  like this, here  is the sponge  and  the wipes  [pointing   to the
         sketch], and that brain [referring to the EV3 brick] will be dragging behind.
         B2: I am still not clear...wouldn't it hurt the brick, we can put it on the top. And how will we
         attach that sponge and the wipes? And where are the wheels? How many do we need?
         B1: We need four.
         B2: Putting these on the sides [referring to sponge and wipes in the sketch] will not clean the
         trash completely. We also need to add a dustbin kind of thing to collect the trash.

Here, group B learners B1 and B2 reflected on one of the alternatives sketched by them. They were figuring out
how   to attach different components    of the  robot  (the motors,  EV3  brick  and cleaning   materials)  using the
analysis strategy. While analyzing, the team identified issues with the design like the problem of dragging the
brick, the problem with the sponge and wipes attached on the sides, etc. The strategy helped the team establish a
function of garbage collection. It also gave rise to new uncertainties like where to put the EV3 brick, how to
collect the garbage, and where to attach the sponge and wet wipes, thus expanding their problem space and
opening opportunities to make their design even better.

Argumentation
This strategy encompasses the process in which two or more engineers engage in a dialogue where arguments
are constructed and critiqued. For example, consider the following episode:

         B1: Do we really need to make a bottom? I don't think so. [Referring to a support that team is
         trying to build to hold EV3 brick in the Robot].
         B2: We need it because the surface will be uneven.
         B1: No, because all the wheels we are using are of same height.
         B2:   But above the surface will be rough and the brick will keep falling down.
         B1: We can do something, may be just tape it, because the bottom would be very costly.
         B2:   Ok. We can try it.

Here, group B used the argumentation strategy for dealing with the uncertainty related to how to build sturdy
but  cheap support  to   hold the  EV3   brick. The   strategy  likely  helped in resolving  conflicts and   building
consensus  among   the   teammates. It  also helped   in making  informed  decisions and   lead  to clarification and
reduction of doubts and misconceptions.

Experimentation and Trial & Error
This strategy includes systematically testing option(s)/ ideas or engaging in Trial & Error method. For example,
consider the following episode:

         A1: Should we just stick the wipe and sponge on the sides, or back or in front? Or should we
         just use sponge at the bottom and wipe at the back. I am not sure which will work better.
         A2: Umm... I don't know, let's try them up.

Here, in group A, while figuring out which design would help in cleaning the trash better, students started by
testing their first idea, i.e., attaching sponge and wipes on the left and right side of the robot. To get the desired
output, they used Trial & Error to check if anything worked. The team then tested another idea of using the
sponge at the back. They did not test any further idea since they got a satisfying result.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     665                                                  © ISLS
Brainstorming
This strategy  refers  to collaboratively generating ideas  around a   specific common   problem.  For      example,
consider the following episode:

        B1: We can fold the wipes.
        B2: We can also cover the sponge with the wipes.
        B1: We need a broom kind of thing and this [pointing to the cleaning wipes] will go wiping behind.
        B3: Or a wipe followed by sponge. It will first do dry cleaning and then the wet cleaning.
        B2: We can cut the wipes and the sponge to place it on both sides.

Here, group B was faced with the uncertainty about how to use the additional cleaning materials given to them.
They brainstormed different ideas which helped the team generate multiple ways of using the wipes and the
sponge. This helped the teammates understand each other's perspectives and think of ways by which they can
incorporate   ideas of other team members.   However,   teams  seemed   to  fixate on some   particular     ideas. For
example, in this particular case, teams fixated on using all the materials provided to them. They wanted to use
all the materials without thinking about other possible solutions that could serve the purpose better.

Ignore uncertainty
This strategy includes actions like dismissing or paying no attention to the introduced uncertainty and moving
forward without addressing them. For example, consider the following episode:

        A1: Our robot will clean everything.
        A2: Should we use eraser dust? Won't it be difficult to clean it? It kind of...sticks to the floor.
        A1: This is not important right now; we will be able to do it.

Here, learner A2 of group A expressed the uncertainty about whether their design will be able to clean the eraser
dust (one of the trash material). Learner A1 completely ignored this uncertainty by calling it unimportant. The
uncertainty raised by the team member was regarding the constraints specified in the design problem. If this
uncertainty had been addressed, the team may have realized that cleaning the eraser dust was not easy with the
provided materials and this might have helped the team to further refine the design.

Delay action
This strategy includes delaying action, decision, or evaluation. For example, consider the following episode:

        B1: Pass me the cost calculation sheet. I am worried that our robot will turn out a due to cost.
        B2: Wait, let us first complete and then calculate, we have to make so many changes.
        B3: Yeah, lets first program it and test it that is more important.

Here, in Group B, B1 expressed her concerns regarding the cost of the robot. She wanted to calculate the cost to
ensure that their budget was in control but the other two members asked her to do it later thereby delaying the
action on it.

Observe and replicate
It means observing the actions of other team members, other groups or an authority figure. Only group B used
this strategy. For example, consider the following episode:

        B1: See, they have used the cage [structure to hold the EV3 brick].
        B2: Yeah I think we should also just do it and start testing, we have no time left.

We observed that when group B was struggling with the uncertainty about how and where to place the EV3
brick for a long time and failed to resolve it after many attempts; they went off to see the design of the other
team and modified their design.

Ask and apply
This strategy refers to asking for a solution from a teammate or an authority figure and then applying it directly.
For example, consider the following episode:

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   666                                                    © ISLS
         A1: So, if you have to clean the dry dust, do we have to take it or we have to just move it aside?
         Mentor:    See that is your wish, anything works.
         A1: So, even with the sponge we can just move it like this [Shows dragging action].

There were    many  instances  like this   one  for group    A where   the team  members    preferred   approaching  an
authority figure like a mentor instead of discussing it among themselves. However, for group B, there was a lot
of discussion happening among the teammates and there were only a few instances where they preferred asking
for a solution directly.

Discussion
Students collaboratively managed the uncertainties using the management strategies mentioned in the above
section. It was observed that students faced some issues while using these strategies which led to ineffective
uncertainty management. For example, in the case of analysis and brainstorming, the dominance of certain team
members    led to unequal   participation. A  potential  solution  to this problem   is to follow  a structured  way of
collaborative turn taking or use of collaborative dialogue or negotiation tools (Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2016).
Similarly, sketches    played an important   role   in guiding  discussions  during  analysis and    brainstorming, but
superficial sketches weakened their analysis as they missed important aspects to be analyzed. Majorly, these
sketches lacked   specifications   like dimensions,    size, materials, etc. and were    incompletely   labeled. Using
collaborative and discussion-led sketching tools with reflective prompts can help in improving the quality of
analysis. In the case of argumentation, it was observed that students' actions were not backed with appropriate
reasoning. Using argumentation construction tools for helping students construct sound arguments might be a
solution to this problem. Also, while brainstorming, teams got fixated on certain ideas which restricted them
from further exploration. Engineering design tools like 6-3-5 Method, C-sketch method and the Gallery method
(Dym et al., 2009) can help the teams expand the solution space while brainstorming.
         Further detailed studies need to be conducted to understand different issues involved in the process of
collaborative uncertainty management. Technological affordances, like the ones discussed above, can then be
utilized to solve these issues and help learners manage uncertainties effectively.

Conclusion
The preliminary     results presented   in this paper   help   us understand  how    middle  school   students  manage
uncertainty   while solving   an engineering    design  challenge   collaboratively. Effective  scaffolds  for  helping
learners to manage uncertainties collaboratively can only be designed once we understand what problems and
issues learners face during the management process. The work done in this paper is, therefore, an important step
in gaining insights about what form and features can a computer-supported collaborative learning environment
possess to ensure that learners are able to develop the skill of managing uncertainties effectively.

References
Clore, G. L. (1992). Cognitive phenomenology: Feelings and the construction of judgment. The Construction of
         Social Judgments, 10, 133­163.
Dym, C. L., Little, P., Orwin, E. J., & Spjut, E. (2009). Engineering design: A project-based introduction. John
         Wiley and sons.
Jeong, H., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2016). Seven affordances of computer-supported collaborative learning: How
         to support collaborative learning? How can technologies help? Educational Psychologist, 51, 247­265.
Jordan, M. E., Cheng, A.-C. J., Schallert, D., Song, K., Lee, S., & Park, Y. (2014). "I guess my question is":
         What is the co-occurrence of uncertainty and learning in computer-mediated discourse? International
         Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9(4), 451­475.
Jordan, M.  E., &   McDaniel   Jr, R.   R. (2014).  Managing   uncertainty   during  collaborative problem  solving  in
         elementary school teams: The role of peer influence in robotics engineering activity. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 23(4), 490­536.
Mayring,   P.  (2015). Qualitative content   analysis:  Theoretical   background and    procedures.  In Approaches   to
         qualitative research in mathematics education (pp. 365­380). Springer.
Kaur, N. & Dasgupta, C. (2018).         Types of uncertainty and collaborative uncertainty management strategies
         evidenced     during  the  engineering    design    process. International  Conference      on Computers    in
         Education, 175-180.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      667                                                   © ISLS
