    Understanding Climate Change Through Collaborative Versus
   Individual Inquiry With Constructive or Example-Based Scaffolds
                     Sarah Bichler, University of Munich (LMU), Sarah.Bichler@psy.lmu.de
                 Sonya B. Richards, University of Munich (LMU), sonyabrichards@gmail.com
                 Lisa Hasenbein, University of Munich (LMU), lisa.hasenbein@uni-tuebingen.de
                    Marcia C. Linn, University of California, Berkeley, mclinn@berkeley.edu
                    Frank Fischer, University of Munich (LMU), Frank.Fischer@psy.lmu.de

        Abstract: We investigated a constructive and an example-based scaffold when learning from
        dynamic     visualizations  about  climate    change.  Learners  collaboratively   or individually
        generated a diagram that represented energy flow (constructive scaffold) or observed a peer
        learner generating the diagram (example-based scaffold). We hypothesized that collaborative
        learners would benefit more from the constructive than the example-based scaffold, but that the
        opposite    would  be  the  case  for  individual learners. Seventy-one  university students  were
        randomly     allocated to   conditions  in  the   2X2  between-subjects   design. Climate change
        understanding was measured at pre- and posttest. Preliminary results supported our hypothesis.
        We conclude that the constructive scaffold elicited questions that led to deep engagement in the
           collaborative condition, resulting in better understanding. Individual learners possibly failed to
           recognize crucial concepts in the constructive condition because they had questions but nobody
           to discuss with. They profited more from the example-based scaffold which emphasized central
           concepts of climate change.

Objective
The rationale for our study is that scaffolding effects are usually investigated without considering the social mode
of learning. Dependent on whether learners study individually or collaboratively, specific types of scaffolds might
be more or less suited. Our aim is to determine which properties of scaffolds elicit effective learning processes in
individual, and which in collaborative settings.

Theoretical and empirical background
Inquiry settings actively involve the learner in knowledge construction by engaging them in various epistemic
activities such  as making   predictions, experimenting,    evaluating evidence,  explaining, revising  predictions,
discussing,  and critiquing  (Fischer  et al., 2014;  Linn  &  Eylon,  2011). Scientific  models are  suited   to test
predictions, to be evaluated, and revised (Schwarz et al., 2009). Due to technological affordances, scientific
models can be implemented in inquiry settings fairly easily, as well as dynamically depict aspects of scientific
phenomena that are otherwise not directly observable, allow experimentation that would not be possible in a
classroom, and better represent the complexity of scientific phenomena. Thus, they show an advantage over static
images in fostering coherent science understanding (McElhaney, Chang, Chiu, & Linn, 2015).
        Key   to inquiry   learning is learner  guidance   (Lazonder  &  Harmsen,  2016).   Designers  of scaffolds,
however, are challenged with the aptly named "assistance dilemma" (Koedinger & Aleven, 2007): The fine line
between providing too much or insufficient support. To be most effective, scaffolds ought to operate at what
Vygotsky (1978) called the learner's zone of proximal development (Tabak & Kyza, 2018). If a scaffold provides
too much information, a learner has no room for autonomous inquiry or improvement. If a scaffold provides too
little information, a learner might be overwhelmed with the task.
        Research determining effective scaffolds usually investigates scaffolding independent of the social mode
of learning. As  known    from  worked    example   research,  involving learners in problem   solving  before    they
processed domain concepts and problem structures, often results in the use of ineffective strategies. Learners
should first learn with a worked example, from which domain principles and problem structures as well as solution
strategies can be inferred, before engaging in less structured activities (Renkl, 2014). In example-based learning,
"the apprentice observes the master demonstrating how to do different parts of the task" (Collins, Brown, &
Holum, 1991, p. 2 online version). In other words, what usually happens "within" a problem-solver is externalized
for observing learners. It seems, that properties of example-based scaffolds might be more suited for individual
and less for collaborative learning settings.
        Collaboration   is a  typical and  critical feature of inquiry-based  learning (Linn  &  Eylon, 2011).    The
effectiveness of collaboration depends on "the extent to which groups actually engage in productive interactions"
(Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer, 2009, p. 6). For this reason, collaboration scaffolds have been designed to

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     668                                                   © ISLS
support learners' productive interaction (Kollar, Fischer, & Slotta, 2007). These scaffolds, called collaboration
scripts, are most effective when they prompt learners to build on each other's ideas (Vogel, Wecker, Kollar, &
Fischer, 2017). Designing content scaffolds for collaborative settings should thus be effective, when they give
learners opportunities to externalize their ideas, and build on each other's ideas. In general, properties of scaffolds
for collaborative settings should promote learners to generate instead of process information.
         Notably, the "generative" property of scaffolds that has been identified as ineffective for individual
learning, might be the essential property in collaborative settings because it elicits questions which constitutes the
basis for debating meaning, argumentation, consensus building, or other interactive activities that foster successful
collaboration (Weinberger & Fischer, 2006). Building on each other's ideas or constructing ideas beyond the
learning materials are at the top of the ICAP framework's hierarchy of deep cognitive involvement (Chi & Wylie,
2014),  which    aligns with   the assumed      mechanism.  In  individual learning however,    it  seems  that active
engagement,   although   lower  on  the ICAP's    hierarchy, is essential for learners' success.   Whereas  individual
learners might feel discouraged through constructive scaffolds and give up or skip over the understanding part, in
collaboration  settings understanding   happens     through constructing  knowledge  in  interaction. In other  words,
collaborative learners would not benefit from the typical advantages of collaboration when using example-based
scaffolds, as it might elicit less interaction.

Research question and hypothesis
Learners creating a model, such as drawing a diagram, externalize crucial features and how features are linked,
as well as underlying mechanisms, or relations (Schauble, 2018). A diagram activity thus scaffolds learning from
a dynamic visualization. In the present study learners used dynamic visualizations to understand climate change
in an online inquiry unit which they either completed collaboratively or individually. We compared two different
scaffolds alongside the dynamic visualization and hypothesized:

         The   constructive   scaffold fosters  understanding   climate  change more    effectively than  the
         example-based scaffold when learners collaborate but the opposite is the case when learners
         study individually.

Method

Sample, design, and materials
German university students were recruited via advertisements to participate in the study, received a participation
certificate, and were   entered into a  lottery  to win one  of eight 50-Amazon     gift cards.  A  priori power  was
calculated with G*Power version 3.1 and the target sample size for detecting a medium sized effect (lower end of
medium effect size according to Cohen f = .2) with 80% power and a 5% alpha error probability is N = 199.
Preliminary results reported in this paper refer to N = 71 participants (44 females, 26 males, 1 other) with a mean
age of 25.30 years (SD = 5.85). Participants were randomly allocated to one of the four experimental conditions
of the 2X2 between-subjects design. The two manipulated factors were scaffold (constructive vs. example-based)
and study mode (collaborative vs. individual).
         Participants   learned about   different types of   energy, energy   flow and  transformation,   how   energy
interacts with greenhouse gases and the ozone layer, and how this contributes to global warming in an online
inquiry-learning unit with dynamic visualizations. Dynamic visualizations (NetLogo simulations) portray the
entire process   from   solar energy   entering  the Earth's atmosphere,   being   absorbed by   the  Earth's surface,
transforming into heat energy within the Earth's surface, being released as infrared radiation back into the Earth's
atmosphere, and either exiting the Earth's atmosphere or being held back by greenhouse gases. In addition,
dynamic visualizations address the role of the ozone layer, which is commonly but erroneously assumed to affect
the rise of global temperatures (Andersson & Wallin, 2000).

Scaffolds and study mode
Learners in the constructive scaffold condition created an energy-flow diagram (a type of concept map). Learners
begin with an empty workspace and drag and drop icons that represent the physical system (e.g., the Earth) and
choose from several types of energy when linking the icons (e.g., solar energy). Linking the icons shows the
energy type and flow direction. Learners receive automated guidance which prompts them to further investigate
the dynamic visualization if ideas are inaccurately represented. Learners in the example-based scaffold condition
observed a modeling video, in which a peer learner creates the diagram, receives guidance and revises the diagram
until energy flow is accurately represented.
         In the individual condition, participants did not see each other's monitor display and worked alone. In

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      669                                                  © ISLS
the collaboration condition, participants saw each other's monitor and collaborated throughout the learning unit.

Procedure
Participants first completed a pretest including multiple choice, open response items and a diagram (20 minutes).
After a quick explanation of how to navigate in the unit, they worked in the inquiry environment for 1.5 hours.
Immediately after the unit, participants completed the same test as before and an additional transfer item.

Understanding of global climate change
In this paper, we only report the outcome of the multiple choice test, consisting of 10 items with four answer
options each. An example item is: "How do greenhouse gases influence global temperature?". The following
answer options include the correct answer (a): a) Greenhouse gases contribute to an increase in global temperature
as they absorb infrared radiation and send it back to the Earth's surface, b) Greenhouse gases contribute to an
increase in global temperature as they absorb infrared radiation and send it back to the Earth's surface as heat
energy, c) Greenhouse gases contribute to an increase in global temperature in a different way, d) Greenhouse
gases do not interact with other types of energy and thus do not affect global temperature. All ten items were
shown to participants in random order, as were the four answer options of each item. Each item included one
correct answer, each correct answer was coded with 1 point resulting in a maximum of 10 points. Items were
designed by a group of researchers and refined through cognitive interviews and feedback from subject matter
experts. Reliability of both tests was low: rtt = .28 (acceptable) for pre- and rtt = .60 (acceptable) for posttest.

Statistical analysis
The alpha level was set to 5% in all analyses. Statistical software used was SPSS24. Data from the collaborative
condition was considered as hierarchical as individual learners were nested in dyads. To eliminate potential effects
of particular learning partners on each other, we calculated the ICC for the collaborative condition. The ICC was
close to 0 and statistically not significant which indicates that units in the same dyad did not resemble each other
more than they resembled units from other dyads with respect to individual scores in the multiple choice test.
Using individuals as unit of analysis is appropriate in this case. We tested differences in prior knowledge between
all four conditions with a two-factorial ANOVA. Results showed that there were no systematic differences in
prior knowledge   before  the  study;  no statistically significant difference  between   the scaffold    conditions
F(1, 67) = 0.02, p = .894, Kp2 < .01, between the study mode conditions F(1, 67) = 0.2, p = .655, Kp2 < .01, and no
statistically significant interaction F(1, 67) = 0.17, p = .668, Kp2 < .01 (descriptive statistics in Table 1). It is
therefore appropriate to not control for prior knowledge (Senn, 2013). Also, because the prior knowledge measure
cannot be considered reliable.

Results
A 2X2 ANOVA with factor 1 scaffold (constructive vs. example-based), factor 2 study mode (collaborative vs.
individual), and knowledge about climate change as dependent variable showed that neither of the two scaffolds
was more effective (F(1, 67) = 0.35, p = .558, Kp2 = .01), and neither study mode was more effective than the
other (F(1, 67) = 0.8, p = .374, Kp2 = .01). In contrast, the interaction effect of scaffold and study mode was
statistically significant, F(1, 67) = 4.22, p = .044, Kp2 = .06. Descriptive statistics (Table 1) show that collaborative
learners understood more with the constructive scaffold than with the example-based scaffold but that individual
learners understood more with the example-based than with the constructive scaffold.

Discussion and conclusion
Without a peer to discuss, individual learners might have resorted to weak strategies when trying to learn with the
constructive scaffold.  They   might  not have recognized    crucial   aspects of the dynamic     visualizations     by
themselves. It was more beneficial to observe the modeling video (i.e., the example-based scaffold) because the
demonstration of constructing   a simplified model   of energy flow    and transformation  that  explicitly includes
inaccurate ideas and   their revision helped individual   learners  to recognize  crucial aspects  of the   dynamic
visualization and consequently understand domain principles (Renkl, 2014). Learners who have a peer to consult
might  (a) more  easily master technical  aspects of the  modeling   task  (how  to link  icons) and  (b) overcome
challenging aspects by asking questions, verifying understanding, or debating meaning (Weinberger & Fischer,
2006). We assume that the constructive scaffold elicited high task engagement which reflects that learners were
deeply cognitively engaged (Chi & Wylie, 2014). However, with the example-based scaffold the potential of
collaboration might have been underutilized, as it elicited less questions and thus less interaction followed.
        Conclusions are limited because results are based on a preliminary set of participants. Further, so far

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   670                                                   © ISLS
only multiple choice items were used to measure understanding of climate change and a more valid picture of
learners' understanding and the effects of the scaffolds will be obtained when open items and diagrams are
included in the analyses. We will follow up on the idea that the constructive scaffold elicited more interaction
than the example-based in the collaborative condition by analyzing video data of collaboration sessions.

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for multiple choice test across all four conditions at pre- and posttest

                                             Individual                    Collaboration
                                     Mpre  SDpre   Mpost     SDpost  Mpre  SDpre   Mpost  SDpost
            Constructive Scaffold    4.64   1.14   7.64      1.87    4.64   1.28   8.79    1.12
            Example-based Scaffold   4.52   1.4    8.67      1.46    4.86   2.41   8.21    1.76

References
Andersson, B., & Wallin, A. (2000). Students' understanding of the greenhouse effect, the societal consequences
       of reducing CO2 emissions and the problem of ozone layer depletion. Journal of Research in Science
       Teaching: The Official Journal of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, 37(10),
       1096­1111.
Chi, M. T., & Wylie, R. (2014). The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engagement to active learning outcomes.
       Educational Psychologist, 49(4), 219­243.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Holum, A. (1991). Cognitive apprenticeship: Making thinking visible. American
       educator, 15(3), 6­11.
Dillenbourg, P., Järvelä, S., & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research on computer-supported collaborative
       learning. In N. Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen, & T. de Jong (Eds.), Technology-enhanced learning (pp. 3­19).
       Dordrecht: Springer.
Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Ufer, S., Sodian, B., Hussmann, H., Pekrun, R., . . . Fischer, M. (2014). Scientific reasoning
       and argumentation: Advancing an interdisciplinary research agenda in education. Frontline Learning
       Research, 2(3), 28­45.
Koedinger, K. R., & Aleven, V. (2007). Exploring the assistance dilemma in experiments with cognitive tutors.
       Educational Psychology Review, 19(3), 239­264.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
       inquiry learning. Learning and Instruction, 17(6), 708­721.
Lazonder, A. W., & Harmsen, R. (2016). Meta-Analysis of Inquiry-Based Learning: Effects of Guidance. Review
       of educational research, 86(3), 681­718.
Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B.-S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology to promote
       knowledge integration: Routledge.
McElhaney, K. W., Chang, H.-Y., Chiu, J. L., & Linn, M. C. (2015). Evidence for effective uses of dynamic
       visualisations in science curriculum materials. Studies in Science Education, 51(1), 49­85.
Renkl, A. (2014). Toward an instructionally oriented theory of example-based learning. Cognitive Science, 38(1),
       1­37.
Schauble, L. (2018). In the eye of the beholder: Domain-general and domain-specific reasoning in science. In F.
       Fischer, C. A. Chinn, K. Engelmann, & J. Osborne (Eds.), Scientific Reasoning and Argumentation. The
       roles of domain-specific and domain-general knowledge (pp. 21­43). New York, NY: Routledge.
Schwarz, C. V., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Kenyon, L., Achér, A., Fortus, D., . . . Krajcik, J. (2009). Developing
       a learning progression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modeling accessible and meaningful
       for learners. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632­654.
Senn, S. (2013). Seven myths of randomisation in clinical trials. Statistics in Medicine, 32(9), 1439­1450.
Tabak, I., & Kyza, E. A. (2018). Research on Scaffolding in the Learning Sciences. A Methodological Perspective.
       In F. Fischer, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, S. R. Goldman, & P. Reimann (Eds.), International Handbook of the
       Learning Sciences (pp. 191­200). New York and London: Routledge.
Vogel, F., Wecker, C., Kollar, I., & Fischer, F. (2017). Socio-cognitive scaffolding with computer-supported
       collaboration scripts: A meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review, 29(3), 477­511.
Weinberger, A., &  Fischer, F. (2006). A  framework  to    analyze  argumentative knowledge  construction         in
       computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46(1), 71­95.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Elite Network of Bavaria (ENB) project number K-GS-2012-209.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 671                                                       © ISLS
