   Examining How Scientific Modeling Emerges Through Collective
                                              Embodied Play
                  Xintian Tu, Joshua Danish, Chris Georgen, Megan Humburg, and Bria Davis
           tuxi@iu.edu, jdanish@indiana.edu, cgeogern@iu.edu, mahumbur@iu.edu, davis217@iu.edu
                                                 Indiana University

                        Noel Enyedy, Vanderbilt University, noel.d.enyedy@vanderbilt.edu

         Abstract: Previous studies demonstrated that embodied play in a mixed-reality environment
         can be an entry point for young children to learn about scientific modeling. However, it's still
         unclear  how   specific features  of play  orient  students   towards    scientific modeling   and   thus
         science learning. We investigate how the organization of an activity where students pretend to
         be bees to learn about how bees pollinate might direct their attention either to treating these
         activities as play or to exploring the underlying rules about how bees behave in the real world
         in a manner more akin to modeling. We describe three activities where students appear to
         have engaged in different kinds of play and explore how their actions and teachers' orientation
         produced either playful rules or scientific accounts. The implications of this work will support
         teachers and researchers in organizing embodied play activities that help students engage with
         scientific concepts.

Introduction
Play as defined by Vygotsky (1978) is the combination of two key features: an imaginary situation and a set of
rules, which  allows  students   to explore the  explicit   rules of  the  social world by    engaging    in the imaginary
situation. While play is often accepted in out-of-school settings, it has been rarely treated as a powerful learning
tool in  classrooms. Nonetheless,    scholars have   argued     that there are  ways  that   play can  help   with science
learning. For example, when used to articulate ideas about how the world works, play can be viewed as a form
of inquiry  (Youngquist   & Pataray-Ching,    2004).   Based    on   Lesh  and  Deorr's (2003)    definition,  a  scientific
model   contains "elements,   relations,   operations, and   rule    governing  interactions   that are   expressed  using
external notation   systems." Both   play  and   scientific models    are  rule-based activities.   In play,   students can
explore and negotiate the rules to make the play meaningful to themselves; while in modeling, the rules refer to
the relationships between objects in the natural world. Therefore, we argue there is real potential to use play as
an entry point for learning scientific modeling (Enyedy, Danish, Delacruz, & Kumar, 2012) because play helps
students orient towards the implicit rules of a social situation or phenomena. However, not all play activities
automatically lead students to engage in the target content. Therefore, in this work we explore how teachers'
organization of play activities in the form of prompts and materials may lead students to engage either solely
with fun aspects of the play context, or with scientifically normative rules more akin to modeling. Specifically,
we   focus on how    the students   orient their play  either   toward    fun, nonscientific  features,   or  to normative
scientific accounts during their interaction in the Science through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP) project
(Enyedy, Danish, & DeLiema, 2015).

Design
This work builds on the Science through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP) Project, which is a Mixed Reality
(MR)   environment   to  support young     children learning    science concepts   through    sociodramatic    play. When
students move    in the  classroom,  Microsoft   Kinect   cameras    track their  motion     and feed  it into a  computer
simulation, which   depicts   their movements    as  bees   in  the  meadow.    The   STEP    environment     provides  the
imaginary context for students (pretending to be a bee), so that students can explore the rules of the phenomena
(how bees collect nectar) through their embodied play (See Figure 1). Our prior work has demonstrated that this
general approach was quite successful in helping students understand how honeybees collect nectar. The current
implementation took place over 8 days. Our present analysis focuses on activities from Day 6 and Day 8, when
students engaged with a range of materials to explore how bees that are foraging flowers in search of nectar
have pollen stick to their bodies and thus unintentionally support pollination.

Method

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       676                                                      © ISLS
Participants and data source
In the STEP project, participants (n=48) were from a first and second grade classroom at a public elementary
school in a small city in the midwestern United States. Each classroom was teacher-assigned into two groups
and participated in eight 45-minute lessons. Each teacher led two groups of students from their own classroom,
and the researchers were present with the teacher to facilitate the conversation. Here we present an illustrative
case  study  from  two   days (Day   6   and Day   8) when   one group   of  second   graders  (n =13)  engaged    in the
embodied activities to learn about the procedure of pollination. Day 6 was the first day we started to introduce
the concept of pollination to the students. Students were given stickers and blocks as tools to demonstrate the
procedures of pollination. Then they switched to interact with the STEP environment to continue exploring the
rules of pollination. Day 8 was the last day students participated in the activity, and they did an activity with
blocks again to demonstrate the pollination procedure, but this time they were not given stickers.

Data analysis
We used Interaction Analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) in both contexts to investigate the organization of
play on these two days. From our experience in the classroom, we were particularly struck by how distinctly
different the two activities were for the same group, and only moments apart. Therefore, we made a note to
begin our analysis with these two sessions, and then after reviewing the entire corpus of video we identified Day
6 as a valuable contrast point. We looked at all 3 activities across the 4 groups and found similar interaction
patterns. Therefore, we identified one group for further analysis, and to serve as an illustrative case study of
these interaction  patterns.  Our   goal in  analyzing these three   activities is to present  general  patterns in how
students' activity was   organized.  We   focused  on  how   the students   interacting with   peers and  material,   and
response to the teachers impacted the organization of play in a way that oriented students to either non-scientific
"rules" or to normative "rules" that accounted for how honeybees pollinate.

   Figure 1. The students interacting with STEP (left) and the projected simulation on shared screen (right).

Findings
To explore   how   the organization  of  play  led students  to focus on   different  kinds of rules (non-scientific   or
scientific), we focused on how students pick up teachers' prompts given in the activities and the way students
then interact with each other and the materials as they continue to co-construct their play experience with each
other and the teacher. To explore how these interactions led students to science learning, we also focused on
whether the students were engaged in the implicit or explicit rules of science phenomena or other less scientific
rules. Based on the these interactions, we categorized the three activities into three types of play 1free play,
where students appear to have been oriented toward non-scientific rules or fun; 2intermediate play with rules,
where  students   were  interacting  with   some  of  the scientific rules  due  to the STEP    environment;    3)  more
scientifically normative    play, which   is more    akin to modeling,    where    students themselves   identified   the
scientific rules.

Free play
We   named   this  activity free  play,  because  even though   the  teacher intended   for it to be   oriented  towards
modeling   and    making sense   of the  science,  students engaged   in the imaginary   situation   as being bees    and
focused   on rules  of getting stickers.  Students  were  divided   into three  groups: flowers,   bees  and observers.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      677                                                    © ISLS
Students who pretend to be flowers were sitting on the floor holding a block with heart stickers that represented
nectar; they were also given round stickers representing pollen. These students were given the task to give out
the stickers to represent pollination. Their peers were told to pretend to be bees and get nectar from the flowers,
while  observers were   told to   write and draw what   they   saw  happening   (See  Figure  2).  This activity  had
previously been quite productive for helping students recognize how pollen sticks to bees who were collecting
nectar. However, in the current iteration, the bee group started to reach out their hands asking for "stickers"
rather than waiting. This led all the students to orient more towards the sticker passing process, which was
exacerbated when one student "slapped" his sticker onto a peer in an exaggerated manner, which led to laughter
and then repeated acts of rambunctious sticker requests and passing. The observers primarily laughed at this,
rather than observing how pollen was collected. As a result, the intended, implicit rule of "demonstrate how
bees pollinate flowers accidentally" became "getting stickers as pollen in a funny way", and the students did not
focus on the "accidentally" aspect. The prompts given by the facilitators attempted to re-focus the students'
attention on the scientific rules of pollination and were not taken up by the students. Students ultimately focused
primarily on getting the stickers in the most laughter-inducing manner, and the teacher ultimately decided to cut
the activity short and attempt to re-focus the students' attention on the scientific rules in subsequent activities.
We thus decided to re-orient students toward attempting to model how real bees behave and chose not to re-use
the stickers as they appeared to be a major distraction for this group of students.

                                Figure 2. Students doing free play and exchanging stickers.

Intermediate play with rules
Intermediate play with rules is the activity right after the free play sticker activity on Day 6 that is described
above. In this activity, students were interacting with the STEP simulation. In STEP, the rule of the scientific
phenomena is pre-set in the simulation: 1) bees get pollen "sprinkled" accidentally when they collect nectar in
the simulation, and 2) pollination only happens on the same species of flower, which is represented as two or
more flowers in same color in the simulation. In this activity, students were split into two groups: an embodied
group that were pretending to be bees and interacting with the simulation, and an observer group, that was given
paper to take notes
        Students'   embodied    action  showed that  they   started to explore  the flower with    high   quality and
quantity nectar in the simulation and they would respond to the facilitators' prompt to move on to other flowers
unlike the prior activity. The facilitator prompts appeared to have helped orient students toward the underlying
scientific rules of the imaginary situation by orienting the students-as-bees to the aspects of the phenomena that
would lead them to new flowers (nectar supplies). The teacher comments also helped students to disentangle the
symbolic supports within the simulation from the phenomena they described. For example, after visiting several
flowers iteratively, students noticed that the dot trail that the simulation uses to show them where pollen was
carried created a clearly visible "line." The teacher asked whether the bees were following the "line" and why
they would care about the "line"?     The students were able, in response to these prompts, to note that the bees
were  pursuing nectar,  but  this led to a  repeated visit to certain  flowers and  hence the   line, and ultimately,
pollination. Thus, the rules built in to the simulation scaffolded students' action to be "accidentally" getting
pollen and helped   the students  re-orient away from   aiming   to collect pollen  (stickers), to aiming  to collect
(simulated) nectar as bees would.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    678                                                   © ISLS
Scientific normative play
In Day 8 students were engaged in a play activity with blocks that represented flowers when tracked by the
STEP software, and they were asked to demonstrate the procedure of pollination. One intention of this was to
challenge students to re-represent and thus focus on what they had noticed within the STEP MR environment.
Students were split into two groups, one group pretended to be bees, and the others were observers. For this
time, the students were interacting with the blocks, responding to the teachers' prompt, and came up with their
own ideas to represent the "accidentally" aspect of the pollination rule. A common occurrence was that students
would   exaggeratedly   bump  their   foot into  a flower    while pretending  to drink   nectar with  their mouth.   The
teacher then  asked    what they   were  doing   and the   students  clarified that they  were   showing how    the  bees
"accidentally" bumped the flower and thus collected pollen         When students visited multiple flowers of the same
color, they further highlighted, in response to teacher prompts, that this is how bees supported flowers of the
same species in receiving pollen, again by accident as they pursued nectar sources. In this more scientifically
normative play, students became the ones to demonstrate the explicit rule of scientific phenomena, and they
were able to use objects given in the space as a symbol of the real scientific rule. Their embodied interaction
between the bees and blocks mirrored the explicit rules of pollination. The prompts given by the teachers cued
students' explanations, and students were able to give an accurate explanation of pollination to their embodied
action.
          Across the three activities, we found the interaction shifted from engagement in play with implicit rules
of being bees but focusing on stickers in a fun manner, to being oriented toward nectar by the pre-built rules in
the STEP environment and later having students themselves represent the rules using the materials in the space
to demonstrate    the  scientific model.   In the  first activity, we see  how  the  typically   fun nature  of play  can
sometimes intrude into classroom play when students focus on their own rules. However, a focus on how these
rules are made salient to students helped us to easily adapt and re-focus. In this case, we shifted to using the
STEP environment to help make the implicit rules more salient. In other activities, we were able to pause and
help the students re-orient towards the underlying scientific rules. Student learning can also be seen in how they
are able to take responsibility for enacting the rules of the target phenomena, and ultimately used those rules to
guide their actions in the final activity. Here, though, we saw that while the students were oriented towards
those rules, teacher   prompts    were often   necessary   to help  make  them    visible to the teacher and    the  other
students.

Significance
By investigating the interaction during these three types of play, we saw that the STEP environment serves as
the transitional stage for students to use play to produce a scientific model, and that this type of simulation with
pre-built rules   also served as    a form    of pivot   for students  to connect   play  to modeling    of  a  scientific
phenomenon. Teachers' prompts were important not just for helping the students to focus on the scientific rules,
but also in helping students to articulate how and when they were representing those rules for their peers. Play
remains a powerful entry point into scientific modeling. However, this work shows how play facilitators can
benefit from orienting toward which rules students are attending to in order to support students in using play as
a form of modeling in ways that continue to build on the imaginary situation while orienting them towards rules
that they are continuing to uncover in their inquiry.

References
Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., Delacruz, G., & Kumar, M. (2012). Learning physics through play in an augmented
          reality environment. International     journal  of  computer-supported    collaborative    learning, 7(3), 347-
          378.Authors. (2015).
Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., & DeLiema, D. (2015). Constructing liminal blends in a collaborative augmented-
          reality  learning   environment. International         Journal   of    Computer-Supported      Collaborative
          Learning, 10(1), 7-34.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The journal of the learning
          sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Lesh, R. A., & Doerr, H. M. (2003). Beyond constructivism: Models and modeling perspectives on mathematics
          problem solving, learning, and teaching. Routledge.
Vygotsky,  L. S.   (1978).  Mind   in  society:  The development      of higher psychological    processes.  Cambridge:
          Harvard University Press.
Youngquist, J., & Pataray-Ching, J. (2004). Revisiting "play": Analyzing and articulating acts of inquiry. Early
          Childhood Education Journal, 31(3), 171-178.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        679                                                   © ISLS
