  Exploring Group' Design Thinking Patterns in a Principe-based
                          Knowledge-Building Environment

                       Pei-Yi Lin, National Chengchi University, hanapeiyi@gmail.com
                    Huang-Yao Hong, National Chengchi University, hyhong@nccu.edu.tw

         Abstract:  This study  adopted  a  principle-based knowledge-building     pedagogy  to engage
         groups in four design-thinking modes (i.e., observation, synthesis, ideation and make proto-
         types) in an online environment. Participants were 38 college students enrolled in an "Introduc-
         tion to Living Technology" course at a Taiwanese university. They were randomly assigned to
         eight groups. Each group discussed their design ideas in a computer-supported collaborative
         knowledge-building environment - called Knowledge Forum (KF) - to collaboratively design a
         product. Data includes  students' design discussion  in KF and     analysis focused on   online
         knowledge-building  activities and groups' design-thinking  modes.    In  general, knowledge-
         building activities cultivated students in design-thinking modes during the design process as a
         group. Specifically, the extent to which groups sustained online engagement and the advance-
         ment of their group knowledge had a major impact on their design performance. Ways of ap-
         plying knowledge-building principles to foster effective design processes are discussed.

Introduction
An important strand of research in design education explores how to foster students' design thinking so that they
can be effective knowledge workers (Bereiter, & Scardamalia, 2014; Scheer, Noweski, & Meinel, 2012). This
includes research on providing more effective and productive online learning environments. To date, current
studies have introduced design thinking not only in professional design practices and in different disciplines, but
also identified the process to foster design thinking. However, there have been relatively few studies dedicated to
improving researchers' and educators' understanding on how to foster students' design skills using online learning
environments or the design of pedagogically effective online activities (Taheri, Unterholzer, & Meinel, 2016).
         Innovative instruction studies have proved  that   principle-based knowledge   building   pedagogy  and
technology enabled elementary students to engage in collaborative design projects to make visible their invisible
design knowledge, in the form of notes written in shared online environment called Knowledge Forum (KF)
(Kangas, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, & Hakkarainen, 2013). These earlier studies have demonstrated the value of KF
as a knowledge-building environment in which students can develop their design ideas. Nonetheless, no study has
focused on the relationship between groups' collaborative activities and the development of design-thinking
modes in online knowledge-building environments (e.g., KF). The current study is designed to adopt principle-
based knowledge building pedagogy to guide students' design work in KF. Our research question was brought
out: What are the groups' sequential behavior patterns of design thinking in a knowledge-building environment?

Method

Classroom context and participants
Educational reforms in Taiwan are shifting from teacher-guided, outcome-based education to learner-centered,
maker-based, technology-integrated education. Based on that, increasing emphasis focused on cultivating students
as design-oriented thinkers and knowledge practitioners. Nonetheless, there is a few courses provided to engage
students in such  innovative and  design-oriented learning  environment.    In the present  study, we employed
principle-based knowledge-building pedagogy to engage students in online communities to develop design ideas
and sustain idea improvement. The participants were 38 undergraduate students aged 18 to 22 years, from a
national university in Taiwan. They enrolled in an elective course titled "Introduction to Living Technology" for
a semester. At the start of the course, the participants were randomly assigned to eight small groups (G1 to G8)
with four or five members each.

Instructional design
The course had two separate parts, one based on lectures given by an instructor and the other on a student-directed
design project (for 14 weeks). The groups were allowed to freely choose project topics based on their interests
(i.e., shoes, glasses, cotton swab, e-book projector, VR and its application, parking lot, raincoat). The design
projects were taken places in an online environment with the goal to help students develop design modes of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  692                                                  © ISLS
thinking through knowledge-building activities.
        Groups'     design work   was explicitly guided  by   two  knowledge-building  principles: "community
knowledge, collective responsibility" and "improvable ideas" (Scardamalia, 2002). The first principle states that
participants should work collectively to advance the group's knowledge. The main KF activities, such as notes
generated and  read,  essentially reflect the extent of  students' online  engagement. The   second   principle,
"improvable ideas", asserts that ideas are improvable and that collective advancement of knowledge depends on
sustained, creative work with ideas as a group. Students are encouraged to identify design topics that interest them
and then to contribute their initial design ideas in the form of notes in KF. The important point is the production
and refinement of ideas (i.e. knowledge advancement activities) that leads to the evolution of group knowledge,
and therefore optimizes their design work.

Data collection and analyses
The data of this research was based on groups' design work in an online environment called KF, which is designed
on the basis of knowledge    building principles  so the KF   supports the principle-based knowledge  building
pedagogy.

Analyses of knowledge-building activities
Knowledge building activities include engagement and knowledge advancement. Engagement data was directly
retrieved from embedded analytical tool of KF. We summed up number of noted generated and read. In contrast,
knowledge advancement in the online community was assessed by counting their built-on (i.e., connected) notes
in the KF database and by coding these notes into six levels of cognitive understanding suggested a revised version
of Bloom's taxonomy (see Anderson et al., 2001). Using the six cognitive levels from remembering to creating,
along with exemplary verbal concepts to indicate knowledge advancing efforts (such as interpreting, designing,
etc.), a score of 1 to 6 was assigned. Two researchers independently coded data and Cohen's kappa coefficient
computed was 0.87 (p < 0.001).

Analyses of design-thinking modes
During the design process, students were introduced to four design-thinking modes (i.e., observation, synthesis,
ideation, prototype creation) to help them design products (Plattner, 2010). Groups' design processes were further
coded in six categories in our study: (1) discarded idea: the ideas were left without further discussion (e.g., S35:
This cannot work, let's abandon the idea.); (2) social talk: they shared an understanding or emotional response
toward a thing (e.g., S8: I agree! This is a good way to try.); (3) observation: they "observe" emerging problems
in their daily life and then choose a topic that interested them (e.g., S2: Police officers might be well-trained,
additional function to their shoes would give them another way of protecting themselves); (4) synthesis: they
"synthesized" all the problems in which they were interested into a set of core problems on which they wanted to
do further work (e.g., S5: I think that our design could focus on different functions for different duties or tasks,
for example...); (5) ideation: they "ideated" every possible solution to the core problems (e.g., S1:I think that the
electricity to be used for shocking should be controlled to just cause minor cramp); (6) prototype creation: they
summarized and   developed a "prototype" (in concept only, due to time constraints) based on promising ideas
they had identified (e.g., S30: Our design could include...). Using notes as the unit of analysis, two researchers
independently coded data into above mentioned six coding schemes, with Cohen's kappa coefficient computed to
be 0.90 (p < .001).

Analytical strategies
In order to answer our research question, we calculated KF activity scores using z-scores based on the sum of
online engagement activity (including the numbers of notes contributed and read) score and online knowledge
advancement score (number of built-on notes and their quality scores). Next, scores for KF activities were calcu-
lated using a two-stage cluster analysis with knowledge engagement and advancement as two principal indicators:
(1) first using hierarchical clustering analysis to determine the cluster number on the basis of dendrogram; (2)
second using k-mean cluster analysis on the identified cluster number. Last, we examined groups' design-thinking
performance using behavior sequential analyses to ascertain design patterns (i.e., discarded idea, social talk and
four design-thinking modes, i.e., observation, synthesis, idea generation and prototype creation) for each cluster.

Results

Group design-thinking performance in a knowledge-building environment
The online engagement of the 38 participants contributed 399 notes (M = 10.5, SD = 7.16), read 2728 notes (M =

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   693                                                © ISLS
71.79, SD = 79.23). The knowledge building advancement counted 181 built-on notes (M = 4.76, SD = 4.90) and
the mean score of built-on notes was 1.69 (SD = 0.60). Cluster analysis was employed to measure students' online
engagement and knowledge advancement activities (using z-scores). The four clusters which emerged according
to the online behavior they represented, Cluster 1 (groups 1 and 6), Cluster 2 (groups 2 and 7), Cluster 3 (groups
3 and 4), Cluster 4 (groups 5 and 8).
         We conducted the sequential analysis on the six design behaviors - discarded idea, social talk, observa-
tion, synthesis, ideation and prototype creation as exhibited by the four clusters of groups. The adjusted residual
z-score greater than 1.96 indicates that a statistically significance (p < .05) of the continuity of specific initial
behavior is followed by a subsequent behavior in the design process (Bakeman & Gottman, 1997). As a result,
the design behavioral patterns of each cluster is shown in Figure 1.

                          Figure 1. Clusters distribution and design behavioral transition.
        Note: DI = discarded idea, ST = social talk, O = observation, I = ideation, P = prototype creation.

         The above analyses show an integrating of cluster and sequential analyses of groups' design behavior
patterns within the knowledge-building environment. Cluster 1 exhibited high frequencies of online engagement
activities and knowledge advancement activities and thus had the best overall design performance as reflected in
the sum of their design patterns. Via sequential behavior analysis, we found that groups in Cluster 1 tend to involve
in the  iterative social talk, observation and  ideation. Moreover,   they  might   worked   back and  forth between
observing problems and generating solutions.
         Cluster 2 showed that their online activity was dominated by online engagement activities at the expense
of knowledge advancement activities and as a result, their design behavioral transition were mainly on iteratively
discarding ideas, talking and ideating. As a result, some ideas come after their talking such that group 2 contributed
a lot of information, but the information was not being further refined via reflection and elaboration to advance
knowledge.
         Cluster 3 did better than Cluster 2 at knowledge advancement activities; however, there was relatively
little online engagement. This overemphasis on the former is clearly evidenced by the quality of their reflective
efforts to advance   knowledge    through   iteratively discarding   useless ideas,  observing   designed problems,
proposing possible ideas and making prototype. But their design behavior could not be transited. For example,
group 4 worked iteratively on their initial design ideas but did not try to enrich or diversify their initial pool of
ideas in order to broaden their ideas solutions.
         Lastly, Cluster 4 clearly had the lowest frequencies of online engagement activities and knowledge
advancement activities. For example, the groups in Cluster 4 were mainly focus on social talks. As a result, they
were not   able to decide  their design topics.  Even   though their social  talks and observation activities are bi-
directionally influencing each other, their social talks were not helpful for observing problems.

Discussion and future directions
The purpose of this study was to investigate whether working in a computer-supported collaborative knowledge-
building environment, in this case KF, improves students' design-thinking capability. Students were guided by
two knowledge-building principles to encourage them to engage in interactions in an online environment (i.e.,
"community   knowledge,    collective responsibility")  and   advance knowledge     (i.e., "improvable ideas"). They
involved in design projects to collaborate with group members. To summarize, the findings suggest that the
performance of the different clusters would need different, customized guiding principles to further facilitate KF

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     694                                                   © ISLS
activities and  achieve   an  appropriate    balance between     them,  in order   to improve  different groups'  design
performance. For example, we found that many students struggled with particular modes of design thinking and
so it might be helpful to design some customized instructional scaffolds to smooth the transitions from one design-
thinking mode to another, such as "I observe", "I emphasize", may help novice designers to concretize design
ideas and consolidate the complex design process. To facilitate further development of design ideas, it is perhaps
necessary to encourage groups to make a fast prototype creation that requires the participants to explain how the
prototype would meet users' needs. In addition, setting up more specific and well-defined design goals in each
design-thinking mode may be useful.
         Moreover, this study showed that groups that demonstrated better knowledge engagement and more
knowledge     advancement    activities also  tended  to  have   better and    smoother design   behavioral transition as
indicated  by   behavioral   sequential  analyses.   In   other words,  balanced   online  engagement    and knowledge
advancement activities in a knowledge-building environment have important effects on students' design-thinking
capability.
         Instructional implication for future studies should select appropriate pedagogical principles to shape a
productive learning environment. This study employed a principle-based knowledge building pedagogy by using
two   explicit principles and  found    that providing    students with  guiding   principles helped create  an effective
knowledge-building environment in which both online engagement and knowledge advancement activities were
valued. We found that in an open, collaborative knowledge-building environment that encourages production of
ideas and makes it easier to connect ideas to each other, online activities such as contributing, reading and building
on notes have to be engaging enough if they are to advance a group's knowledge. For example, groups who find
it difficult to move from one design-thinking mode to another might benefit from an additional guiding principle
"rise above"   (see Scardamalia,  2002,      for detail). This  principle  that highlights group  members    collectively
working towards higher-level understanding of problems, may be useful for guiding the groups to focus on the
task at issue, and thus to help enhance group members to enhance their thinking skills. In summary, design
thinking   is  emerging   as one of  the  key    thinking  competency      for the 21st century. To  facilitate students'
development of design thinking, pedagogical models that with appropriate use of knowledge building principles
are urgently needed. Future research into these issues is in progress.

References
Anderson, L. W., Krathwohl, D. R., Airasian, P., Cruikshank, K., Mayer, R., Pintrich, P., ... & Wittrock, M. (2001).
         A taxonomy for learning, teaching and assessing: A revision of Bloom's taxonomy. New York. Longman
         Publishing.
Bakeman, R., & Gottman, J. M. (1997). Observing interaction: An introduction to sequential analysis. Cambridge
         university press.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: One concept, two hills to
         climb. In Knowledge creation in education (pp. 35-52). Singapore: Springer.
Kangas, K., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., & Hakkarainen, K. (2013). Design expert's participation in elementary
         students'  collaborative   design    process. International    Journal    of Technology   and   Design   Educa-
         tion, 23(2), 161-178.
Plattner, H. (2010). Bootcamp bootleg. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford Institute of Design.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B.Smith (Ed.),
           Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp.67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scheer, A., Noweski, C., & Meinel, C. (2012). Transforming constructivist learning into action: Design thinking
         in education. Design and Technology Education, 17(3), 8-19.
Taheri, M., Unterholzer, T., & Meinel, C. (2016). Design Thinking at Scale: A Report on Best Practices of Online
         Courses. In Design Thinking Research (pp. 217-235). Springer International Publishing.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        695                                                   © ISLS
