Perspective Taking in Participatory Simulation-based Collaborative
                                                       Learning

                Fengfeng Ke, Xin Yuan, Mariya Pachman, Zhaihuan Dai, and Raymond Naglieri
         fke@fsu.edu, xyuan@cs.fsu.edu, mpachman@fsu.edu, zd12@my.fsu.edu, rjn15b@my.fsu.edu
                                                 Florida State University

                             Xinhao Xu, University of Missouri, xuxinhao@missouri.edu

         Abstract:     This  experimental    study   examined    participatory     simulation-based collaborative
         learning   in  a    teaching  training  setting.    A  virtual-reality    (VR) supported,    embodiment
         integrated learning system is constructed to enable collaborative and contextualized teaching
         practices by university teaching assistants. A total of 40 teaching assistants participated in a 4-
         hour teaching training session, during which they were randomly assigned to a VR-supported
         and a live simulation group. Participants reported significantly higher teaching self-efficacy
         after  the training.   The   VR  participatory   simulation    better  promoted   the  post-session,  lab-
         teaching knowledge test performance than the live simulation. `Bicentric' perspective taking
         embedded in VR-based interactions facilitated both experiential and vicarious learning. Yet a
         concurrent    hybrid   presence  framed   by    the virtual  and  physical    collocation of  participants
         exerted    an  over-reliance   on   individual   autonomy      in VR   simulation-based    collaborative
         learning.

Introduction and literature review
Simulation refers to the imitation or representation of dynamic features and structural elements of a real-world
system, entity, phenomenon, or process (Frasson & Blanchard, 2012). A participatory simulation extends and
integrates a real-world representation with participatory and collaborative role-play--`diving into' the simulated
space and directly engaging with the simulated system or phenomenon (Colella, 2000; Ackermann, 2012).
         According to Piaget (2005) and Ackermann (2012), both perspectives of "diving in" and "stepping out"
are important   for deeper   understanding.   By   "diving     into" a  variety of  situations  and becoming     part of the
phenomenon,     the learners    are connected    and sensitive   to  variations in  the environment    in reacting   to their
actions. By "stepping out" of the situations or momentary withdrawal from immersion in the experience, the
learner then   gets the chance   to  reflect on  their experience    from   a  distance to  form   more abstract,   symbolic
insights and achieve "reflexive abstraction." Through shifting between "diving-in" (egocentric) and "stepping-
out" (exocentric) perspectives, learners are able to differentiate and coordinate different viewpoints to discover
foundational rules governing the phenomenon (Ackermann, 2012; Dede, 2009).
         Although    such    an integrative,  "bicentric"    frame   of reference   is argued  to  support   the mastery  of
complex,  multidimensional      information   (Dede,   2009),   the  design   and  research of  a  bicentric perspective  in
simulation-based    collaborative   learning  is lacking. Prior   research  of  participatory  simulations   predominantly
studied the single "diving in," immersive experience, focusing on a simulation with surrounding projection or a
pervasive play experience. To extend prior research, this current examination is aimed to explore the design and
learning effectiveness of a participatory simulation that: (a) integrates both perspectives in its interactivity, and
(b) enables    the  shifting between   immersive     role-playing    and   "stepping-out"   observation   of  the simulated
phenomenon by blending a virtual and a physical learning space.

Virtual reality for participatory simulation with a bicentric perspective
The nature of virtual reality is defined as "Immersion-Interaction-Imagination" by Burdea and Coiffet (2003).
Virtual reality    (VR)  enables    and   integrates   a 3D     immersive   user    interface, multimodal    and    real-time
interactivity, participatory  narrative,  and persona    construction    that  promotes  imagination    creativity.  VR  also
allows the user to view and interact with a virtual object, space, or phenomenon from egocentric and exocentric
perspectives.  These    salient  features  of VR     make    it a  promising    platform   of  collaborative,  participatory
simulation with dynamic perspective taking. A recent meta-analysis of the effectiveness of virtual reality-based
instruction on  students'    learning  outcomes   in K-12    and  higher   education   indicated  that virtual worlds   were
effective in improving learning outcome gains (Merchant, Goetz, Cifuentes, Keeney-Kennicutt, & Davis, 2014).
         Although isolation from the physical environment is considered immersive, it is not a prerequisite for
the situated immersion (Witmer & Singer, 1998). It is argued that one's immersion in a virtual space does not
require the  total  displacement    of attention  from   the    physical   locale, because  typically  attention  is divided

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        696                                                      © ISLS
between the physical world and the mental world of imaginations, memories, and other cognitive activities. In
other words, individuals experiencing a virtual space can concurrently attend to aspects of the virtual space and
events in their physical environment.

Simulation-based teaching training
Teaching is complex problem solving that requires contextualized information representation and multimodal
interpersonal  interactions.  Cruickshank   (1986) summarized     four levels  of  strategies in teaching    training: (a)
concrete-real ­ infield and clinical experiences of student teaching; (b) concrete-modeled ­ simulated teaching
experiences, such as role-playing, microteaching, and simulation; (c) vicarious ­ observations of others teaching
live in classrooms or on tape, and (d) abstract ­ learning from lectures, case studies and discussions. Teaching
training in university has traditionally relied on abstract instructional strategies. The need for training to bridge
the gap between abstract and concrete-real experiences of teaching is critical for future university instructors
(DeChenne et al., 2012).
         The use of virtual reality to promote simulation-based teaching training is just emerging (Ke, Lee, &
Xu, 2016). In a recent qualitative, observatory study, Quintana and Fernández, (2015) reported that VR can
provide a virtual space to simulate teaching challenges and hence act as a pedagogical tool for the collaborative
teaching training program. Gregory and Masters (2012) conducted a study on using SecondLife-supported VR
for pre-service   teachers to practice teaching.   The study  reported   that VR-based    simulation    and  role-playing
made    pre-service teachers  "think  in complex   and   creative ways   by   assisting them  in considering    multiple
perspectives   on a topic"   (p.427). Gregory  and   Masters  (2012)   called  for future research    on designing     VR
training to serve as a complementary part for teachers with both real-life and virtual accesses.

Methods
By  investigating   a VR-supported,    participatory simulation   in  comparison    with  the   live  simulation  in   the
collaborative learning setting, this study aimed to address the following research questions: To what extent will
the VR-supported participatory simulation, compared with the live simulation, support teaching practices and
knowledge development? An experimental, pretest-posttest control group design was adopted. Both quantitative
and qualitative data on participatory simulation-based collaborative learning were collected.

Participants
Forty university teaching assistants were recruited from the chemistry department in a land-grant university in
United  States. These   participants  included 22.5%   females    and 77.5%   males,    with 50%  of    them  not having
teaching  experience  and  37.5%   being  non-native   English  speakers. Twenty    one   participants   were  randomly
assigned to the VR-supported simulation group while the other 19 were assigned to the live simulation group.
Both groups participated in a 4-hour, synchronous training session in a physically co-located setting, with the
VR simulation group staying in a computer lab and the living simulation group being in a chemistry classroom.

Simulation-based collaborative learning environments

VR-supported participatory simulation
In  the VR  simulation-based     learning setting, participants   were physically   seated   in the  computer   lab    and
participated in collaborative role-play through a 3D, VR-supported simulation. Using OpenSimulator, a virtual
campus   was   designed to  simulate  daily teaching scenarios,   such as lab   teaching,  recitation,  and   assignment
tutoring. Participants were assigned into two sub-groups. Within each sub-group, participants shifted the roles
of  instructor and  student   in the  teaching scenarios, following    a semi-structured     protocol   that outlines  the
backdrop mission, structure, and planned procedure of the collaborative roleplay. Each participant was provided
a  randomly-assigned,   role-play  notecard  describing   a specific  learner  or  instructor   profile with  exemplary
scripts. Every participant wore headsets during the training session, and there were dividers in between their
seats. They did reflective group debriefing via VR voice and text chats at the end of each teaching simulation.
         Using Microsoft Kinect and a middleware that interfaced Kinect with the OpenSimulator platform, the
VR-based   teaching   simulation   enabled  participants to project   and embody    real-time    body   movements      and
gestures onto their avatars in the virtual world. Specifically, it enabled embodied gesturing in virtual lecturing.
         Implementing VR-supported simulation in a physical co-located space would create a hybrid space that
allows trainees to engage in collaborative role-play in a virtual space through virtual avatar embodiment, while
maintaining a real-world identity to do reflective and vicarious (or observational) learning of their virtual-world
performance. VR simulation also supports the sifting between the first and third person points of view during
the interaction and navigation. We hypothesized that the hybrid, virtual-physical learning space as well as the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     697                                                      © ISLS
bi-centric interaction interface of the VR simulation would offer trainees a dynamic "diving-in" and "stepping-
out" perspective taking during participatory simulation-based learning.

Live participatory simulation
In the  live  simulation-based    learning   setting, participants   were   physically   seated in  a  typical chemistry
classroom.   Facilitated by an   experienced    teacher trainer, they  performed    collaborative  role-play--acting  and
shifting being the instructor or student in simulated teaching scenarios. The structure and protocol of simulation-
based collaborative learning activities in the live simulation setting were similar to those in the VR simulation
group, except that all activities were performed face to face in a physical space--an actual classroom.

Data collection
All Participants received a teaching knowledge test and a teaching self-efficacy survey before and after the
study session.  The  teaching  knowledge     test was   developed    based  on  the existing graduate  teaching  training
materials of the chemistry department, and encompassed 12 lab-teaching story problems (Cronbach's =.88 in
this study)  and  4  recitation/tutoring  story problems   (Cronbach's     =.61).   Each problem    presented  a scenario
narrative and asked participants to select all applicable problem solutions in a checklist. Each item is scored on
the number of correct answers selected. The STEM Graduate Teaching Assistant (GTA) teaching self-efficacy
survey by DeChenne, Enochs, and Needham (2012), validated in prior research on GTA teaching training, was
adopted in the study. The survey consists of 15 five-point Likert scale items (Cronbach's =.95 in this study).
          Participants' learning interactions in the two simulation-based learning settings are observed, screen
captured, and voice recorded. A semi-structured group interview was conducted at the end of the study session,
focusing on exploring participants' perceptions of their learning experiences.

Data analyses
We   conducted    descriptive  statistics and   pairwise t-tests with   the pre-  and  posttest results  to examine    the
potential changes in participants' teaching knowledge and self-efficacy before and after the study session. We
then  did  ANCOVA        analyses to  investigate  whether     there   was  a difference   between   the two   modes    of
participatory simulation in supporting participants' teaching knowledge and self-efficacy development. We also
performed a qualitative thematic analysis with the qualitative data to examine salient themes that depict the
attributes  and  the nature   of  simulation-based    collaborative    learning  in  the two   simulation   settings. The
qualitative findings  provided    descriptive   evidence   and explanation    on the features   of the two  participatory
simulation environments and their impacts on participants' collaborative learning processes.

Findings

Modes of participatory simulation on teaching knowledge
A  one-way    ANCOVA      was  conducted     to compare    the  effect of  simulation  modes    on the post-session   lab-
teaching   scores of participants  in  the  VR  and   live simulation   conditions,  with  the  participants'  pre-session
scores as the co-variate. There was a borderline significant effect of the simulation modes on the lab teaching
scores, F(1, 33)= 3.48, p=.07, partial 2=.10. The VR-supported participatory simulation group (Mv=28.80 out
of 43, SEv=5.38, n=20) scored higher than the live participatory simulation group (Ml=24.63, SEl=6.14, n=16).
          The ANCOVA        on the effect   of  simulation  modes    on the   post-session recitation/tutoring scores   of
participants in VR and live simulation conditions also indicated a significant result, F(1, 37)= 23.54, p<.001,
partial 2=.39. Differently, the live participatory simulation group (Ml=7.47 out of 17, SEl=1.65, n=19) scored
higher than the VR-supported participatory simulation group (Mv=5.81, SEv=2.20, n=21) in the post-session
recitation/tutoring knowledge test.

Modes of participatory simulation on teaching self-efficacy
A one-way ANCOVA was conducted to compare the effect of simulation modes on the post-session teaching
self-efficacy scores  of  participants   in VR  and   live simulation   conditions,  with  the  participants'  pre-session
scores as the co-variate. There was not a significant effect of the simulation modes on the teaching self-efficacy
scores, F(1, 34)= 0.15, p=.71. The pairwise t-test comparing the teaching self-efficacy of all participants (n=37)
before and after the training session indicated a significant result, t(36)=-2.76, p<.01, d=-.31. Participants scored
higher in the teaching self-efficacy responses after the session, Mpre=63.24 out of a total of 75, SDpre=7.73;
Mpost=65.03, SDpost=8.21.

Qualitative findings

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       698                                                    © ISLS
Two salient themes governing the features of VR-supported participatory simulation in relation to collaborative
learning   processes  and   outcomes     emerged  from   the qualitative  data: (a) experiential  and  vicarious  learning
enabled  by    a bicentric  interaction  interface,  and (b)  inconsistency   and   heterogeneity  in  resource  or effort
allocation across the hybrid learning spaces. We observed that more than 50% of the role-playing or learning
interactions in the VR-based simulation involved participants' shifting points of view; the frequency of enacting
ego- and exocentric perspective alternation during the interactions tended to be positively associated with both
prior teaching    experience   and  the  post-session   teaching   knowledge    performance.   An  interpretation   is that
dynamic    perspective     taking embedded    in  the VR     interactions facilitated both  "diving-in"   experience   and
evaluative observation of each other's teaching practices.
         On    the   other hand,  a concurrent   hybrid  presence   framed  by  the virtual and  physical   collocation of
participants in the VR simulation was associated with a reliance on individual autonomy in coordinating one's
simulated and real-world personae during collaborative role-playing. As a result, participants showed differing
level or pacing    in allocating  their  attentional resources   in between  VR-based     collaborative role-playing   and
"stepping-out" reflection/observation. Their attention allocation to the collaborative role-playing also fluctuated
based  on  the   contextual  demand,     with the  "diving-in"   input  obviously   reduced   in teaching  scenarios   that
prioritize lecturing     or concept   explanation    (e.g.,  recitation/tutoring).  The   inconsistent  and   inequivalent
individual  learner   involvement     in collaborative   role-play  created frustration   and  may   have  moderated    the
experience of immersion and interactivity in VR simulation-based learning. In comparison, the live simulation
participants demonstrated a similar and consistent level of engagement in collaborative role-playing.

Implications and significance
The   study  findings     generally  support  the   feasibility  and  effectiveness   of  a VR-supported    participatory
simulation that enables dynamic perspective taking in the collaborative learning of a complex task. The study
indicates an interaction between the design of perspective taking and learner autonomy in collaborative role-
play. It will  help   to  inform  not only   the approach    of concrete,  modeled    teaching training in  an  accessible
manner, but also design strategies in relation to perspective taking, interactivity, and immersion that enhance
simulation-based collaborative learning.

References
Ackermann, E. (2012). Perspective-taking and object construction: Two keys to learning. In Y. B. Kafai & M.
         Resnick (Eds.), Constructionism in practice (pp. 39-50). New York, NY: Routledge.
Burdea, G. C., & Coiffet, P. (2003). Virtual reality technology. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Colella, V. (2000). Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamic
         modeling. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.
Cruickshank, D. R. (1986). Instructional alternatives available for use in professional education. In E. Doak
         (Ed.),  Simulation   and   clinical knowledge    in teacher  education:   Prologue   to the future (pp.  10-20).
         Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee, College of Education.
DeChenne, S. E., Enochs, L. G., & Needham, M. (2012). Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
         Graduate     Teaching    Assistants  Teaching   Self-Efficacy.   Journal  of the Scholarship   of  Teaching   and
         Learning, 12(4), 102-123.
Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning. Science, 323(5910), 66-69.
Frasson, C., & Blanchard, E. G. (2012). Simulation-based learning. In Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning
         (pp. 3076-3080). Springer US.
Gregory,   S., &   Masters,  Y.   (2012).  Real  thinking   with virtual  hats: A   role-playing activity  for pre-service
         teachers in Second Life. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 28(3).
Ke, F.,  Lee,    S., &   Xu, X.   (2016).  Teaching   training   in a mixed-reality   integrated  learning  environment.
         Computers in Human Behavior, 62, 212-220.
Merchant, Z., Goetz, E. T., Cifuentes, L., Keeney-Kennicutt, W., & Davis, T. J. (2014). Effectiveness of virtual
         reality-based instruction on students' learning outcomes in K-12 and higher education: A meta-analysis.
         Computers & Education, 70, 29-40.
Piaget, J. (2005). The psychology of intelligence. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Quintana,   M.   G.   B.,  &  Fernández,   S. M.    (2015).  A   pedagogical    model  to develop    teaching  skills. The
         collaborative     learning experience   in  the Immersive    Virtual   World  TYMMI.     Computers    in Human
         Behavior, 51, 594-603.
Witmer, B. G., & Singer, M. J. (1998). Measuring presence in virtual environments: A presence questionnaire.
         Presence, 7(3), 225-240.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        699                                                    © ISLS
