  Using A Virtual Design Studio to Support Collaborative Studio
                                                 Instruction
                         Jessica Briskin, Bloomsburg University, jbriskin@bloomu.edu
                                Susan Land, Penn State University, sland@psu.edu

           Abstract: This study explored artifact-driven online collaboration methods within a virtual art
           studio context. A collective case study (Stake, 1995) methodology was used to investigate a
           virtual design studio (VDS). The purpose of this study was to explore how two different studio
           art classes used a VDS environment to engage in studio practices and online critique processes.
           Through data analytics and thematic analysis, this study investigated how students collaborate
           during the critique process in a VDS environment. The results are supported in three ways: (1)
           VDS technology afforded viewing and the critique of artifacts, (2) the VDS failed to support
           dynamic peer collaboration, and (3) students sought technology alternatives to engage in deeper
           discussion. These findings aim to increase the effectiveness of VDS and expand the methods of
           online student collaboration.

           Keywords: virtual design studios, online collaboration, online discourse

Introduction
A virtual design studio (VDS) is one platform in which students can post artifacts (artwork), critique/collaborate,
facilitate sharing of design  information,  and   support integration regardless of place and   time (Broadfoot &
Bennett, 2003). A critique is a strategy used to evaluate students' work and work in progress to discover potential
ways to proceed (Hetland et al., 2013). A critique is a creative and collaborative process that is linked to the
principles of effective learning and has been identified in the learning sciences (Sawyer, 2012).
           Studio-based learning (SBL) is a method used in arts-based education that allows learners to use feedback
from peers to refine their work and it is through that interaction that students can foster a sense of creative
discovery, exploration of ideas, and critical discussions (Vyas et al., 2012). Students are encouraged to not only
produce artifacts but also to critically respond to others' artwork (Halverson & Sheridan, 2014). A group of
students can achieve more together than they could individually (Barrett, 2000). A typical interaction involves
both the instructor and students providing feedback to a piece of artwork, as well as the artist responding. This is
a continual dialogue between an instructor and peers. Due to evolving technology, studios that leverage a virtual
design environment are a relatively new phenomenon; therefore, it is important to investigate the affordances and
constraints of this new offering and to examine how the proliferation of the online environment impacts the student
learning experience in the arts discipline. As classroom learning environments inevitably transition to more online
environments, unanswered questions of practical and theoretical significance are worth discussion: How can a
critique effectively translate into an online environment? What will be lost or gained in this process?
           The creative process and collaborative critique are linked to the principles of effective learning and have
been identified in the learning sciences (Sawyer, 2012). Given the research on SBL, this study explored how two
case studies used a VDS for studio practices, specifically the collaborative nature of participating in a critique. By
embedding a collaborative activity, like a critique, into the structure of a course, encourages students to view it as
a necessary step in the process of creating quality work (Ruff, 2010). This research investigated how technology
impacts    the collaborative critique process in  a virtual studio environment.  Specifically, this study aimed to
investigate:   How  does technology      provide opportunities or  barriers to student collaboration  in  a virtual
environment?

Methods
This study builds off of a pilot study that was conducted in the spring of 2016. The goal of the pilot study was to
explore strategies to leverage this technology in an effort to support critiques and collaboration practices. The
pilot study was integral in the design of the VDS and helped to determine what "worked" and what did not in the
VDS.
           This study ran in fall 2017 and employed a qualitative collective case study (or multiple case study)
design (Creswell, 2013; Yin, 2003) to describe and explain how learners in two asynchronous studio-based classes
utilized a VDS. This collective case-study (Stake, 1995) builds off the pilot and focused on two different courses
from a Digital Multimedia Design (DMD) program at a university in higher education to explore the pedagogical
beliefs and implications for SBL in two asynchronous learning environments.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    700                                                 © ISLS
The participants and case study setting
Participants included 17 undergraduate students (ages 18-44). This first case examined a course which introduces
students to  the concepts, skills, language, and principles  of  practice in art and  design, communication,    and
information sciences. Ten students consented to be a part of the study. The second case study analyzed a course
that provides an introduction to how computer hardware and software can be used to produce works of art and
design to be exhibited electronically or in print. Seven students consented to be a part of the study. The analyses
focused on two assignments for each case study that included studio-based instruction and a critique of artwork.
Students were    taught a critique method to provide feedback    called the  critique sandwich,  in which  students
provided a compliment, followed it up with a possibly negatively comment, and ended the critique with a positive
statement. Furthermore, these assignments required students to go through a process of `propose­critique­iterate,'
where students provided feedback to help refine an artifact (Brocato, 2009, p. 179) for final submission. This
practice is similar to the characteristics of the four studio hallmarks: demonstration-lecture, students-at-work,
critique, and exhibition (Hetland, 2013).

Learning design and environment
The learning environment from this study focused on the participation and experiences of conducting a critique
in the VDS. This VDS is a component of a larger online platform called eLearning Management System (ELMS).
The ELMS platform was developed using Drupal, an open source educational technology platform used for
building and sustaining innovative online courses. In ELMS there are two virtual environments: (1) course pages
and (2)  the VDS.    Courses pages,  which  were separate   from the VDS,    displayed  specific information about
assignments and course content. This study concentrated on the VDS. Students were taught how to use the system
and were required to use it for all class assignments and to critique peers (see Figure 1).

                     Figure 1. The VDS Homepage that Shows a Galley of Student Artwork.

Data sources and analysis
Data sources included: (a) data/user analytics, (b) transcripts of discourse and student artifacts (artwork) posted
on ELMS,     (c) online interviews, and (d)  background    information  surveys. Interviews   were  transcribed and
interactions on the virtual studio were documented and interpreted. There were two types of data analysis: (1) data
analytics to examine critique completion and response rates and (2) thematic analysis of participant interviews.
Both of these methods were collected to discover trends in participation and engagement in the VDS.

Findings
Technology is what mediates the collaborative environment between students since there are no synchronous
communication components. The findings are categorized in three ways: technology affordances (what the VDS
allows  students  to accomplish    from the  participants'  perspective), technology   failures  (concern with  the
technology and issues using/navigating the VDS), and technology alternatives (other critique methods).

The VDS technology afforded viewing and critiquing artifacts
The functionality of ELMS allowed participants to complete critiques and provided an environment that enabled
dialogue, conversations, and critique of peers' works. As one participant discussed, the asynchronous aspect of
the VDS was beneficial because of the flexibility: "I do the bulk of my homework and stuff during my downtime

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   701                                                   © ISLS
at work or on my breaks." The VDS allowed her to access the studio from anywhere and still participate in class
in spite of her busy work schedule. Another student stated that the being asynchronous allowed more time to
reflect on peers' work: "[...] I have time to think about it. I mean I don't always have to answer right away, but
it's nice [...] and maybe sit with it, and kind of have the wheels turning." The asynchronous nature of the case
studies allowed for flexibility and reflective practice (Schön,1987), which is essential to SBL. Students in both
case studies completed critiques, provided feedback to peers, and were able to progressively iterate toward a
solution. In both case studies, student perceptions were overall favorable. One participant interviewed described
the ease of using the VDS to review her peers' feedback: "It was it was nice because you know [...] right on the
side of your work, you can see [...] in a list of all the people's response [...] it was definitely helpful." The layout
of the VDS allowed participants to easily search for and view peers' work. The VDS homepage allowed students
to view active projects, identify who needed a critique, and view recent submissions.

Asynchronous technology failed to support dynamic peer collaboration
The technology used for the VDS had limitations. During a critique, students were required to respond to at least
two people or a set group. When examining student participation, students only provided an initial response, rarely
responded to peers' critiques, and rarely extended beyond the required amount (see Table 1). The technology in
this study did not promote the levels of student interactions intended, and the majority of students simply went
through the motions, completing activities because they were required to as part of a grade. Students in face-to-
face studio environments typically thrive off peer collaboration and learning (Kvan, 2001), but in this collective
case study, participants did not contribute to a back-and-forth communication process. Instead, communication
was one-directional, meaning it was student-to-student or instructor-to-student, with no response back.

Table 1: Participation Averages

                                               Mean # of              Mean Word Count          Mean # of
                                          Critiques per student        for each critique        Replies

  Case Study 1: Assignment 1 N=10                  2                          197                       0

  Case Study 1: Assignment 2 N=10                  2                          562                       0

  Case Study 2: Assignment 1 N=7                   3                          113                       0

  Case Study 2: Assignment 2 N=7                   3                          162                       1

The asynchronous nature of the VDS further impacted the critique; typically critiques involve the discussion of
and sharing of ideas in order to develop design projects (Kvan, 2001). However, in this case, the VDS environment
did not meet all of the students' needs in order to foster the appropriate levels of collaboration. For example, one
participant indicated that not being in a face-to-face environment was a barrier in forming a sense of a connection
with peers: "[...] I didn't ask anyone any questions because [...] there's a disconnect between everybody [...]
because it's not like a classroom where you could just turn to your left and right, and form any type of rapport."
The asynchronous nature of the VDS isolated students and led to limited discussion and debate among peers, both
of which are important aspects of the signature pedagogy (Cennamo & Brandt, 2012). Participants reported that
more   direct notifications (or pings) when others provided    a critique would have   been helpful to    promote
engagement and lessen isolation. Further investigation of the tools and technology in conjunction with social
interactions should be explored in an effort to increase the discussion aspect of the VDS that was limited in this
study.

Students sought technology alternatives to engage in deeper discussion
Participants in both case studies reported that they wanted to engage with their peers, but the VDS environment
was not allowing them to adequately do so. One participant from the first case study discussed how she did not
complete a critique in ELMS: "I did kind of my own personal experiment on one after I wasn't getting a lot of
feedback. And I took it to Facebook....and many of my friends ripped me apart and helped me build it to something
better..." In the second case study, participants reported that they utilized other technology to communicate and
collaborate. For example, one participant described in the interview that he wanted to directly communicate with
a peer and could not: "[...] I sent them a message outside and saying like 'hey - you want to see your idea in
action? This is kind of what I did with it.'[...] And then they commented on it and critiqued it a little bit [...]

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   702                                                 © ISLS
through   our canvas message." This    student used   Canvas  (the University LMS),   not ELMS    (the VDS),  to
communicate with peers for a critique. The notion that students were critiquing by using technology not provided
in the class suggests that multiple technologies and methods for supporting discussion around artifacts were
needed.

Conclusions and implications
This study provides perspectives on utilizing a VDS in SBL courses. One underlying objective of this study was
to investigate the characteristics of a VDS that allow students to experience a successful critique process in a
virtual environment. By analyzing two asynchronous SBL courses, we were able to examine the beliefs and
practices associated with facilitating a critique in a VDS.   The  findings suggest that students recognized the
affordances of being asynchronous and that the VDS was effective in allowing students to participate and conduct
critiques. In both case studies, participants saw value in being online as it allowed for flexibility in students'
schedules and wider availability, meaning students could be located anywhere, yet still participate in collaborative
work (Bradfoot & Bender, 2012).
          The findings revealed insight into the prevalence and growth of online education models and provide
implications for a redesign of the structure of the course requirements of a studio-based course. Consistent with
other studies on a VDS, continuous dialogue is a central component of critique and typically involves students
engaging in dialogue with the artist (Vyas et al., 2013). A response to an initial critique, which is equally as
important to the critique process, involves aspects such as answering questions and posting new ideas. However,
this environment lacked the continuous dialogue component of a critique. It was found that due to the strict course
requirements and procedures, the dialogue became largely one-directional and involved only a small number of
students. Course requirements should have less rigid peer critique requirements and should promote the idea of
responding to peers to initiate continuous dialogue.
          Furthermore, due to the lack of interactivity and responses, participants, sought out alternative forms of
technology to conduct critiques when the immediate environment was not meeting their needs. This lack of
interactivity leads to the idea that a focus should be placed social presence in the online experience (Whiteside,
2015) in order to promote a level of collaborative discourse in SBL. Building relationships in online courses are
important for students to connect and engage with each other (Whiteside, 2015) and to the studio pedagogy in
order to encourage connections in the iterative design process (Cennamo & Brandt, 2012). Further exploration is
needed to synthesize and develop methods to use in online critiques and promote student collaboration.

References
Broadfoot, O., & Bennett, R. (2003). Design studios: Online? Comparing traditional face-to-face design studio
          education with modern Internet-based design studios.
Brocato, K. (2009). Studio based learning: Proposing, critiquing, iterating our way to person- centeredness for
          better classroom management. Theory into practice, 48(2), 138-146.
Cennamo, K., & Brandt, C. (2012). The "right kind of telling:" Knowledge building in the academic design studio.
          Educational technology research and development, 60(5), 839- 858.
Creswell, J. W. (2013). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches (4th edition).
          Thousand Oak, CA: Sage.
Hetland, L., Winner, E., Veenema, S. and Sheridan, K.M. (2013) Studio thinking 2: The real benefits of visual
          arts education. 2nd ed. New York: Teachers College Press.
Kvan, T. (2001). The pedagogy of virtual design studios. Automation in Construction, 10(3), 345-353.
Sawyer, R. K. (2012). Learning how to create: Toward a learning science of art and design. In Proceedings of the
          10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012) (pp. 33-39).
Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Sage.
Vyas, D., van der Veer, G., & Nijholt, A. (2013). Creative practices in the design studio culture: collaboration
          and communication. Cognition, Technology & Work, 15(4), 415-443.
Whiteside, A.  L. (2015). Introducing    the Social  Presence Model  to Explore  Online  and Blended   Learning
          Experiences. Online Learning, 19(2), n2.
Yin, R. K. (2003). Design and methods. Case study research.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   703                                                © ISLS
