      Maggie Mars: Theatrical Modeling and the Phenomenological
                                Understanding of Solar Systems
                     Jackson Reimers, Vanderbilt University, jackson.e.reimers@vanderbilt.edu
                           Corey Brady, Vanderbilt University, corey.brady@vanderbilt.edu

           Abstract: In this manuscript we report on initial findings from the first implementation of a
           four-cycle design study that seeks to synergize computational modeling and narrative theater
           to support students' phenomenological understanding of solar systems. We develop the notion
           of  the  theatrical  model   as   a   low-overhead,    high-expressivity     alternative  to   typical
           computational modeling approaches. We then analyze the lifespan of one theatrical model as a
           case study to show how its collaborative creation and interpretation both reflect characteristic
           computational modeling practices and suggest new resources for modeling.

Introduction
Embodiment     is  supports the development      of  computational   thinking  through   syntonic  links  between   human
learner and    computational   agent   (Papert,  1980).  Recently,   learning  environment    designers   have  used  this
syntonicity   to  support  students' construction    and use of   embodied    computational   models   to study dynamic,
complex    systems   (Colella, 2000;   Wilensky    &  Reisman,    2006;  Brady,  Holbert, Soylu,    Novak,   &  Wilensky,
2015). Outside the classroom, embodiment is an important modeling tool for structural biologists, who conduct
"body experiments" to understand the dynamics of protein folding (Myers, 2012). In this paper, we present a
kind of modeling activity--theatrical modeling--that leverages the power of syntonicity by combining theater
and multi-agent computation in the context of solar systems modeling. We believe that theatrical modeling is
especially useful for the study of perspectival aspects of solar systems using what Bollen and van Joolingen
(2013) call a "phenomenological way of modeling" (p. 213, italics in original).

Theoretical framework
We ask: how might theater and computational modeling be coordinated in a collaborative learning environment
to promote students' development as scientific modelers of solar systems? To answer this question, we build on
work in computational modeling to develop the concept of the theatrical model. We believe embodiment is
conducive to computational thinking because of human-agent syntonicity (Papert, 1980). We also draw from
Wilensky    and   Reisman   (2006),   who  analyzed    how   students  construct  embodied     computational   models  of
complex systems, like firefly populations, to understand emergent phenomena such as the synchronization of the
fireflies' flashes. These   works  highlight  syntonicity   as an   embodied,  perceptual   resonance   between   a single
learner in physical space and a single agent in representational space (e.g., the LOGO turtle or the NetLogo
firefly). There is a related body of research considering how computationally enriched embodied activities (e.g.,
participatory  simulations)    enable  groups  to  model   emergent    phenomena    in  complex    systems  (Wilensky  &
Stroup, 1999;     Brady,  Weintrop,  Anton,  &   Wilensky,   2016;   Colella, 2000;    Brady, Holbert,  Soylu, Novak,  &
Wilensky, 2015). This work extends the idea of syntonicity to groups of learners modeling complex systems.
           We  believe,  however,  that there   is a categorical  difference  between   the  complex   systems  modeling
(e.g., of a firefly population) and phenomenological modeling (e.g., of a solar system). This important difference
is in how     the target phenomenon    emerges.    For the  firefly  population, synchronization    emerges  as   a global
aggregation of local, single-agent behaviors. This contrasts with solar systems, where phenomena such as day
and   night   emerge through   the   interaction of  only some    of the many    bodies.  In  this case,  we believe  that
embodied perspective taking is an even more crucial "phenomenological connector" for enabling students to
model perspectival aspects of solar systems (cf. Soylu, Holbert, Brady, and Wilensky, 2017).
           With this background, theatrical modeling was conceived as a low-overhead modeling environment
that  could   blend science  with  art to support    both quantitative   scientific modeling   and  qualitative   narrative
expression. Theatrical models involve a script, a performance, and a recording all geared toward a modeling
question.   We    construe the script  as a  modeling    artifact that  mediates  between     the  computational  and the
theatrical: it defines the stage as a performative and co-ordinate space and assigns roles and behaviors to actors
using codified stage directions and narrative lines. Throughout the modeling process, the development of the
script parallels the development of the group's epistemological and affective stances toward the phenomenon. In
these ways the script both organizes and is shaped by each group performance in much the same way that a
computational     model   evolves  over time.    Theatrical models   are similar    to what   Myers  (2012)  calls  "body
experiments," which

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       704                                                     © ISLS
         are part of the daily and mundane work of learning and conducting inquiry in science.... As
         improvised articulations they can be reenacted, revised and refuted mid-gesture. They can be
         repeated, but always with a difference. What's crucial here is that these animations do not fix
         the temporal flow of a process: their temporality is elastic. (p. 171)

In much the same way, theatrical modelers and their onlookers can use the performance as a temporally elastic
tool for exploring and communicating ideas about solar systems and their experience as part of the model. In a
theatrical model, human bodies become celestial bodies, human eyes become perspectival sensors, and human
experiences become scientific evidence.

Methods and data
We developed a three-week unit on solar systems, emphasizing a phenomenological understanding of patterns
(like day/night cycles). The 15-day sequence of lessons culminated in students working in groups of three to
video record a theatrical model of an imagined solar system that addressed two questions: (1) How do planets
move through the solar system? and (2) What are some consequences or implications of that motion? Students
first wrote a narrative script to be read aloud as the group enacted the model. They then used a head-mounted
GoPro camera to record their enactment. In total, 7 models were recorded. On the last day of the unit, Ms.
Rogan facilitated an activity in which students viewed two of the videos, reenacted each of them to address
questions that arose in discussion.
         We collected student artifacts (e.g., written scripts and video recordings) as well as video and audio
recordings of the whole classroom. First, we prepared a detailed transcript of the whole-class video and audio
data using Inqscribe. We then used NVivo to code the transcript and students' scripted theatrical models. We
were looking  specifically for  instances of  students  using  theater as modeling:    these included    making  claims
related to both quantitative and qualitative aspects of the model, bids to re-run or change the parameters of the
model, taking the perspective of actors within the model, and using the model to generate new questions. The
research team  met weekly   to   discuss  the analytic  process and    review  data at  length    while  simultaneously
developing a theoretical framing for the argument presented here. As themes began to emerge in our discussion
and analysis, we twice brought selections from the video record before an interdisciplinary group of researchers
to conduct  interaction analysis   sessions  (Jordan  & Henderson,     1995), which    both  refined and    opened new
avenues for our inquiry.

Analysis
We present here an analysis of the lifespan of a single model: Maggie Mars. This model was the first video
watched in the final discussion, and was both reenacted by new actors and built on to construct new theatrical
models in real time. First we introduce the video as a model by describing its components and discussing the
decisions made in its creation. We then narrate its lifespan in the course of the final discussion as it was viewed
and reenacted, framing students' interpretive discourse as characteristic of scientific modeling (cf. Lehrer &
Schauble, 2015).

Maggie Mars
Maggie, Amanda, and Britney created Maggie Mars to explore Mars' perspective on the Earth-Sun relationship.
They wrote it as a script before they performed and recorded it in private, knowing that it might be presented to
the whole class for interpretation and questioning (see Figure 1).
         Each model, including Maggie Mars, reflected a unique combination of modeling decisions that we
categorize as literary, filmic, and  computational.   Literary decisions  concern   narrative    aspects of the model,
including story and point of view. Filmic decisions concern cinematic aspects of the model, including camera
position and perspective. Computational decisions concern metric qualities of the model, including timing and
actor motion. Literarily, the story is told from Maggie Mars' point of view as she recounts her own experience
as Amanda   Earth's next-door      neighbor.  In this model,   the filmic perspective   is   the  same   as the literary
perspective: Maggie wore the camera in addition to being the story's narrator. She positioned the camera to
maintain a  consistent   view   of Amanda     Earth,  with Britney  Sun   usually   at the   left edge   of the image.
Computationally, "orbit" means to traverse a circular path and "rotate" means to spin in place--both of which
were definitions used by the whole class.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    705                                                     © ISLS
          Figure 1A. Series of still frames from Maggie Mars. 1B. A copy of the script of Maggie Mars.

          In both the script and video, Amanda Earth orbits Ashley Sun and rotates about her own axis every 2
seconds, producing a complex pattern of doubly circular walking. Maggie Mars follows in an orbit slightly
outside of  and   behind   Amanda   Earth's,  but   does not    rotate (in disagreement   with  the script, which   is of
consequence to our later analysis). Britney Sun holds her position at the center of both orbits. Here the use of
"orbit" and "rotate" to denote different kinds of walking motion parallels the uses of functions in computational
modeling. Considering the script alone, it would be possible to translate it into a computer-based model, which
reinforces the validity of the script as an artifact of scientific modeling. What would be lost in the process,
however, would be the perspectival understanding embedded in Maggie's cinematic choices and the nuanced
phenomenological understandings embedded in the model's literary choices.

Viewing the model
The final class began with a viewing of Morgan Mars. Ms. Rogan paused the video midway through to facilitate
a brief discussion about the basics of the model, establishing a shared understanding of each actor's role and the
goal of the model. Then, Ms. Rogan instructed the students: "pretend you live on Amanda's nose." This was a
bid to inhabit the model as a world, much like when Papert (1980) suggested that students "play turtle." Ms.
Rogan asked the students to clap when they'd "seen a full day," then replayed the video. Students clapped in
approximate unison each time Amanda completed a full rotation, suggesting that they used their embodied in-
model perspective to infer when day and night would occur. This routine continued without teacher prompting,
serving as the theatrical equivalent of a model-clock or tick-counter. Further discussion interrogated the literary
and filmic perspective of Maggie Mars, from which students inferred that Maggie Mars was orbiting, but not
rotating. Ms. Rogan built on this realization by asking what life would be like on Maggie Mars, garnering a
chorus of claims about how either day or night would be everlasting depending on your location. In the language
of planetary motion,   Maggie    Mars    was tidally locked     to the Britney  Sun (like  the moon  is to  Earth). The
theatrical model   not only  supported    students  in realizing    this fact, but also  enabled them   to  imagine    the
experiential implications of tidal locking in a phenomenological way.

Re-enacting the model
Ms. Rogan    expressed   her own    confusion    at students'   claims   about  everlasting day  or  night:  "Could    we
demonstrate this for a second? Because you guys are talking but it's hard for me to see it in my head." After
selecting  actors and  clearing  a stage at  the front of   the room,    the re-enactive demonstration  began. Esteban
played  Britney   Sun, Brian  played     Maggie   Mars,   and   Kyle   played   Amanda    Earth. The  trio  began   their
performance, portraying the motions of all three original actors with an impressive degree of accuracy given that
they had never read the script. As the performance continued a researcher asked the class where daytime was on
Brian, which also met a chorus of claims about which parts of Brian's body directly faced Esteban. Macey
pointed out that Brian was "actually moving," by which she meant not that he was simply moving, but that he
was moving differently relative to how Maggie had moved in the video. This insight reflected a remarkable
understanding of the reenactment as a model of motion in comparison to the video as a model of motion, and
suggests that Macey was thinking deeply about the computational and filmic qualities of both the video and
reenactment.  When     the class   faced the question    of where    daytime   was  on   Kyle, Ms.  Rogan   "froze"    the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       706                                                   © ISLS
performance   to allow  for   closer inspection    of Kyle's  orientation   without him  continuing   to  rotate.  Over     the
course of the reenactment, the performance came to be frozen, played in discrete steps, replayed, and slowed
down to support finer-grained quantitative investigation by the students into the perspectival relations embedded
in the model. This kind of flexible executability and repeatability is an affordance of computational modeling
environments, as it supports both intuition-building and experimentation (Brady et al., 2015).

Conclusion
We believe that the findings from this initial study show promise for the future iterations of this work and for
the learning  design  community      at large. Particularly   given the  constraints  of this  particular setting    (i.e., 26-
minute  class periods),   it is remarkable    how   richly these   students were  able   to engage in both    collaborative
construction  and  interpretation   of  theatrical models  of   solar systems.   These   findings suggest     that theatrical
modeling    enables  students    to  explore   both   quantitative  and   qualitative  aspects  of   solar    systems  in     a
bootstrapping kind of way. For example, we consider the intellectual work done by a student in imagining the
stage from another student's perspective to be similar to the work done by a physicist when transposing frames
of reference or considering relative motion. If composing and inhabiting models in which the physical world is
blended with human experience is a quintessential scientific practice (cf. Ochs, Gonzales, & Jacoby, 1996), then
we believe further research into the intersection of modeling and expression at the classroom level could offer
significant insight to educators and other designers of learning environments. We have continued to explore and
improve the theatrical modeling framework in subsequent implementations. Extended analyses of these data are
pursuing   an adaptation     of the liminal   blends  framework     (Enyedy,  Danish,    &  DeLiema,   2015)      to analyze
theatrical  modeling.  Future    work    will explore  a   tighter coupling  of theatrical   modeling  with    agent-based
computation, perhaps through the use of programmable robots.

References
Bollen, L.,   &  van Joolingen,     W.  R.  (2013).   SimSketch:   Multiagent   Simulations    Based on   Learner-Created
         Sketches for Early Science Education. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 6(3), 208­216.
Brady,  C.,   Holbert,  N.,     Soylu,  F.,   Novak,  M.,   &   Wilensky,   U.   (2015).    Sandboxes     for model-based
         inquiry. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 24(2-3), 265-286.
Brady, C., Weintrop, D., Anton, G., & Wilensky, U. (2016). Constructionist learning at the group level with
         programmable badges. In Proc. Constructionism Conf (pp. 61-68).
Colella, V. (2000). Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamic
         modeling. The journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.
Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., & DeLiema, D. (2015). Constructing liminal blends in a collaborative augmented-
         reality learning    environment.   International  Journal    of Computer-Supported     Collaborative      Learning,
         10(1), 7­34.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The journal of the learning
         sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2015). The development of scientific thinking. Handbook of child psychology and
         developmental science, 2(7), 671-714.
Myers,   N.   (2012).  Dance      Your    PhD:  Embodied        Animations,  Body     Experiments,   and      the  Affective
         Entanglements of Life Science Research. Body & Society, 18(1), 151­189.
Ochs, E., Gonzales, P., & Jacoby, S. (1996). "When I come down I'm in the domain state": grammar and graphic
         representation   in  the  interpretive activity   of physicists. Studies  in Interactional  Sociolinguistics, 13,
         328-369.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc..
Soylu,  F., Holbert,  N., Brady,    C.,  &  Wilensky,  U.  (2017).   Embodied   Perspective    Taking in   Learning    about
         Complex Systems. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 28(3), 269­303.
Wilensky,   U., &  Reisman,     K.  (2006).   Thinking like   a wolf, a  sheep, or  a firefly: Learning   biology    through
         constructing  and      testing computational   theories--an     embodied   modeling    approach. Cognition         and
         instruction, 24(2), 171-209.
Wilensky,   U.,  & Stroup,   W.   (1999,    December).   Learning   through  participatory   simulations:  Network-based
         design for systems learning in classrooms. In Proceedings of the 1999 conference on Computer support
         for collaborative learning (p. 80). International Society of the Learning Sciences.

Acknowledgments
Funding from the National Science Foundation (Grant No. 1742138) is gratefully acknowledged.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       707                                                       © ISLS
