Impact of Choice on Students' Use of an Experimentation Model for
                     Investigating Ideas about Thermodynamics
                                       Jennifer King Chen and Marcia C. Linn
                                     jykchen@berkeley.edu, mclinn@berkeley.edu
                                         University of California, Berkeley

         Abstract:   This   paper    examines   the impact   of  providing   choice     on  students'  use of   an
         experimentation model to investigate their ideas using an online thermodynamics unit. Sixth-
         grade students working in pairs (N = 78) were randomly assigned to either a choice or no-
         choice condition   for  investigating   the   insulation  effectiveness  of    different materials.  The
         choice students were asked to select one of two equivalent scenarios to investigate with the
         experimentation model. In contrast, the no-choice students were randomly assigned a scenario
         to investigate. Our findings indicate that the choice students more often used the model to test
         their prior ideas than their no-choice peers. Furthermore, the choice students also ran more
         informative experimentation test patterns that yielded valid and useful data for understanding
         heat energy transfer with the model. The findings from this study provide promising insights
         into  the   potentially  beneficial    impact   of  incorporating    choice    into   science  learners'
         experiences in the classroom.

Rationale and research objectives
This  study   investigates how   providing     choice  during   instruction  impacts    students'   use of   an  interactive
experimentation model in Thermodynamics Challenge, an online curriculum unit about heat energy transfer and
thermal  equilibrium. Providing      different investigation   choices can   make   the  learning   experience   feel  more
personally  relevant for   students  (Cordova   &   Lepper,  1996),   which   can in    turn lead  to more   effortful self-
regulated and metacognitive learning (Kamii, 1991; Pintrich, 1999). Although choice has been examined across
a  variety of educational   contexts  ranging   from   school   choice (e.g., McLaughlin,      2005)   to  example    choice
(Reber, Hetland, Chen, Norman, & Kobbeltvedt, 2009), studies investigating the impact of choice in authentic
classroom settings for a complex learning task such as scientific inquiry are rare (refer to: Flowerday & Schraw,
2000; Reber, Hetland, Chen, Norman, & Kobbeltvedt, 2009). We take the view that the sense of competency,
relevancy  and autonomy     that providing     choice  can impart  to students (Katz    &    Assor, 2007)  may   positively
impact how they engage with learning. This study builds on prior research investigating the impact of choice on
student learning outcomes within an authentic classroom context (King Chen, 2016), and we hope it provides
additional insight into the potential value of providing choice during science inquiry instruction.

Theoretical and methodological perspectives
This research work views learning from a constructivist perspective--that learners' pre-existing ideas can be
effectively leveraged towards more normative and integrated understandings of challenging science ideas and
concepts (Smith, diSessa, & Roschelle, 1993). The Thermodynamics Challenge curriculum unit was designed
using the  scaffolded knowledge      integration framework     for instruction (Linn,    Davis,   &   Eylon, 2004),   which
specifies four iterative processes that can help students to integrate new ideas with their existing understandings
as they  engage in   inquiry: elicit prior ideas,   introduce   normative    scientific ideas, help   establish criteria for
evaluating ideas, and encourage the sorting and refinement of one's repertoire of ideas.
         As a design-based research (DBR) study, this work aims to inform and advance the development of
theories of learning as well as the design of innovative learning environments (Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer,
&  Schauble,  2003).  The   primary   hallmarks     of DBR   are   iterative cycles  of  implementation      and evidence-
supported refinement (e.g., Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004; Sandoval, 2014).

Methods and study design

Thermodynamics Challenge curriculum unit and experimentation model
Thermodynamics     Challenge     (or Thermo    Challenge)   was    developed   using    the  Web-based    Inquiry  Science
Environment   (WISE;    Bell, Davis,   &   Hsi,  1995).    The  unit encourages   students    to  apply their   ideas  about
thermodynamics (specifically insulation, conduction, heat energy transfer and thermal equilibrium) towards the
testing and  evaluation  of different  materials  for  insulating  a  beverage  using    an  experimentation    model.   We

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       708                                                       © ISLS
designed the model to function as an interactive space for testing ideas, running experiments and making sense
of acquired data. Students modify two parameter settings (cup material and starting liquid temperature) before
running  the model  to observe   the transfer  of heat energy  over  time  and  the resulting heating  or   cooling
temperature curve.

Iterative refinement of the model and user interface
During our previous classroom implementations of the Thermo Challenge curriculum unit, we observed many
students adopting a perfunctory approach towards using the model (e.g., completing a random subset of tests in
a haphazard manner, or running quickly through all the test possibilities to "complete" the work) rather than
taking a  more   self-directed and  reflective approach   towards   conducting  their experiments    (i.e., making
intentional decisions about which experimental tests to run and why these tests might be useful for improving
their understanding).
         Based on these observations, we redesigned the model interface to more explicitly promote students in
engaging in reflective and self-directed experimentation with the model. Specifically, we made design changes
to better support students with the following key scientific practices (NGSS Lead States, 2013): planning and
carrying out  an investigation,  using the  model   to investigate  ideas  and explanations,  and   analyzing  and
interpreting data obtained from the model. The new design feature that supports students with these activities is
the experimentation matrix, which allows students to easily view the full range of experimental trials for their
planning, investigating and analyzing activities with the model (see Figure 1). (The matrix replaced the drop-
down parameter menus previously available for operating and interacting with the model.) As can be seen in the
figure, the column headers of the matrix indicate the six different materials available for testing (i.e., aluminum,
wood,  styrofoam,  plastic, clay and glass) and   the row   headers of the matrix show  the   three starting  liquid
temperature options (i.e., hot, warm and cold). The resulting 3 x 6 matrix thus allows students to track the 18
possible experiments that they can run with the model. The experimentation matrix and supporting curriculum
scaffolds aim to engage students in more directed and deliberate experimentation with the model: Students first
use the matrix to discuss and record the key tests they want to run (planning; the matrix logs students' preferred
tests as "starred" experiments), they then use the matrix to select tests to run with the model (experimentation
and data collection) and finally, students use the matrix to choose a subset of their collected data for scaffolded
analysis and sense-making (interpretation).

Figure 1. Screenshot of the experimentation matrix and interactive model in Thermo Challenge. Students use the
 matrix to plan their key trials for investigation beforehand (recorded in the matrix as "starred" tests). Students
         then use the matrix to run the model (completed tests are indicated with green check marks).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   709                                                   © ISLS
Choice study design and data collection
As  stated previously,   this study investigated   the  effect  of providing  choice  on  students' use of the   Thermo
Challenge model for investigating their ideas about thermodynamics. 156 sixth-grade students taught by one
teacher at a public middle school participated in the study. Student pairs were randomly assigned within class
periods to either the choice (N = 38) or no-choice condition (N = 40) and completed the unit over four hours of
classroom   time.  Students   in both conditions   received    exactly the  same  instructional content   with  only one
difference: The    choice  students were   offered  the choice  of  two  equivalent  scenarios  to  investigate with  the
model (how best to insulate either a hot or cold beverage over time). In contrast, the no-choice students were
randomly assigned to investigate either the hot or cold beverage scenario.
          We captured the following sources of data: students' individual responses to the unit pre- and post-test,
student pairs' written responses to embedded assessment prompts in the unit, their experimentation decisions
with  the model    as  logged by  their use  of the experimentation    matrix,   our classroom  observation   notes, and
recorded video data of student pairs working together.

Results and discussion
For   the following    analyses  we examined    the data   logged   by students'  use  of the experimentation    matrix,
specifically: Which experimental tests students flagged beforehand as important for their investigations, and
which tests they actually completed and collected data for with the model. We present two primary findings.
          Fidelity  of implementation   of planned   experimental    tests. We   hypothesized that  the choice  students
might demonstrate a higher fidelity of implementation (i.e., completing and collecting data for more of their
planned tests). Our reasoning for this hypothesis was that the choice students might feel more engagement or
ownership (and consequently, a greater sense of commitment) for carrying out their chosen investigation with
the model compared to their no-choice peers (who were assigned to investigate either the hot or cold beverage
scenario). Our analysis for fidelity of implementation found evidence to support this hypothesis. Students in the
choice condition demonstrated a higher rate of following through and carrying out the experimental tests that
they flagged during the experiment planning step compared to the no-choice students. This result was found to
be statistically significant using the Chi-square test (p < 0.05). In other words, the choice students more often
used the model to test their prior ideas (the experimental tests they starred as the important ones for adding to
their understanding    of  thermodynamics     and   their selected  scenario  during  experimentation     planning). We
interpret this finding as an indication that giving students choice may provide them with the opportunity to
engage in more self-directed learning; in this case, following through with the investigation of a scenario that
students were able to choose for themselves. Since both choices are equivalent scenarios (the physics behind
heat energy transfer for a hot or cold beverage are exactly the same), we posit that the effect of choice seen here
is more   likely to be  an  affective or motivational     one. Furthermore,   as offering choice   allows the   option to
choose a more personally relevant situation to investigate, learners might have used the opportunity to examine
and possibly build on their prior ideas about various materials using the model (e.g., "a steel water bottle keeps
my water cold, so steel must be a good insulator").
          Frequency    of  informative   experimentation    patterns.  Another   interesting  finding from    this  study
emerged when we analyzed the patterns of experimental tests students ran with the model. In our analysis, we
looked    specifically for completed    sets of tests  that demonstrated    evidence  of  experimental    proficiency  or
systematicity that would yield informative data for students to draw scientifically valid conclusions from their
use of the model. (Some examples include: Running a set of tests that compared materials by controlling for
starting liquid temperature, or running matched temperature tests for the same set of materials.) Again we found
that the choice students demonstrated a higher rate of informative experimentation patterns than their no-choice
peers. Interestingly, this finding was not found to be significant using the Chi-square test for the cold beverage
students (comparing choice to no-choice) but was found to approach significance for the hot beverage students
(choice versus no-choice; p = 0.07). This finding raises a potentially interesting avenue for further analysis and
investigation. For the entire population of choice pairs, 61% chose to investigate the cold beverage scenario, and
only 39% chose the hot beverage scenario. These percentages suggest that students might have a preference for
(or more familiarity with) thinking about the cold beverage scenario. Our previous observations and studies
examining students' ideas about thermodynamics would seem to support this hypothesis. We have noticed that
most students generate responses about heat energy transfer by referring to everyday experiences about keeping
a  beverage  cold   (refer to the steel water   bottle  example    given above)  rather than  keeping   a beverage   hot.
Another piece of evidence that lends weight to this idea from our analysis of the logged matrix data is that
testing a cold liquid in an aluminum container was by far the experimental test students most frequently selected
whether   during   planning   or data   collection with   the  model.  Taken  collectively, we  hypothesize    that these
findings might provide evidence for the instructional value of utilizing choice as an instructional approach that

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       710                                                    © ISLS
provides students with the important opportunity to engage in the learning of new ideas through activation of
their prior knowledge and understandings. We acknowledge that this is at present a speculative conclusion that
requires further investigation and evidence. (Additional analyses of the other data sources collected from the
study are currently underway to find more evidence in support of this hypothesis.)
         Instructional     value of  student choice    and the  experimentation   matrix  for   collaborative learning.
Another    possible   explanation for the   promising  findings  we  have   found  in favor  of choice  might   be that
requiring student pairs to choose an investigative topic promotes the need for collaborative discussion with a
partner in order to negotiate ideas and preferences to reach a consensus about which investigative scenario to
choose. In other words, choice promotes discussion and the need to collaborate during learning. Furthermore,
the activities  with   the  experimentation  matrix are  designed  such that  student  pairs must  negotiate  decisions
together (e.g., which experimental tests to star during planning; which tests to run with the model). Thus the
matrix can help to make student thinking visible and available for discussion by providing an accessible, shared
learning space for continual discussion, the negotiation of experimentation decisions, and sense-making.

Conclusions and implications
We propose that the findings from this study, although preliminary, provide promising insight into the beneficial
impact of incorporating choice into learners' experiences in the classroom. It is worth noting that we observed
these positive impacts using a relatively simple embedding of choice in the curriculum, and that the study was
implemented over only four hours total of instruction. We anticipate that other choice design studies employed
over longer spans of instruction may yield even more positive and powerful benefits for learners. We hope that
this work will help to serve as a starting point for more conversations with other researchers in the learning
sciences   community     about how   to design   instructional innovations  and   technological tools that can support
students' engagement with learning through choice and collaborative sense-making of complex scientific ideas.

References
Bell, P., Davis, E. A., & Hsi, S. (1995). The knowledge integration environment: Theory and design. In J. L.
         Schnase    &    E. L. Cunnius   (Eds.), Proceedings   of the Computer    Supported   Collaborative   Learning
         Conference, CSCL '95, Bloomington, IN (pp. 14­21). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cobb,  P.,  Confrey,   J.,  DiSessa, A., Lehrer,   R., &   Schauble, L. (2003).   Design  experiments   in educational
         research. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9-13.
Collins,   A., Joseph,   D., &   Bielaczyc,  K.  (2004). Design   research:   Theoretical and   methodological  issues.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.
Cordova, D. I., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Intrinsic motivation and the process of learning: Beneficial effects of
           contextualization, personalization, and choice. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88(4), 715.
Flowerday,     T., &   Schraw,   G.  (2000).  Teacher    beliefs  about instructional  choice:   A phenomenological
           study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(4), 634.
Kamii,   C.    (1991). Toward     autonomy:   The   importance    of critical thinking  and   choice   making.  School
           Psychology Review.
Katz,  I., &    Assor,   A.  (2007).  When   choice    motivates  and   when   it does  not. Educational   Psychology
           Review, 19(4), 429-442.
King  Chen,    J.  Y. (2016).  Designing  Technology-Enhanced      Science    Inquiry Instruction to  Scaffold Student
           Choice Through Explanation and Reflection (Doctoral dissertation, UC Berkeley)
Linn, M.    C.,   Davis, E.  A., &   Eylon,  B.-S.  (2004). The   scaffolded  knowledge    integration framework    for
           instruction. Internet environments for science education (pp. 47-72).
McLaughlin, T. (2005). School choice and public education in a liberal democratic society. American Journal of
           Education, 111, 442­463.
NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: The
           National Academies Press.
Pintrich, P. R. (1999). Chapter 2: The role of motivation in promoting and sustaining self-regulated learning.
           International Journal of Educational Research, 31, 459-470.
Reber, R., Hetland, H., Chen, W., Norman, E., & Kobbeltvedt, T. (2009). Effects of example choice on interest,
           control, and learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(4), 509-548.
Sandoval, W. A. (2014). Conjecture mapping: An approach to systematic educational design research. Journal
           of the Learning Sciences, 23(1), 18-36.
Smith, J. P., diSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis of
           knowledge in transition. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115-163.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      711                                                   © ISLS
