 What Can Be Learned About Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning From a Bibliographic Coupling Analysis?
                          Heisawn Jeong,   Hallym University, heis@hallym.ac.kr
                         Sujong Seo, Hallym University, westwaterbell@gmail.com
                          Ji Yeon Jeong, Hallym University, qkdua45@gmail.com
                      Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University, chmelosi@indiana.edu
                      Sebastian Grauwin, University of Lyon, sebgrauwin@gmail.com

       Abstract: Bibliographic coupling (BC) of 869 CSCL papers published between 2005 and 2014
       showed a map of CSCL research organized around shared references. The CSCL map consists
       of ten BC research clusters with varying size and topics. A subset of CSCL were not well-
       connected, suggesting a degree of fragmentation in CSCL research. Bibliometric analysis also
       revealed hidden or implicit research practices.

Introduction
With advances in technology, there has been much progress in the field of Computer-Supported Collaborative
Learning (CSCL). In spite of its success in producing positive learning gains (Chen, Wang, Kirschner, & Tsai,
2018), there is awareness that CSCL is at an inflection point (Wise & Schwarz, 2017). A number of recent studies
have examined CSCL research practices and showed that, while sharing the goal of supporting collaborative
learning with technology, CSCL research is practiced and studied in a number of different ways and differing
views exist as to the critical aspects of collaborative learning (Jeong, Hmelo-Silver, & Yu, 2014). Tang, Tsai, and
Lin (2014) examined pairs of CSCL publications cited together and, by additionally applying exploratory factor
analysis and social network analysis, identified six major research themes and 15 core publications. These field-
wide reflections on CSCL research helped us understand the major research topics along with major theoretical
and methodological frameworks.
       The goal of this paper is to understand the current landscape of CSCL research between 2005 and 2014
using a bibliographic coupling analysis. Bibliographic coupling (BC), like co-citation analysis, use bibliometric
information about publications (e.g., authors, references), but differs in that it uses shared citations between
publications and identify clusters of research that share references. It can help us understand how CSCL research
is grouped around major reference bases and what are the nature and characteristics of these references. The
features of the clusters in terms of keywords, journal outlets, institutional backgrounds of the authors, for example,
can also help us understand CSCL research practices around CSCL publications.

Method
A CSCL corpus constructed in earlier examinations of CSCL research practices and outcomes was used (Jeong et
al., 2014; Hmelo-Silver et al., under review). The corpus was constructed by journal-based searches as well as
keyword-based searches on the Web of Sciences and ERIC databases. It contained a total of 869 papers published
between 2005 and 2014. Metadata extraction includes information about the authors, title of the publications,
keywords, publication source, institutions, country affiliated with authors, references, for example.
       Bibliographic   Coupling (BC) links were formed           between publications when they share   references
(Kessler, 1963). A community detection algorithm based on modularity optimization (an implementation of the
Louvain algorithm) was then applied to partition networks of linked papers into clusters. These clusters are
represented in a map, in which a node represents a cluster with its size being proportional to the number of papers
within the clusters. A frequency analysis was carried out to the papers within each cluster and provided results for
(1) top 20 author keywords (2) top 10 publication sources, (6) top 10 countries, (7) top 10 references, (8) top 10
references sources, and (9) top 10 representative papers of the clusters. Representative papers here refer to papers
that are most closely aligned with the papers within the cluster. In technical terms, they refer to the papers with
the highest in-degree, where the in-degree of a paper is defined as the number of papers with the topic it is
connected to by the shared references. Note that even when items such as author keywords or references appear
in a given cluster with high frequency, the high frequency appearance may not be unique to that cluster, that is,
the same keyword might appear frequently in other clusters too. A sigma value was used to identify whether the
information is significant or significant, but note that it only indicates whether the item was more or less unique
to the clusters and should not be likened to a statistical test.

Results

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 712                                                      © ISLS
Bibliometric characteristics of the corpus and BC map
The most   cited reference of the whole  corpus was Vygotsky     (1978)  followed by  Dillenbourg     (1999) and
Kirschner, Jochems, Dillenbourg, and Kansellaar (2002). Vygotsky was cited in 124 times (14%) in the corpus,
twice  as much   as Dillenbourg (1999). The top  three keywords     used to describe the CSCL    research   were
collaborative/cooperative learning, computer-mediated  communication     (CMC), and  interactive environments.
These keywords appear in many CSCL clusters, indicating the homogeneous nature of the corpus. In terms of
publication sources, they were mostly published in Computers and Education, Computers in Human Behavior,
and Journal of Computer-Assisted Learning. The International Journal of CSCL (ijCSCL) and Journal of the
Learning Sciences (JLS) ranked fourth and fifth. The largest proportion of CSCL research (38%) were published
in Computers and Education. It is by no means a CSCL exclusive journal, but publishes a large numbers of papers
each (e.g., 12 issues per year, a contrast to 4 issues by ijCSCL). The CSCL research base is international with the
United States (25%) followed by Taiwan (13%) and the UK (8%) forming the top three countries in which the
authors were based.
          The BC map of CSCL research is presented in Figure 1. The map consists of 10 clusters of varying size.
Cluster labels were automatically selected from the most significant keywords used by the papers in the clusters.
Note that not all papers in the corpus were included in the BC map. Out of the 869 papers in the corpus, a subset
of the papers (n=122) did not share any references with other papers in the corpus and were not included in the
cluster map. There were also a set of small clusters, consisting of two or three papers, that were unconnected to
the rest of the clusters. Presence of such unconnected papers and clusters can be due to the inconsistencies in the
data because of slight variations and inconsistencies in reference formatting (e.g., presence or absence of middle
names, subtitles, etc.) that can make the same reference be treated differently by the BC algorithm.

                                Figure 1. BC Map of CSCL research clusters.

Major CSCL research clusters
The major clusters refer to the five biggest clusters. They represent major areas of CSCL research in which many
papers were  published.   They  were: knowledge  building    (145), argumentation (127),  interactive   learning
environment (127), content analysis (109), and mobile learning (90). Most of the research topics are concerned
with issues related to developing CSCL environments but with different foci. While the interactive learning
environments cluster is about generic interactive environment without strong association with specific technology
or tools, the knowledge building is closely tied with Knowledge Forum as well as accompanying learning theories
and pedagogy. The argumentation cluster reflects one of the major pedagogical foci in CSCL. The presence of a
separate mobile learning cluster suggests a strong interest in these technologies by themselves. Although CSCL
can occur both online and offline, much of the online collaboration is mediated by computers. The content analysis
cluster reflects interests in method needed to analyze data often produced in computer-mediated discourses.
          In addition to research topics or focus, these clusters also differ in the kinds of references they cited. A
few references such as Vygotsky (1978) appear in multiple clusters, but highly cited references differ across
clusters. This happened even when the clusters appear to study similar topics. For example, both the knowledge
building and interactive learning environments clusters are interested in building collaborative environments. In
the knowledge building cluster, theoretical papers about knowledge building communities and methodological
papers about design experiments were one of the among the most cited references. On the other hand, in the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  713                                                  © ISLS
interactive learning environments cluster, publications on self-efficacy and statistical power analysis were highly
cited (see Table   1). These  differences    in references  show   that the same    issue     of building a       collaborative
environment are designed and researched from quite different theoretical and methodological perspectives.
        Clusters also differ in terms of the contexts in which the research was conducted, that is, the country in
which authors are based in. As noted in the previous section, US-based researchers authored the majority of the
papers throughout the corpus, but European-based researchers were more visible in the argumentation cluster
producing 74% of the papers in this cluster. Researchers in Asia, especially from Taiwan, were prominent in the
interactive learning environment and mobile learning clusters. Cultural emphasis on different styles of discourse
and/or technology might have played a role, but more exploration is needed to better understand the causes of
these differences.

Table 1: Top three references (authors and titles) of the major CSCL clusters (number of publications)

      Clusters                                              Top Three References

   Knowledge        1. Vygotsky (1980). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes.
      building      2. Brown (1992). Design experiments.
       (145)        3. Scardamalia, & Bereiter (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities.

  Argumentation     1. Webb (1989). Peer interaction and learning in small groups.
       (127)        2. Cohen (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups.
                    3. Clark & Brennan (1991). Grounding in communication.

    Interactive     1. Bandura & Wessels (1997). Self-efficacy
      learning      2. Cohen (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioural sciences.
   environment      3. Vygotsky (1980). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes.
       (127)

 Content analysis   1. Hara et al. (2000). Content analysis of online discussion in an applied ed psy course.
       (109)        2. Rourke et al. (2001). Methodological issues in the content analysis of computer conference
                       transcripts.
                    3. Gunawardena et al. (1997). Analysis of a global online debate and the development of an
                       interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in computer
                       conferencing.

  Mobile learning   1. Zurita, & Nussbaum (2004). CSCL using wirelessly interconnected handheld computers.
        (90)        2. Dillenbourg (1999). Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches.
                    3. Vygotsky (1980). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes.
Note. Publications in the table only appear in the table (not in the reference section) due to space limitations.

Minor CSCL research clusters
Minor  clusters  refer to the five   smallest   clusters, which were:   Computer-mediated         communication        (n=66),
evidence-based argumentation (n=41), peer assessment (n=13), networks (n=10), and gross anatomy education
(n=7). Computer-mediated communication address various issues arise in computer-mediated communication
situations (e.g., social presence, dialogue patterns). The evidence-based argumentation cluster research online
discourse  and  computer-mediated     learning, but with   emphasis  on  structured  pedagogical     activities      including
argumentation, PBL, and/or inquiry. The rest of the minor clusters address feedback provided by peers (peer
assessment   cluster), networked    learning and  social   network analysis (networks     cluster),  and  education      in a
particular discipline (gross anatomy education cluster).
        These clusters were again differentiated by the references they cited. This difference is noticeable when
clusters with overlapping research topics were compared. As described earlier, computer-based communication
(CMC) and evidence-based argumentation both share as emphasis in online discourse, but differed in their top
references. In the CMC cluster, social and communication theories ranked high, whereas in the evidence-based
argumentation cluster, references on pedagogies (e.g., PBL or web-based inquiry) were highly cited. We can also
compare this cluster to the argumentation cluster, one of the major clusters, in which reviews and conceptual
papers played a bigger role in grounding the research (see Table 1). These differences represent different traditions
of argumentation research in CSCL and indicates how research examining the same topic such as argumentation
can be built on quite different intellectual traditions.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      714                                                           © ISLS
          Like major clusters, minor clusters varied in the county in which authors are based. While US based
works were the majority, European researchers were again more visible in the evidence-based argumentation and
networks cluster. Asian researchers were highly represented in the peer assessment cluster.

Summary and conclusion
In this paper, we examined CSCL research based on the references they share and presented a BC map of CSCL
research. The map showed that CSCL research is organized into ten clusters of research. They cover different
topics, but the   majority  of  the papers   addresses topics  related to knowledge  building,   interactive learning
environments, and argumentation. There were also clusters that represent a small but distinct research topics such
as peer assessment or gross anatomy education. BC analysis helped us to reveal these clusters and organizations
that did not receive much attention. Both minor and major clusters are part of CSCL research. We need to be more
mindful of integrating findings and lessons from all the clusters when we interpret and assess CSCL research.
          Some of the clusters, although addressing similar topics, formed distinct clusters because they cited
different references. Cited references show the intellectual backgrounds of the research. Many of them are related
to the theoretical and methodological approaches adopted in the research. The diversity in theoretical backgrounds
and methodology provide productive tensions from which new knowledge can emerge. At the same time, there is
a danger that they may remain as separate body of knowledge bases. They do not need to be merged into one, but
we need to make sure there are enough connections and awareness of each other within the field to ensure the
coherence of CSCL as a research field.
          The findings of the paper also showed that certain topics were published more in some journals over
others and that certain topics were more researched by researchers from certain countries and regions, hinting that
some   of  the  clustering may  not    be purely intellectual. Researchers   may value   certain research  questions,
theoretical perspectives   and/or   research methods   over others  depending   on their backgrounds    and  training.
Journals are also likely to establish its identity by the editors, editorial boards, and reviewers. These factors may
have been implicit in the past, but BC analysis revealed the influence of some of these factors. It will take time to
explore these further and interpret properly, but it a new analytical tool that we can use to understand how the
knowledge outcomes produced in research may interact with the process that produce the knowledge.

References
Chen, J., Wang, M., Kirschner, P. A., & Tsai, C. C. (2018). The role of collaboration, computer use, learning
          environments, and supporting strategies in CSCL: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research,
          88(6), 799-843.
Dillenbourg, P. (1999). Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches. advances in learning
          and instruction series. New York, NY: Elsevier Science.
Hmelo-Silver,    C. E.,  Jeong, H.,  McKeown,    J., Hartley,  K., Faulkner, R. T. & Andrade,    A. (under   review).
          Synergies among the pillars: A meta-synthesis of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning in STEM
          domains.
Kessler, M. M. (1963). Bibliographic coupling between scientific articles. American Documentation, 24, 123­
          131.
Kirschner, P. A., Jochems, W., Dillenbourg, P., & Kanselaar, G. (2002). Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support
          CSCL? Heerlen: Open University of the Netherlands.
Jeong,  H., Hmelo-Silver,    C. E.,  &  Yu   (2014). An  examination   of  CSCL  methodological   practices  and  the
          influence   of   theoretical  frameworks    2005­2009. International   Journal   of  Computer-Supported
          Collaborative Learning, 9(3), 305-334.
Tang, K. Y., Tsai, C. C., & Lin, T. C. (2014). Contemporary intellectual structure of CSCL research (2006­2013):
          A co-citation network analysis with an education focus. International Journal of Computer-Supported
          Collaborative Learning, 9(3), 335-36
Wise,   A.  F., &   Schwarz, B.   B.   (2017). Visions of CSCL:     eight provocations for the   future of  the field.
          International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(4), 423-467.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher mental process. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
          University.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (Grant# 2016R1D1A1B03935697) and US
National Science Foundation (US National Science Foundation (Grant # 1249492).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     715                                                   © ISLS
