Group Formation in the Digital Age: Relevant Characteristics,
Their Diagnosis, and Combination for Productive Collaboration
     Dimitra Tsovaltzi (organiser), Saarland University, Germany, d.tsovaltzi@edutech.uni-saarland.de
  Armin Weinberger (co-organiser), Saarland University, Germany, a.weinberger@edutech.uni-saarland.de
               Lara Schmitt, Saarland University, Germany, l.schmitt@edutech.uni-saarland.de
             Henrik Bellhäuser, Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, bellhaeuser@uni-mainz.de
              Adrienne Müller, Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, muadrien@uni-mainz.de
      Johannes Konert, Beuth University of Applied Sciences, johannes.konert@beuth-hochschule.de
                      René Röpke, RWTH Aachen University, roepke@cs.rwth-aachen.de
                          Hannie Gijlers, University of Twente, a.h.gijlers@utwente.nl
                           Elise Eshuis, University of Twente, e.h.eshuis@utwente.nl
                          Tessa Eysink, University of Twente, t.h.s.eysink@utwente.nl
                 Melanie Erkens, University of Duisburg-Essen, melanie.erkens@uni-due.de
                      Sven Manske, University of Duisburg-Essen, manske@collide.info
                      H. Ulrich Hoppe, University of Duisburg-Essen, hoppe@collide.info
                   Daniel Bodemer, University of Duisburg-Essen, bodemer@uni-due.de
            Sreecharan Sankaranarayanan, Carnegie Mellon University, sreechas@andrew.cmu.edu
                  Cameron Dashti, Carnegie Mellon University, cdashti1@andrew.cmu.edu
                    Chris Bogart, Carnegie Mellon University, cbogart@andrew.cmu.edu
                      Xu Wang, Carnegie Mellon University, xuwang@andrew.cmu.edu
                      Majd Sakr, Carnegie Mellon University, msakr@andrew.cmu.edu
                  Michael Hilton, Carnegie Mellon University, mhilton@andrew.cmu.edu
                    Carolyn Rosé, Carnegie Mellon University, cprose@andrew.cmu.edu
                   Jan van Aalst (discussant), University of Hong Kong, vanaalst@hku.hk

       Abstract: This symposium tackles a central topic in CSCL, group formation for productive
       collaborative  learning with   / in digital media. Traditional research  on  group formation  has
       investigated mostly separate learner characteristics as preconditions of learning. Combinations
       of different learner characteristics and of learner characteristics with collaborative processes
       have been less in focus. Considering such combinations is necessary to represent the complexity
       of group interactions and learning. Despite the digitalization of learning, there has been only
       few attempts to investigate the diagnostic information that mining learner texts and learning
       processes can contribute to addressing this complexity for optimal group formation, and to
       assign groups automatically based on multiple parameters simultaneously. This symposium
       brings together a multi-disciplinary and international consortium of researchers who all focus
       on group formation for computer supported collaborative learning. They complement each other
       in   investigating  different combinations   of learner characteristics, learning  processes  and
       automatic techniques for optimal group formation.

       Keywords: group formation, learning processes, automatic diagnostic, optimal grouping

Introduction

Symposium focus and major issues addressed
Group formation for productive collaboration has been a central topic in the research agenda of CSCL for a long
time. Early research shows that how a group of learners is formed principally influences collaborative learning,
and most results favor heterogeneous groups (e.g., Webb, 1982). However, learners tend to self-form homogenous
groups, which might not always foster learning (Bell, 2007). Learning success also strongly depends on group
learning processes, which develop throughout collaboration (e.g. Weinberger & Fischer, 2006). The digitalization
of society and the outspread of social media has emphasized the complexity of group interaction and learning.
Productive interactions are becoming extremely important in the age of shallow processing of information and
self-presentation, and need to be induced and sustained to warrant quality discussions (e.g., Greenhow, Robelia,
& Hughes, 2009; Tsovaltzi, Puhl, Judele, & Weinberger, 2014). The research focus is, hence shifting towards
identifying learner characteristics and processes that account for the complexity of interactions and can support
transactive processes that emphasize    communication   with   each other and   can increase quality discussions

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   719                                                 © ISLS
(Weinberger & Fischer, 2006; Fu, van Aalst, & Chan, 2016). Varying multiple learner characteristics for group
formation simultaneously, and on the fly "spying" the development of learning processes may help represent the
complexity  of  collaborative  learning  better.  New   technologies  provide   ways    to  form  groups   beyond  one-
dimensional  distinctions:  homogenous     vs.   heterogeneous.   Still, research   that investigates   diagnostic and
optimization techniques for online group formation (e.g, Konert, Bellhäuser, Röpke, Gallwas, & Zucik, 2016), or
tests that against self-organized groups (Siqin, van Aalst, & Chu, 2015) is sparse. Systematic research on learning
processes for group formation is also rare, and little research relates learning processes to group formation criteria
(Fransen, Weinberger, & Kirschner, 2013).
        This symposium looks at matching multiple learner characteristics through technological means and
investigates process characteristics to tap on the complexity of group interactions for group formation. It raises
the following questions: How do multiple learner characteristics need to be combined to leverage collaborative
learning? What learning processes are most relevant, and how should we combine characteristics and processes:
homogenously     vs. heterogeneously?    Are     there sequencing     effects  of   homogenous      and  heterogeneous
collaboration? How is the balance between productivity and learning opportunities of groups affected by the
complexity  of factors  influencing   group processes?   What    automatic   techniques  do  we  need   to handle  such
combinations and to mine for relevant information to optimize learning processes for small and larger groups, or
over longer periods of time?

Significance of the contributions
Each individual contribution addresses several of the above general questions and formulates concrete research
questions to test  them  empirically.   They   each contribute   significantly   to systematically   addressing   group
formation to account for complex group interactions with scientific rigor.
        Bellhäuser and colleagues look at forming groups automatically to optimize heterogeneity distribution.
How  do   homogenous    and  heterogeneous   combinations     of multiple   learner  characteristics  distributed  by a
complex   group-formation   algorithm   affect learning?   Measures      of personality  traits show  main   effects  of
heterogeneity on performance when extraversion and conscientiousness were manipulated in parallel.
        Gijlers  and  colleagues   examine  learning    processes  in a   jigsaw   variant. How   does   sequencing   of
homogeneous vs. heterogeneous grouping affect learning processes and outcomes? They show that sequencing
can cause  procedural   loses, but  quality during    homogenous   collaboration    relates  to  conceptually oriented
contributions in later heterogeneous collaboration, which, in turn, influences learning outcomes.
        Erkens and colleagues use text mining to form knowledge-heterogeneous groups and to support group
awareness: How can automatically diagnosed knowledge influence processes and outcomes of heterogeneous
groups? They report promising results on automated grouping and recommend which method should be used for
the additional visualization of co-learners' heterogeneity.
        Lara Schmitt and colleagues study collocated collaborative embodied learning with tablets and additional
cognitive support.   To what   extent does  heterogeneity  of bodily  processes    influence cognitive   processes and
learning outcomes? They point to differential effects of bodily and cognitive process heterogeneity that exemplify
the need investigate such processes heterogeneity and their interaction.
        Sankaranarayanan     and  colleagues   combine   automated    methods    to support  transactive   processes  in
collaborative work settings. They investigate conditions of balancing productivity while allowing possibilities for
learning to take place within a group. Can technological supporting scrutiny of processes and transactivity cater
for a good balance of productively working together and learning from each other? They are finding positive
results that transfer between different contexts.

Collective contribution towards the issues raised
Together the contributions disentangle a central topic in the learning sciences, group formation for collaborative
learning. They tackle the question from technological and psychological perspectives. They use a brought range
of learning contexts and methods. All studies use innovative grouping variables and designs. They utilize either
automatic group   formation,   or technology-based     communication,    or  both.  They   indicate best candidates   of
information that group-formation algorithms can draw upon to deliver optimal grouping, i.e. types of learner
characteristics and productive learning processes, and of potent heterogeneous vs. homogenous combinations.
The contributions, hence, present a wide spectrum of research while sharing a cutting edge focus to foster quality
discussion in complex collaborative interactions through on the fly evaluation of processes and group formation.
        The discussion will attempt a synthesis of the presented research, while maintaining a critical eye to
pinpoint weaknesses and gaps that still need to be addressed before a comprehensive account on the topic can be
claimed. This will be a source of inspiration for further research, but also for collaboration possibilities among
and beyond   the contributors. The    discussant, Jan  Van Aalst, is  a  leading  researcher  in the learning sciences

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     720                                                    © ISLS
enjoying a broad overview of the developments in the field through his editorial work. He is currently publishing
research, cited here, in group formation. He is, therefore, aptly suited to provide insightful, productive critiques,
lead the discussion and help us advance our common approach. Other researchers can profit and orient their own
future research around the proposed  further possibilities. Presentations   will be 12  min. long, including   an
introduction to the topic. A 20 min. discussion will follow, which will also be opened up for the audience.

Birds of a feather learn well together? An experimental study on the effect of
homogeneous and heterogeneous learning group composition on satisfaction
and performance
Henrik Bellhäuser, Adrienne Müller, Johannes Konert, and René Röpke

Collaborative learning is an effective learning strategy, well-established in research, and frequently implemented
in academic learning settings. However, one aspect of collaborative learning that has received only little attention
from both researchers and practitioners is the question of composition of learning groups: Which participants
should form a group together so that all of them profit the most from the group? Group composition is particularly
important because when students are free to form groups by themselves they tend to form homogeneous groups
(Hinds, Carley, Krackhardt, & Wholey, 2000). This phenomenon, often called homophily, can lead to undesirable
outcomes because heterogeneous groups tend to perform better than homogeneous groups (Bell, 2007).
         In our approach, we focus on two personality traits as grouping criteria that have been investigated the
most in literature on group composition effects: Extraversion and conscientiousness. For extraversion, researchers
have postulated that heterogeneous distribution within each learning group should be beneficial (Kramer, Bhave,
& Johnson, 2014). It is argued that extraverted persons often engage in leadership behavior and that conflicts may
arise when too many group members exert leadership. For conscientiousness, one hypothesis is that homogeneous
distributions should lead to better outcomes (Prewett, Walvoord, Stilson, Rossi, & Brannick, 2009). The presumed
mechanism is that group members with the same level of conscientiousness can easily agree on a common goal
for the group work (e.g. high achievement goals for highly conscientious groups).
One important point of critique towards these hypotheses is that they were derived solely based on correlational
studies. Experimental  approaches, that would  allow for    causal effects, are  still missing in  the literature.
Experimental variation of group formation requires complex algorithms. In our interdisciplinary approach, we
therefore developed a software that is capable of randomly splitting the population into several subpopulations in
which different predefined criterions can be applied for group formation. Data is collected via questionnaires to
diagnose extraversion and conscientiousness for each person. The algorithm then optimizes the formation of
groups respecting homogeneity for conscientiousness and heterogeneity for extraversion.

Method and results
In the present study, N=430 students in an online mathematics preparation course were randomly assigned to one
of nine conditions in a completely balanced 3x3 design, with extraversion and conscientiousness each distributed
homogeneously, heterogeneously, or ignored for group formation (in the latter condition, the algorithm did not
apply restrictions for this criterion, hence groups in this condition could be either homogeneous, heterogeneous
or in between). This design allows for the analysis of the two main effects of heterogeneity of extraversion and
conscientiousness, and of the interaction effect between the two variables. To increase test power, we intentionally
included conditions that were hypothesized to be maleficial. As results of the voluntary mathematics preparation
course did not have implications for the subsequent university courses, this experimental design was considered
acceptable from an ethical point of view. Students enrolled voluntarily in the preparation course to recapitulate
mathematics school knowledge before the actual university lectures began. The preparation course was carried
out completely online and included a large collection of instructions and self-tests to work with individually.
Additionally, participants were asked to complete three weekly group assignments with complex modelling tasks
that allowed for different approaches towards the solution. The groups of four members each were free in their
choice of communication channel; the majority chose online communication (forum posts, video chat) due to
distance between places of residence. As outcome measure, participants rated their satisfaction with the quality
of group collaboration on a 6-point Likert scale and retrospectively estimated their time investment for the group
assignments. Furthermore, quantity of assignments handed in (0 to 3) and respective quality (rated by tutors on a
10-point Likert scale) was collected as measures of performance.
For the 3x3 ANOVA, we found no significant main effects for any of the dependent variables, but instead several
significant interaction effects that were difficult to interpret. For a deeper insight into the data, we therefore split
up the design in three separate parts: Part 1 included the two conditions where conscientiousness was ignored,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  721                                                  © ISLS
thereby using extraversion as the sole grouping criterion (homogeneous vs. heterogeneous). Inversely, part 2
included those  two   conditions where  extraversion   was  ignored and    conscientiousness  was  used  as  the sole
grouping criterion (homogeneous vs. heterogeneous). Lastly, part 3 included those four conditions where both
criterions were manipulated simultaneously (each of them either homogeneously or heterogeneously).
         For part 1, consistent with our hypothesis, we found positive effects for heterogeneous extraversion on
performance, but no effects on time investment and satisfaction. For part 2, also consistent with our hypothesis,
positive effects for homogeneous conscientiousness were shown on performance and satisfaction, with no effect
on time investment. However, when both variables were manipulated simultaneously in part 3, results partly
contradicted our   hypotheses:   We   found   positive  main   effects  for heterogeneous     extraversion   and  for
heterogeneous   conscientiousness    on   performance,    satisfaction,  and  time     investment.   Thus,   whether
conscientiousness should be distributed homogeneously or rather heterogeneously seemed to be dependent on
whether extraversion is manipulated simultaneously or not. These findings will be critically evaluated in the light
of a replication study that was conducted recently. Preliminary analyses from the second study seem to support
parts of the results of the first study. Implications for future research and application in teaching settings will be
discussed.

Knowledge exchange of students using the differentiated Jigsaw approach
Hannie Gijlers, Elise Eshuis, and Tessa Eysink

Active participation is an important factor related to successful collaborative learning. Students with different
ability levels might not benefit equally from group work (Tomlinson et al., 2003). We can compose homogeneous
and heterogeneous ability groups, each with their own advantages and drawbacks. Homogeneous ability groups
make it possible to adjust the material, and level of scaffolding to the needs of the students (Lou et al., 1996).
Research   indicates  that homogeneous    grouping is  effective when    combined    with   tailored instruction and
scaffolding (Kulik   & Kulik,  1991).  Within homogeneous      groups,  students are more   likely to build  on  their
partner's contribution because students have access to comparable knowledge and skills, and discussions are based
on equality. Without appropriate support, below average students in homogeneous groups might have insufficient
knowledge and skills to complete the task. In heterogeneous groups, below average students might benefit from
high ability peers because they might receive help and feedback (Saleh, Lazonder, & de Jong, 2005).         The tutee,
tutor relation is more likely to occur between below average and above average peers, average peers might be left
out of these tutoring conversations (Lou et al., 2006). The jigsaw is a collaborative learning technique that is often
used to promote participation in collaborative learning tasks. By requesting students to study different parts of the
material that are required to complete the final group task interdependence between group members is created.
Each learner can make a unique contribution. In the STIP approach (Dutch Acronym: Samenwerken tijdens Taak-
, Inhoud- en Procesdifferentiatie), working in homogeneous and heterogeneous ability groups is combined in a so
called differentiated jigsaw  (Eysink, Hulsbeek, &    Gijlers, 2017).   In  this approach,  students  first construct
knowledge   in homogeneous     groups,  with  materials and    instruction tailored  to the students'  ability  level.
Subsequently,  students    exchange their knowledge    in heterogeneous     groups  in  order to complete    a group
assignment. Different subtopics are available for the homogeneous phase to ensure that students can provide a
unique contribution to the heterogeneous group.
   In the present study we focus on the effect of the STIP-approach on the learning processes and knowledge
gains of students with different ability levels. Resulting in three research questions:
   1)    What is the effect of the STIP approach on the knowledge gains of students?
   2)    Are there differences in knowledge exchange processes between heterogeneous groups and are they
         related to individual knowledge gains of the students?
   3)    Are students' learning outcomes of the homogenous phase related to their learning process and learning
         gains of the heterogeneous phase?

Method and results
A comparison was made between the STIP condition (N = 95) and a control condition (N = 149) (grade 4, 9-10
years old). Heterogeneous groups consisted of one below average student, three average students and one above
average student. Students participated in 6 STIP modules, each consisting of 2 lessons) about STEAM related
topics like the weather. Students in the STIP condition worked in homogeneous groups during the first lesson and
heterogeneous groups during the second lesson. Heterogeneous groups consisted of one below average student,
three average students and one above average student. In the present study we focus on the sixth and final module

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   722                                                    © ISLS
(about the weather).  Teachers in the control condition taught the same content but used their regular teaching
approach (business as usual).
         Student products  from  the  homogeneous    and   heterogeneous   groups  were   scored  as indicators     of
performance in these groups. Furthermore, an individual knowledge pre- and posttest was administered. Group
work was recorded with digital cameras, students' contributions to the overall discussion and more specifically
their exchanged  knowledge    was coded   to provide  information    about the amount     and nature  of     students'
contributions to the group work.
         With respect to the learning outcomes it was found that students in the control condition reached higher
learning gains compared to students in the STIP condition (F (1, 242) = 22.84, p <.001). Although the total time
of the lessons was shorter in the control condition, the time students actively engaged with learning material was
higher in this condition. Video analysis revealed that in the STIP condition a lot of time was needed to organize
seating arrangements, collect materials students created in the homogeneous phase etc. Zooming in on the results
of the STIP condition, we found a positive relation between the amount of contributions made by individual
students and their individual learning gains (r=.649, p<.001).    Moreover, the   quality of  the outcomes      of the
homogeneous   group    was positively  related to the  number     of conceptual   oriented   contributions     in  the
heterogeneous groups (r = .588, p < .001). The quality of the results of the heterogeneous collaboration was
positively related to students' individual learning gains on the knowledge tests (r=.222, p < .047). The first results
of the video analyses and products of the heterogeneous groups shows that students engage in a high amount of
coordinative activities. A first exploration of the data suggests that in the knowledge exchange phase no significant
differences were found in the amount knowledge exchange related utterances made by students from varying
competence levels (F (2, 25) = 2.50, p = .102). At the moment, coding of the process data is fine-tuned and further
analysis is performed to gain insight in the participation levels of students with different ability levels.

Impact of text-mining based group formation and group awareness on learning
in small groups
Melanie Erkens, Sven Manske, H. Ulrich Hoppe, and Daniel Bodemer

Small group learning is a powerful educational approach, if collaborating students are a good match and know
enough about each other's knowledge to use the group beneficially. One measure to ensure that the characteristics
of participants are distributed across groups in a favorable way is to form groups of students with heterogeneous
knowledge  (cf.  Dillenbourg  &  Jermann, 2007).  In  particular, learners with   complementary    knowledge       are
expected to learn by compensating for gaps in individual knowledge through explaining missing concepts to each
other (Ploetzner, Dillenbourg, Preier, & Traum, 1999). However, it is difficult for learners to find out about
knowledge levels and knowledge differences on their own. Cognitive group awareness tools provide learners with
such information by collecting, transforming, and visualizing socio-cognitive variables and feeding them back to
the group, frequently allowing the learners for comparison (cf. Bodemer, Janssen, & Schnaubert, 2018). Thereby,
these tools support learners discovering gaps and expertise in knowledge, which can improve knowledge exchange
and knowledge acquisition. It thus seems reasonable from a learner's and teacher's view to combine knowledge-
complementary    group formation  with group   awareness   support.  However,  if teachers want   to support      their
students with both measures in class, this is a burden for them as they have to collect information on the students'
knowledge, enabling them to form appropriate learning groups and to provide feedback to students about their
knowledge. A facilitation of both could lie in automated technologies such as text-mining methods that allow the
efficient formation of groups of learners with a magnitude of text dissimilarities and to support group awareness
by visualizing degrees to which learners wrote on specific topics (Erkens, Bodemer, & Hoppe, 2016; Manske &
Hoppe, 2017). We investigated the suitability of text-mining methods in two studies. The first study examined the
research questions: Do text mining-based group formation and group awareness visualizations have an effect on
knowledge acquisition? In the second study, we were interested in optimizing the feedback and investigated the
research question: Which text-mining method provides the most accurate group awareness visualizations?

Method and results
Regarding the first research question, we assumed that the effect of text mining-based support on knowledge
acquisition becomes larger the greater the heterogeneity of a dyad is. This hypothesis was tested in a collaborative
classroom scenario with 54 dyads discussing the topic of climate change that were either formed of students with
high knowledge heterogeneity and provided with awareness information (supported group) or of students with
random   knowledge   heterogeneity   and without  awareness   information    provided   (unsupported   group).      A
moderation model with group membership (supported / unsupported) as independent variable, text dissimilarity
as moderator and knowledge acquisition as dependent variable explained 21 % of the variance of knowledge

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  723                                                      © ISLS
acquisition caused by the discussion (R2 = .21, F(3, 50) = 4.53, p = .007). However, since there was no significant
effect of the interaction term, we included only the main effect terms into the analysis. This model explained 20
% of the variance of knowledge acquisition caused by the collaboration (R2 = .20, F(2, 51) = 6.40, p = .003) with
both group membership ( = .327, t(53) = 2.61, p = .012) and dissimilarity ( = .279, t(53) = 2.21, p = .031)
significantly predicting knowledge acquisition. Regarding the second research question, we used texts created by
22 students   in a similar  collaboration   to compare   the  quality  of  automatic semantic   extraction    approaches
compared to a correct (manual) classification. To assess the quality of the text analysis approaches, we used recall
(`true positive  rate'), precision (`true positive accuracy')   and   the F-measure   (a weighted   harmonic   mean   of
precision and recall) on the sets of extracted concepts of each method (automatic extraction) compared to the set
of relevant concepts from a manual coding. The text analysis approaches used are network text analysis (`NTA'),
ontology-enriched NTA and DBPedia Spotlight. The ontology-enriched NTA uses an ontology created by domain
experts in order to increase the accuracy of the NTA. The ontology encodes the domain knowledge structured as
synonym-term-category triplets in the domain of the learning context. DBPedia Spotlight is a semantic extraction
method, which spots keywords in a text using an ontology based on Wikipedia. The results indicate that the
ontology-enriched NTA performed best in precision (84.4%), recall (44,2%), and F-measure (56,6%).
         Overall,  text   mining-based    support  seems  suitable  to  collect,  transform, and  visualize    cognitive
information   from  educational    data for supporting   teachers   in their  challenging  task  to  form  knowledge-
heterogeneous groups and to visualize co-learners' cognitive information for better group awareness. Regarding
knowledge acquisition, the results show that text-mining generated knowledge heterogeneity is positively related
to learning, either with or without additionally supported group awareness. In addition, the results illustrate that
group awareness support can increase knowledge acquisition. Regarding the visualization of information, it was
shown that collecting cognitive information by using ontology-enriched NTA provided the most accurate values.

Effects of process heterogeneity in collaborative embodied learning with
tablets
Lara Schmitt, Dimitra Tsovaltzi, and Armin Weinberger

Learner  characteristics  may  affect   learning processes    and outcomes    in collaborative  settings. Learner  prior
characteristics, like prior knowledge and attitude to collaborative learning (Harrison, Price, Gavin, & Florey,
2002; Webb, 1982), have been tested extensively. Heterogeneous combination of these characteristics influence
cognitive processes, but results are inconsistent. They seem to heavily depend on the development of cognitive
processes during   collaboration   (Cheng,  Lam,   &   Chan,   2008),  but also  in interaction with bodily   processes
(Niedenthal, Barsalou, Winkielman, Krauth-Gruber, & Ric, 2005). However, little is known about heterogeneous
combinations of embodied processes, i.e. mixed cognitive and mixed bodily processes. Process heterogeneity may
impact the further development of learning processes in co-located collaborative settings where bodily expression
is innate. We investigate process heterogeneity to inform automatic group formation in embodied learning.
         Besides   shallow  cognitive   processing,    bodily expression   of emotion    and gesturing    are crucial in
describing spatial elements of a situation accurately, which is described as deep processing. Notwithstanding
learner prior characteristics, task conditions    like technological   affordances, verbalization prompts     and group
processes, may lead to deep processing (Niedenthal et al, 2005). When the task representation is explained to a
partner to reach a common embodied action, deep embodied processing and learning are promoted. Explaining
may be especially necessary when partners are heterogeneous with regard to their bodily expression and cognitive
processing and cannot assume a common ground. Previous studies on proportional thinking with tablets, tested
the effects of embodied processes using the `Proportion' app (Rick, Kopp, Schmitt, Weinberger, 2015). Users
directly manipulated two bars to bodily experience their proportional relation. A pedagogical agent, a wise owl,
provided verbalization prompts to elicit explanations about physical actions in the app, and foster abstraction from
embodied experiences. The studies highlighted a high potential of heterogeneous embodied processes for learning
(Rick et al, 2015), and showed learning gains from embodied learning. Verbalization prompts increased cognitive
processes (quality of discussions), and bodily expression of emotion (Schmitt & Weinberger, 2018).
         Here, we test the effects of heterogeneous bodily processes on the quality of cognitive processes, as well
as the effects of heterogeneous bodily processes and of heterogeneous cognitive processes on performance.

Method and results
A sample of n=80 participants (around 10 years old) learned collaboratively for 40 minutes with `Proportion'.
They   physically  manipulated  proportional   quantities and   received   verbalization prompts  requesting    them  to
explain, summarize, and generalize their actions to prompt deep embodied processing of the task representation.
Heterogeneity was observed in group processes. Pre- and a post- math tests as well as surveys were applied

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      724                                                    © ISLS
individually. We     analyzed embodied processes   (bodily   expression   of emotions), and   cognitive processes
(epistemic quality, transactivity, off-task behavior). Coding schemes with sufficient inter-rater reliability were
used to measure emotions and off-task behavior, focusing on gestures and gaze, as well as epistemic quality and
transactivity, focusing on content of discussions and on co-constructing explanations. Regarding performance
variables, we analyzed knowledge outcome and knowledge convergence (math tests), and efficiency (number of
solved problems). Variables were aggregated at dyad level. Process heterogeneity and knowledge convergence
were determined with the Coefficient of Variation (CoV, Weinberger, Stegmann, & Fischer, 2007). We split the
sample into two sub-groups: homogeneous (lower ~50% of CoV), vs. heterogeneous (upper ~50% of CoV).
         MANOVAs showed a large overall significant effect of heterogeneity of bodily processes on quality
of  cognitive processes:  F(3,26)=4.732,   p=.009,  Pillai's Trace=.353,  p²=.353.   A  large negative  effect on
transactivity just missed significance: F(1,28)=3.796, p=.061, p²=.119. Consistent with theoretical claims about
the interaction   of bodily and  cognitive processes, heterogeneity    of bodily  processes  influences cognitive
processes, but rather groups with homogeneous bodily processes were more cognitively transactive by trend.
Possibly, homogeneity in bodily expression frees space up for shared cognitive processing. There was also an
overall significant effect of heterogeneity of bodily processes on performance: F(3,31)=3.858, p=.019, Pillai's
Trace=.272, p²=.272. As expected, there was a large significant effect on efficiency, F(1,33)=9.179, p=.005,
p²=.218, but an effect on knowledge outcomes could not be found. Heterogeneous groups with regard to bodily
processes tended to solve more problems in the embodied learning app. This deep embodied learning did not
transfer to cognitive  knowledge  outcomes   in the posttest,  which  aligns  with situated cognition.  Regarding
heterogeneity of cognitive processes, we found a large significant effect of heterogeneity of epistemic quality
on performance: F(3,30)=3.096, p=.042, Pillai's Trace=.236, p²=.236. A medium negative effect on knowledge
outcomes just missed significance, F(1,32)=4.025, p=.053, p²=.112), and there was a large negative effect on
knowledge convergence, F(1,32)=8.120, p=.008, p²=.202). There were no effects of transactivity or task focus
on performance. Unexpectedly, homogeneous groups with regard to epistemic quality tended to learn more, which
increases the possibility for more similar knowledge scores within groups. The results surprisingly showed some
negative  effects of  embodied  heterogeneous processes,    bodily and cognitive.  Investigating heterogeneity of
embodied processes may help to avoid false assumptions on group formation for collocated collaboration.

CSCL Gets to Work: Towards Collaborative Learning with Working
Professionals
Sreecharan Sankaranarayanan, Cameron Dashti, Chris Bogart, Xu Wang, Majd Sakr, Michael Hilton, and Carolyn
Rosé

Automation is blamed for the projected loss of 5 million jobs by 2020 as argued by the World Economic Forum.
As educational technologists however, we adopt a more optimistic view of its place in the workplace, even as
automation in terms of group formation and support for collaboration gets cast in a dystopian light (Rummel et
al., 2016). The ultimate aim of our work is to inject learning opportunities in work settings with particular focus
on technical fields like software development. We start by investigating how technology can support the correct
balance between productivity and learning in project-based learning contexts. Group formation figures into this
with the idea that the extent to which working groups provide an environment that is conducive to learning is
related to the plethora of personal and contextual factors discussed within the contributions to this symposium. If
technology is effective in placing individuals into project groups that bring out the best in them, that assignment
can lead to advantages, both in terms of learning and productivity. Our own work on team assignment has been
developed and tested in lab studies and real instructional contexts (Wen et al., 2016). In our past work, observed
exchange of transactive conversational contributions in one context when used as an indicator of collaboration
potential in order to form teams in a second context resulted in significant improvements to group products and
processes over randomly assigned teams (Wen et al, 2016). In this contribution, we focus on a new paradigm for
collaborative learning which we call Online Mob Programming (OMP) in which group work is conducted online
where the collaboration can be instrumented to support team assignment, role taking, and work structuring.
         Learning in the context of group work is a concern both in industry and in the more familiar confines of
formal learning in project courses. While collaborative project based learning provides opportunities to foster
needed teamwork skills, it also exposes other difficulties such as management overhead and conflict, among
others. These challenges are exacerbated online and at scale, two contexts that have become more prominent in
computer science education. In industry, the conflict is even more keenly felt, and the pressures of productivity
frequently undercut parallel efforts to provide training opportunities for employees. The challenge in our work is

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   725                                                 © ISLS
to create a context in which learning and productivity can be jointly optimized within group work and the emerging
trend from industry we build on is Mob Programming (Zuill, 2016).

Method and results
We have begun formal investigation of the OMP paradigm in the context of a 6-week free online Cloud Computing
course offered to working professionals in the summer of 2018. We thus first ensure that the industry-inspired
paradigm   can be  cast in  a pedagogical  setting to  simultaneously   prioritize productivity and learning.  The
instrumentation enables instructors to check on group processes and progress, but also allows for automated forms
of support for group learning such as Conversational Agents (Wang et al., 2017). OMP involves students assuming
and rotating through distinct roles responsible for brainstorming potential ideas, deciding on a path forward and
implementing   the selected  path thus providing   the benefit of a  structured collaboration that manages   group
processes for relatively large groups of 4-6 students. Within this paradigm, automated group assignment could be
used to place students in teams that bring out the best in them based on the prediction of collaboration potential
from observed exchange of transactive contributions in a class discussion forum (Sankaranarayanan et al., 2018).
        In an instructional context, we cast OMP as a form of collaborative learning where 4-6 participants
assume different roles to collectively contribute a solution to a programming challenge. In this way, cognition is
distributed, and group members with differing abilities are able to contribute in different roles while benefiting
from the support of the group.
        Results from the study show evidence of success with students following the structure of OMP and the
mob setup scaling to groups having 3 to 6 participants. Further, subjective feedback from students indicate that
they are teaching and learning from their peers and shifting from focusing solely on productivity to a combination
of productivity and learning. The success of the paradigm in this context has prompted us to further investigate
OMP in the undergraduate computer science context where it will be offered as a part of a semester-long project-
based Cloud Computing course. We are now conducting an experimental study where we compare the OMP
paradigm with automated transactivity based team assignment with OMP and randomly assigned teams and an
individual condition as a control. At the symposium we will present an experience report that summarizes our key
takeaways allowing instructors and other researchers to use these pedagogically valuable insights as well as join
us in further investigating and adopting the paradigm for their classrooms.

Selected references
Bell, S. T. (2007). Deep-level composition variables as predictors of team performance: a meta-analysis. The
        Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(3), 595­615. http://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.92.3.595
Fransen, J., Weinberger, A., & Kirschner, P. A. (2013). Team Effectiveness and Team Development in CSCL.
        Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 9-24.
Fu, E. L. F., van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2016). Toward a classification of discourse patterns in asynchronous
        online discussions. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 11(4), 441­
        478. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-016-9245-3
Greenhow, C., Robelia, B., & Hughes, J. E. (2009). Learning, Teaching, and Scholarship in a Digital Age: Web
        2.0 and Classroom Research: What Path Should We Take Now? Educational Researcher, 38(4), 246­
        259. http://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X09336671
Konert, J., Bellhäuser, H., Röpke, R., Gallwas, E., & Zucik, A. (2016). MoodlePeers: Factors relevant in learning
        group formation for improved learning outcomes, satisfaction and commitment in E-learning scenarios
        using GroupAL. In K. Verbert, M. Sharples, & T. Klobucar (Eds.), Adaptive and Adaptable Learning:
        Proc. of the 11th European Conf. on Techn. Enhanced Learning (EC-TEL 2016) (pp. 390­396). Lyon,
        France: Springer LNCS, Berlin. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45153-4_32
Siqin, T., van Aalst, J.,  &  Chu, S.  K. W.  (2015).  Fixed   group and  opportunistic collaboration in   a CSCL
        environment.    International Journal of Computer-Supported     Collaborative  Learning,   10(2), 161­181.
        http://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-014-9206-7
Tsovaltzi, D., Puhl, T., Judele, R., & Weinberger, A. (2014). Group awareness support and argumentation scripts
       for individual preparation of arguments in Facebook. Computers & Education, 76, 108-118.
Webb, N. M. (1982). Group composition, group interaction and achievement in cooperative small groups. Journal
        of Educational Psychology, 74, 475-484.
Weinberger,  A.,  &  Fischer,  F. (2006). A   framework   to   analyse argumentative   knowledge   construction in
        computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46, 71-95.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   726                                                  © ISLS
