      Designing Representations in Deeply Disciplinary Educational
                                                     Games
                    Ravit Golan Duncan, Rutgers University, ravit.duncan@gse.rutgers.edu
                      Frieda Reichsman, The Concord Consortium, freichsman@concord.org
                Kiley McElroy-Brown, The Concord Consortium, kmcelroy-brown@concord.org
                      Veronica Cavera, Rutgers University, veronica.cavera@gse.rutgers.edu

         Abstract: Educational games are common in classrooms and have been extensively studied in
         multiple domains. The Geniventure game was developed to support student learning of core
         concepts  in  genetics  via challenges   that  engage    students with   genetic  phenomena      at the
         molecular level. A core feature of the game is that it simulates behavior of molecular entities
         (genes, proteins, organelles) with high disciplinary fidelity to how these mechanisms really
         operate in the cell. In this sense, it is deeply disciplinary. The commitment to disciplinary
         fidelity presents   design  challenges  regarding    the  ways in    which   entities, activities,  and
         mechanisms are represented and manipulated in the game across the biological organization
         levels. We discuss five distinct types of design challenges that we identified based on data
         from  focus  groups  with   students who    played   the game  and   provide  design    heuristics  for
         addressing these challenges.

Introduction
The development and research on educational games has increased substantially in the past decade (for recent
reviews see Clark, Tanner-Smith, & Killingsworth, 2016; Ravyse, Blignaut, Leendertz, & Woolner, 2017). This
work has identified key features that make games more engaging and productive for learning such as having
them be pleasantly frustrating, involving well-ordered problems, and providing the player with agency, to name
a few (Gee, 2005). This research has also provided some guidelines for the design of successful educational
games (e.g. Kafai, 2006; Winn, 2009).
         In addition to these critical aspects of game design, we wish to draw attention to considerations of
designing deeply disciplinary games and in particular designing representations of key disciplinary entities and
processes in these games. We use the term deeply disciplinary to refer to games that aim to engage students with
key disciplinary phenomena and in which the game play involves manipulating entities and mechanisms within
these phenomena    that may   be  unfamiliar  to    students. This  construct draws    on  the  notion   of  conceptually
integrated  games,    which   integrate  domain     concepts   and  relationships     into  the  core    mechanics    and
representations of the game (e.g. Habgood & Ainsworth, 2011) and expands it to include a stronger emphasis on
the representation  of  domain-specific  entities   and   mechanisms   in  ways   that maintain    high   fidelity to the
structure, function, and interactions of these entities. For example, the game Geniventure engages students in the
genetic study of drakes, the model organism for dragons; students directly manipulate chromosomes, genes, and
proteins in order  to change  the   drakes' traits. The   representations  of these  genetic    entities in the game  are
therefore a central component of making the phenomena accessible on the one hand, while maintaining fidelity
to the disciplinary entities represented on the other. The tension between accessibility of the representations and
their disciplinary  fidelity generates   interesting   challenges   in  terms    of design   decisions      regarding the
representations and the linking of representations across the multiple user interfaces of the game.
         Research on students' understanding of disciplinary inscriptions (such as graphs, models, equations)
provides some insights that can help inform these design decisions. For example, zoom-in features, alternative
perspectives, and control of speed of animations/simulations can help facilitate perception and comprehension
of important disciplinary entities and processes (Tversky, Bauer Morrisony, & Betrancour, 2002). Similarly,
tighter coordination and coherence between multiple representations (especially when visualizing phenomena at
the macro   and   molecular  levels) is also  important   to  reducing  cognitive   load   and  helping   students  make
appropriate connections (Kozma, 2003). In addition, it is often difficult to provide, within the representations,
all the needed  conceptual   and social resources    that can  help convey    the utility  and  purpose   of disciplinary
representations/inscriptions (Roth   &  Bowen,   1999).   However,   much     of this research   was     conducted in the
context of students using and creating inscriptions within, mostly traditional, instructional pedagogies such as
the use of inscriptions, animations, or simulations to explain a science concept. Moreover, the research on using
computerized models for understanding molecular-level representations and ideas predominantly comes from
chemistry (Barnea & Dori, 1996; Williamson & Abraham, 1995; Wu et al., 2000), whereas only a few studies
deal specifically with molecular biology (e.g. Pallant & Tinker, 2004; Tsui & Treagust, 2004). Therefore, while

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      73                                                      © ISLS
relevant, this  body   of work  does  not   address the  specific challenges   associated  with  using disciplinary
representations in game contexts, which are not as conducive to traditional ways of scaffolding and providing
information.  In such  environments,   engagement   with    disciplinary representations and phenomena    is  in the
context of a game challenge and students figure out the key ideas through game play. Exiting the game play to
"instruct" or explain the representations or processes can be distracting and problematic in terms of motivation.
          Here  we present  findings regarding  middle   school  students'   understandings  of representations  and
processes  in a  genetics game  and  their  implications for the  design  of representations in deeply disciplinary
games. The online game, Geniventure, is a fictional and narrative-based game in which students are enlisted to
help breed dragons with traits that can help them in the struggle against a nearby kingdom's attacks. As the
game opens, students find themselves inside the Mission Control room of a secret underground headquarters for
dragon development and breeding. A diverse cast of characters presents students with a series of challenges that
address a need for specific traits and an understanding of how those traits are achieved via genetic instructions.
Students "travel" to different rooms in the underground compound to breed drakes, manipulate genes, or zoom
into cell simulations to interact directly with proteins and DNA. Student actions in a challenge are tracked and
upon completion of a challenge students are awarded "crystals" based on how well they performed the task.
          The game is designed to help students develop core understandings in genetics including patterns of
inheritance (alleles on paired chromosomes control each trait), how random assortment of chromosomes into
sex cells results in the observed probabilities of the expression of traits, and how genes on those chromosomes
code for proteins that bring about those traits. In this article, we focus predominantly on the game challenges
involving proteins (described in more detail below). We conducted focus group interviews with three groups of
students who played the protein challenges with the aim of finding out how they understood the nature and role
of proteins in mediating the genetic traits involved in the challenges. Our research question is: how are students
interpreting and responding to the different representations of molecular entities, mechanisms, and levels of the
phenomena (genes, protein, cell, trait) embodied in the game? We next describe the online game, Geniventure,
and some of the key design decisions that were made in developing the representations of the phenomena.

The Geniventure game: Protein challenges
The protein   challenges  are designed to  engage   students with the mechanisms   that   connect  genes  and traits.
Genes are DNA sequences that specify instructions to the cell for building protein molecules. Proteins are the
workhorses of the cell; they have many different functions, and their functions are closely tied to their structure.
Seemingly small differences in the DNA sequences of genes can have profound effects on an encoded protein's
structure and in turn on its function. Different versions of a gene, called alleles, produce different traits by virtue
of these differences in the structure and function of the proteins they encode. Thus, proteins are an essential link
for productive reasoning about how genes confer traits on individuals.
          Proteins are often  characterized by experts   as molecular machines   (e.g.,  Goodsell, 2009). This   is a
useful analogy since students understand that machines have functions, and that the form or shape of a machine
is essential to its function. In designing the look and feel of proteins in the game, we chose to emphasize their
machine-like qualities by using simple machine structures like gears, and we designed their shapes to match

                                          Figure 1. The size challenge.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    74                                                   © ISLS
very obviously with   their function. We  used color  gradients and softened edges   to  convey    their biological
nature; influenced by Goodsell's (2009) use of color in illustrating actual protein structures.
        The protein mechanisms we targeted in the game are situated in drake scale cells (analogous to human
and other animal's skin cells) and focus on the production and transport of melanin. We chose drake color as a
trait for our protein focus because it is a readily discernable trait and it is constantly and actively maintained by
cells through protein-based mechanisms. In the game, students are exposed to the proteins "doing their jobs"
and then are given the opportunity to either interfere with what the proteins are doing or to help them along the
way, all with the goal of changing the color that the cell produces. The melanosome organelle stores melanin
and changes in color based on how much melanin is present. In the game, there are two types of challenges that
involve proteins. In the first, which  we call the  "size"  challenge, students try to create    smaller  or bigger
melanosomes. We have reduced the complexity of the mechanism to consist of two proteins, both of which are
active in real organisms. One is an enzyme that synthesizes melanin, represented in the game by a set of gears
that can assemble melanin, and its "helper protein" that provides stability to the gear enzyme, represented by a
shaft that holds the gears together (see Figure 1). The proteins build melanin, which is represented as stars, by
assembling the triangular building blocks (white triangles) into melanin stars. Melanosomes change color from
orange to gray depending on how many melanin stars are in them; bigger melanosomes are darker gray and
smaller melanosomes appear orange. Students work through several instantiations of the size challenge in which
they have to either reduce the size of the melanosome (to make an orange drake) by breaking the melanin stars
and slowing down the gears, or increase the size of the melanosomes (to make a gray drake) by helping to
assemble the gear-shaft complex so it works faster to make melanin stars and thereby grow the melanosome.
        In the second  challenge,  which  we   call the "gates" challenge, students  try to     create shiny versus
dull/matte drakes (that can be either orange or gray). Shininess (or sheen) is a function of not having any color
(no melanosomes) in the outer layer of scale cells, causing those cells to better reflect light and making the
scales look shiny. Melanosomes can travel to the outer scale layer through gated channels. These channels are
plugged by a protein that selectively lets melanosomes through. The protein is represented by a corkscrew-like
structure with a pink tip that can sense the incoming melanosome (see Figure 2). In shiny drakes, the protein
plug is not functioning properly and does not ever open the channel; therefore, no melanosomes can get to the
outer layer and the scales are shiny. Making the outer layer of scales actually look shiny in the game was a
graphics-design problem, and there did not seem to be a simple way of showing sheen. Therefore, we opted for
a different solution--having a sheen indicator bar positioned at the top of the field of play, within the outer
scale layer. When the indicator is "full" it means there are lots of melanosomes in the outer layer and the scale is
non-reflective (matte); when the indicator is empty, the scale is shiny. In this challenge, students are tasked with
changing drakes from shiny to matte or vice versa by plugging or unplugging the channels.

                                          Figure 2. The gates challenge.

        Both challenges involve students trying to change the color or sheen of the drakes from a provided
initial state to a required target state. To help students keep track of their progress (the extent to which the drake
is changing) we developed a Heads Up Display (HUD) that includes three elements: a) the initial (start) state of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   75                                                    © ISLS
the drake shown as both a thumbnail of the drake and a thumbnail of a cross-sectional view of the skin tissue; b)
the current state of the drake with a thumbnail of the drake only, that actually updates based on progress in the
game; and c) the target state shown as dual thumbnails of the drake and cross section of skin. The HUD appears
along the right side of the field of play (see Figure 1 & 2) and is present in both challenges.

Methods

Study context
The game was played by n=51 middle school students in the context of an eight-week summer program hosted
by a community center in a metropolitan city in the North East. The program was open to all middle school
students in the city yet the majority of the participating students attended the local public middle school where
the program was held. This 6th­8th grade middle school is ethnically diverse: 38% Black, 25% White; 16%
Hispanic, 10%, Asian; with 43.4% economically disadvantaged students. The genetics program in which the
game was used ran for 90-minute sessions twice per week and was led and instructed by the Middle School
Program Leader and STEM Specialist of the community center. One or two researchers were also present during
the genetics  programming    to assist the   instructor. Each session  was   structured to include    some hands-on
instructional activities in which   students explored    various  aspects of genetics--for example,     students built
catapults using normal and `mutated' instructions to see how changes to the instructions can result in changes to
the catapults shape  and  function. These  activities were   often followed  by  whole  class discussions  about  the
biological meaning of the activity and how it relates to genetics. Students typically spent about 30 minutes, on
average, playing the  online  game  during   these sessions. The   protein challenges,  which   are the focus of  this
article, occurred in weeks 3­5 of the summer program. We wish to note that due to various logistical challenges,
frequent absences of students, and varying level of engagement of students, the instructor and research team
were not able to implement the planned curriculum with high fidelity. Thus, some of the activities and resources
that were expected to support student understanding during game play were not fully implemented. While this
was a general problem for the ongoing research, we feel that the information from the focus groups is still
highly valuable in highlighting issues with the game; some of which may be ameliorated through curriculum
activities while others likely require revisions to the actual game design.

Data collection and analysis
The focus group interviews occurred in week 4 of the program. Student groups were formed based on the game
challenges that the students had completed. Focus groups of students who did not reach the protein challenges
were not included in this analysis. A total of 9 students participated in the three focus groups included in our
analysis. The focus group interview lasted between 19­26 min and involved showing students screenshots of
interfaces in the protein game and asking them questions about specific entities or processes occurring in those
interfaces such as: "how close is the person playing the game to winning?" "what would you do to make the
dragon darker?"  "what    would  you   click on next?".   Students   took  turns answering  each    question and  the
interviewer made sure none of the students had anything else to add to the discussion before moving on to the
next question. Focus group interviews were transcribed verbatim and analyzed by the research team (authors).
         Analysis involved viewing the videotapes together and identifying episodes of interest (e.g. students
misunderstanding a representation, students explicitly expressing confusion, etc.). While we cannot claim to
have identified all potential problems with the game, and in some cases only one student in the group struggled
with a particular issue, we can assume that if these issues happened once, they may happen again. Therefore, we
describe the  issues that came  up  without  making   claims  about  their  prevalence  among   student players.  We
grouped the issues we identified under five themes that we see as being potentially relevant for game design in
other contexts  and   discuss   them   in the results    section. We  then   offer some    heuristics for  designing
representations for deeply disciplinary games that could help address the general problems we identified.

Results
Before we discuss specific themes of problems with the game we wish to note that overall the students did seem
to interpret representations, game phenomena, and game play as intended by the designers. Many of the features
that we had hoped they would notice about the representations of genes, proteins, and traits in the game were
indeed attended to by the students. It was also clear that students who had more prior knowledge in genetics,
which came through in the interviews without us explicitly asking questions about genetic concepts, understood
the game phenomena, mechanisms, and entities better than students who did not. This is not surprising and has
been documented extensively in prior research (Cook, Wiebe, & Carter, 2007; Kindfield, 1994).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     76                                                   © ISLS
         The five thematic problems we identified are: (1) incongruence between phenomenological knowledge
and representations, (2) unintended distractors, (3) non-salient ontological distinctions, (4) misinterpretation of
linked representations, and (5) confusing game progress and disciplinary process indicators. We discuss them in
turn, by first describing the problem as it arose in the focus groups, then providing our interpretation of what is
the specific problem is a case of, and lastly discussing some possible solutions for this problem in the game.

Theme I: Incongruence between phenomenological knowledge and representations
As we noted earlier, the building blocks of melanin (white triangles) can be assembled into melanin "stars",
which are   initially light orange. As  they  accumulate,     however, they   become   darker--as  does  the overall
melanosome (Figure 1). In one of the initial challenges, students are tasked with making a darker gray drake by
interacting with the process of melanin star production in the melanosomes of a lighter orange drake. One of the
students in the focus groups noted a confusion he initially had when playing this challenge. He assumed that
breaking the bright orange stars would lead to darker melanosomes. We interpret this situation as the student
drawing on phenomenological primitive-like knowledge (diSessa, 1998) of the sort- "less bright means dark"
and acting on it to break apart (remove) the bright-looking stars. While the student eventually recognized that
the strategy of breaking stars had the opposite effect (smaller melanosome), the student's initial interpretation of
the representation (bright stars) and its relation to the phenomenon (skin color of drake) is important. This is
because the student's initial reaction was intuitive and yet counterproductive given the specific representations
used. We argue that in general terms this is a problem of having representations and/or processes that behave in
ways that counter, or are incongruent with, students' phenomenological knowledge. By this we do not mean that
the representations are complex or unfamiliar, or that the processes are counterintuitive. Rather we mean that the
actual choice of color (or other feature) of the representation, from a semiotic perspective, is incongruent with
students' knowledge of how entities behave in the world at a basic phenomenological level. The decision to
make the stars light orange on a dark blue background was driven by the aesthetics of having the stars stand out
as brighter objects on the screen. In hindsight, this was problematic in that it cued students to take an intuitive
but unproductive action. Fortunately, the problem also has a fairly simple solution of changing the background
color of the field of play to a lighter color such that the stars are not so bright that they appear to generate light.

Theme II: Unintended distractors
Research has shown that students, especially those with low prior knowledge, tend to select the most noticeable
features of the  representations for  further processing   and  may   ascribe meaning   to  un-important features of
representations when mapping between macro and molecular representations (Cook, Weibe, & Carter, 2007;
Seufert, 2003). While we found that students did notice most of the relevant details of entities and processes in
the game,   they also  noticed and  attempted    to interpret details that were not  relevant. For instance,  in  the
melanosome size challenges, when a melanosome is small the triangular building blocks of melanin tend to
cluster in a higher concentration around the melanosome; when the melanosome is larger the same number of
triangles are still there but seem less concentrated due to the larger circumference of the melanosome. This is a
randomly occurring situation that is an artifact and not a feature of the representation. However, one student
assumed that the discernable clustering of triangles around the melanosomes as somehow contributing to the
change in melanosome color. In general terms, this is a problem of unintended (unforeseen) and sometimes
unavoidable distractors in a complex disciplinary display of mechanisms. The clustering of triangles, while not a
designed behavior per se, is nonetheless reflecting the real-world complexity of the mechanisms and the random
nature of particle movement in the cell. A solution therefore cannot be to avoid this occurrence. The point we
wish to  make   is that student  will attend  to all features  of the  representation, those that were   deliberately
engineered as well as those that were not (and are meaningless). Our solution here will be to try and alter the
underlying dynamics of the representation such that the clustering behavior is less frequent.

Theme III: Non-salient ontological distinctions
In the game, there are several distinct kinds of entities such as proteins, their substrates (triangles) and their
products (stars). As noted above, we used representational elements that resemble little machines to convey the
functional aspect of proteins (as molecular machines that carry out functions in the cell). In contrast, we used
simpler geometrical shapes to represent protein substrates and products. Our attempts to convey this ontological
distinction through semiotic cues were not always interpreted as intended by students. While students did notice
the more complex and gear-like shapes of proteins, they did not view these as inherently different kinds of
things from the stars and triangles, and did not realize the biological significance of the differences. One might
argue that this is not surprising given that students lacked prior knowledge in the domain and therefore were
unlikely to understand   the biological meaning     of the differences in  representations. We agree that  students'

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      77                                                 © ISLS
domain knowledge plays a role here, however, if the game is intended to help novices lean about the biological
significance of key  entities and  mechanisms   in  genetics  then  finding ways    to  convey  important     ontological
distinctions in the discipline is  an important  user   interface design goal.   It  is not clear to  us  how   we    can
necessarily  improve the  representations  in order  to  make  the  meaning   of the    distinctions more   salient.  The
solution to this problem will likely involve adding information to the game through hints or other cues that help
students make sense of the differences they are already noticing in the representations of entities. Or it may be
that the sense making needs to occur in the context of group/class discussion in which the teacher facilitates
student reflection on the differences and what they mean.

Theme IV: Misinterpretation of linked representations (HUD)
A central representational feature in the protein challenges is the HUD, which provides real-time information
about the current color of the drake relative to the initial state of the challenge and the target state. The HUD
provides  representations both  at the  cell level, using  a  cross sectional   skin tissue  view,   and  at  the whole
organism  level by  displaying  a  thumbnail  of the  drake   (see  Figure  1). The    "current state"   cell and drake
representations in the HUD are linked to the field of play. We identified two representational problems with the
HUD design. First, some students did not understand that the centered part of the HUD was representing current
state. They instead thought it was representing an intermediate state between the initial and target states and
therefore when shown a screenshot including the HUD, they struggled to determine how far along the player
was on that particular challenge. This type of confusion of the HUD was surprising to us given the central role
the HUD plays in helping the players determine their progress in the challenge.
         The  second   problem  with  the  HUD   related   to the  specific representations     chosen   to   portray the
cell/tissue levels, and was more severe for the "gates" challenges than for the "size" challenges. In part, this
relates to the complexity of the phenomenon in each challenge. The gates challenges entail understanding that
melanosomes move (or are blocked from moving) from one layer of cells in the skin into another, more surface
layer. The ideas that skin is multilayered and that organelles like melanosomes can travel between cells were
likely new to students, and while they could successfully play the challenge it was clear that many did not
understand the underlying biological phenomenon. The HUD in this case was particularly confusing because it
provided a cross section of the two layers of cells. Students were able, for the most part, to interpret their state in
the game using the HUD but could not explain what the representations in the HUD were actually showing (i.e.
where is this in the drake?). We believe that students may be unfamiliar with cross sectional images and how to
relate them to a "view from above" perspective. While they could pattern-match entities in the field of play to
their smaller representations in the HUD, they did not understand how the zoomed-out view of the HUD is
spatially oriented in relation to the representations on the field of play. Stated in general terms this is a problem
of both misinterpreting the linked representations and being unfamiliar with particular disciplinary inscriptions.
A solution to this problem could to be to change the representation used in the HUD from a cross section view
to some other more familiar view. However, the cross-sectional view is a fairly prevalent disciplinary way of
showing locations of cells within a larger organismal context and there are reasons to keep it given the work it
can do (when someone understands it). If the representation remains, the solution to this problem will likely
entail providing more cues about the relationships between the spatial orientation of the HUD and the field of
play. Perhaps adding a short video that shows how you get from one perspective to another (at the start of the
gate challenges) will allow students to "see" the connections between these linked representations.

Theme V: Confusing game progress and disciplinary process indicators
In the gates challenges, students try to change the sheen of the scales of the dragon from matte to shiny or vice
versa. As noted earlier figuring out how to represent an increase or decrease in scale sheen in the game was a
design challenge that we opted to solve by incorporating an indicator bar for sheen that shows how shiny the
outer cell layer is at any point in time (an empty bar means the scales are shiny and a full bar means the scales
are matte). The sheen indicator bar sits within the field of play (see Figure 2) and includes a small indicator
arrow that shows the target state (empty or full bar). The location of the sheen indicator bar compounded with
the complexity of the mechanism of the phenomena (students struggled to understand why it is that having no
melanosomes in the outer cell layer makes a dragon shiny) resulted in some confusion about what that bar was
actually representing. Some    students understood   it as showing   sheen  (as  intended),  while    others  thought  it
showed progress in the challenge (like the HUD). In the latter case, this was a problem when the target dragon
was shiny   and the goal  was  to  have an   empty  bar. The  discrepancy   between     the bar being    empty  and   the
challenge being successfully completed was confusing to some students who expected a full bar to indicate the
challenge was   complete.  In  general  terms, the  problem   here  is one   of  inconsistent   use   of general   game
navigation cues (like a progress bar) to represent mechanistic processes of a disciplinary phenomenon. Overall

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    78                                                       © ISLS
using a progress-bar type representation to show changes in a mechanism is not an issue in and of itself; in fact,
the  HUD    provides    such  support      in the     protein challenges.    The  case  here   is  that  this  was  a    new
navigational/indicator   feature   that was   used    sporadically  in only   one  set of  challenges-   the  protein gates
challenges. One possible solution, therefore, is to either include a similar indicator bar in the other challenges or
to try again to figure out how to represent sheen within the phenomenon itself (in the outer layer of cells).

Discussion
The focus group interviews, while limited in scope, nonetheless provided us with valuable information about the
ways in which students attended to, interpreted, and acted on the representations of phenomena in the game. The
problems   we   identified  reflected   design  and    usability  challenges  associated  with  representing   entities  and
mechanisms that are inherent and endemic to the discipline of genetics. In this section, we wish to `pop up a
level' and discuss some of the implications from this work more generally and provide a set of heuristics that
can guide the design of representations in deeply disciplinary games.
          The first heuristic, balancing aesthetics, disciplinary fidelity, and phenomenological congruence, stems
from themes I and II. Deeply disciplinary games need to maintain high fidelity to the discipline in terms of how
entities, activities, processes, and    so on  are    represented. They  also need  to  engage  and   attract students,  and
whenever possible they should be consistent with phenomena and behaviors that students may be familiar with
(e.g. correspond p-prims that students likely hold). Balancing these three demands is not trivial and decisions
that privilege aesthetics over fidelity or congruence (intentionally or not) could be costly in that it may take
students longer to figure out the game dynamics.          In addition, while disciplinary fidelity may seem like the most
important consideration, adhering to it may have inadvertent consequences if it leads to meaningless aspects of a
mechanism or entity being overly salient (e.g. clustering of triangles around the melanosome, Figure 1). It may
be prudent at times to forgo some of the fidelity in favor of avoiding such situations.
          The second heuristic, pointing out core disciplinary distinctions, stems from theme III. We have found
that students were able to notice differences between ontologically distinct entities, but they did not recognize
the biological significance of these differences. Altering the representations to make them even more different
from each other, and different in ways that better reflect their ontological origins, may minimize the problem to
some extent. Yet such changes are unlikely to be enough and we believe that additional scaffolds are needed to
help students   grasp   the  disciplinary     nature   and  significance  of  the  differences.   The   scaffolding design
framework   developed    by  Quintana    et   al., (2004)  included  a guideline   about   making  disciplinary  strategies
explicit in learners' interactions with the tool (p. 345), which addresses the similar problem of students not
having disciplinary knowledge to guide them in reasoning about problems in the discipline. The heuristic we
provide builds on and extends this guideline by suggesting that one also needs to make explicit ontological
distinctions and features of core entities and mechanisms. For example, in our game, it will be beneficial to
explicitly point out   that proteins  resemble     little machines  because   they act  as such   in the cell, whereas   the
melanin stars are inactive molecules comprised of smaller building blocks. Such "pointing out" needs to be done
in the context of the game in ways that do not interrupt the game play. In a sense this conceptually important
ontological distinction was not integrated well enough in the game. This presents a true design challenge in
terms of making these key distinctions better conceptually integrated into the game. Another potential solution
may be to draw on the Constructed Authentic Representations (CAR) principle (Holbert & Wilensky, 2014) and
to allow students to build (through manipulation of DNA sequences- the instructions) proteins with particular
functional  domains.   This  may   make    more    salient  the  distinction between   what  can  be  constructed   (protein
machines) by changing the genetic instructions and what is synthesized by using the protein machines.
          The third, and final, heuristic, supporting the linking of phenomena states to progress indicators, stems
from themes IV and V. We found that students had difficulties in relating both the HUD and the sheen indicator
bar to the state of affairs in the field of play. There are actually multiple issues that contributed to this problem
including  lack  of   disciplinary knowledge       of common     representations (cross  sectional   views of  tissues), the
difficulty in representing   sheen,   and     misinterpreting   the indicator  bar to  be  a general    progress indicator.
Therefore, in designing HUDs one needs to consider what types of links to the phenomenon are represented.
Links could be temporal, showing ongoing progress of a mechanism as in the start-current-target states in the
HUD; and/or the link can be spatial, showing where the mechanism is occurring in relation to the rest of the
phenomenon as in the cross-sectional images of the cell and the images of the drakes in the HUD. In both cases
students need support in making the connections and understanding what the HUD is showing. It is likely that
the HUD in the protein challenges by itself is insufficient to support this linking and that additional scaffolds
may be needed to help orient students to relevant relationships (such as an animation that connects the HUD and
the phenomenon).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                          79                                                     © ISLS
         In designing Geniventure to accurately reflect complex genetic phenomena at the molecular level, we
made many design decisions regarding how to represent key disciplinary entities and processes in the game in
ways that can convey their biological characteristics. In many cases, the decisions proved effective and students
were able to comprehend what they are doing in the context of the game and make progress across challenges.
In other cases, the decisions hindered student progress. Moreover, even students who were able to progress
substantially in the game did not always understand some of the underlying biology, such as the differences
between proteins and other molecules in the cell (e.g. melanin). This underscores the importance of providing
supporting curriculum and instruction to help students reflect on and generalize the mechanisms they are seeing
in the game and their biological significance. A key question that arises is how can we decide on the division of
scaffolding labor between the game, curriculum, and instruction (teacher and peers). This issue is even thornier
in educational game   contexts where    there is a risk of  making   the game  feel more school-like  in ways that
disengage students.

References
Barnea, N., and Dori, Y. J. (1996). Computerized molecular modeling as a tool to improve chemistry teaching.
         Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences, 36: 629­636.
Clark, D. B., Tanner-Smith, E., & Killingsworth, S. (2016). Digital games, design, and learning: A systematic
         review and meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 86(1), 79­122.
Cook, M., Wiebe, E. N., & Carter, G. (2007). The influence of prior knowledge on viewing and interpreting
         graphics with macroscopic and molecular representations. Science Education, 92, 848­867.
diSessa, A. (1988). Knowledge in pieces. In G. Forman & P. Putall (Eds.), Constructivism in the computer age
         (pp. 49-70). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Gee. J. P. (2005). Learning by Design: Good video games as learning machines. E-Learning, 2(1), 5­16
Goodsell, D. S. (2009) The Machinery of Life, 2nd ed., Springer, New York.
Habgood, M. P. J., & Ainsworth, S. E. (2011). Motivating children to learn effectively: Exploring the value of
         intrinsic integration in educational games. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(2), 169­ 206.
Holbert, N., & Wilensky, U. (2014). Constructible authentic representations: Designing video games hat enable
         players to utilize knowledge developed in-game to reason about science. Technology, Knowledge and
         Learning, 19(1­2), 53­79.
Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Playing and making games for learning: Instructionist and constructionist perspectives for
         game studies. Games and Culture, 1(1), 36­40.
Kindfield, A. C. (1994). Biology Diagrams: Tools to Think With. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(1), 1­36.
Kozma, R. (2003). The material features of multiple representations and their cognitive and social affordances
         for science understanding. Learning and Instruction, 13(2), 205­226.
Pallant, A., and Tinker, R. (2004). Reasoning with atomic-scale molecular dynamic models. Journal of Science
         Education and Technology, 13(1), 51­66.
Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., et al. (2004). A scaffolding design
         framework for software to support science inquiry. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337-386.
Ravyse, W. S., Blignaut, A. S., Leendertz, V., & Woolner, A. (2017). Success factors for serious games to
         enhance learning: A systematic review. Virtual Reality, 21, 31-58.
Roth, W., & Bowen, G. (1999). Complexities of graphical representations during ecology lectures: an analysis
         rooted in semiotics and hermeneutic phenomenology. Learning and Instruction, 9(3), 235-255.
Seufert, T. (2003). Supporting  coherence     formation in  learning from  multiple representations. Learning and
         Instruction, 13(2), 227 ­ 237.
Tsui, C.Y., & Treagust, D. (2004). Motivational aspects of learning genetics with interactive multimedia. The
         American Biology Teacher, 66, 277­285.
Tversky, B., Bauer Morrisony, J., & Betrancourt, M. (2002). Animation: Can it facilitate? International Journal
         Human­Computer Studies, 57, 247­262.
Williamson,  V.M.,  & Abraham,   M.R.    (1995).   The  effects of computer   animation  on the particulate mental
         models of college chemistry students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 32, 522­534.
Winn, B.  M.  (2009). The Design,  Play,  and    Experience  Framework.    In Handbook   of Research  on  Effective
         Electronic Gaming in Education (Vol. 3, pp. 1010-1024). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Wu, H.K., Krajcik, J.S., & Soloway, E. (2000). Promoting understanding of chemical representations: Students'
         use of a visualization tool in the classroom. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38, 821­842.

Acknowledgments
The research reported was funded by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DRL-1513086.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    80                                                  © ISLS
