       Technology-Mediated Teacher-Researcher Collaborations:
                     Professional Learning Through Co-Design
               Susan R. Goldman (Chair), University of Illinois at Chicago, sgoldman@uic.edu
                              Andrea Gomoll, Indiana University, agomoll@indiana.edu
                        Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University, chmelosi@indiana.edu
                        Allison H. Hall, University of Illinois at Chicago, ahall33@uic.edu
                       Mon-Lin Monica Ko, University of Illinois at Chicago, mlko@uic.edu
                       Angela Joy Fortune, University of Illinois at Chicago, afortu3@uic.edu
                      Eleni A. Kyza, Cyprus University of Technology, Eleni.Kyza@cut.ac.cy
                  Andria Agesilaou, Cyprus University of Technology, aa.agesilaou@edu.cut.ac.cy
                  Kimberley Gomez, University of California, Los Angeles, kpg1321@gmail.com
                  Louis Gomez, University of California, Los Angeles, louismgomez@gmail.com
             Emily Pressman, University of California, Los Angeles, emilypressman1@gmail.com
         Katherine Rodela, Washington State University, Vancouver, katherine.c.rodela@gmail.com
                       Iris Tabak (Discussant), Ben Gurion University, itabak@bgu.ac.il

         Abstract: Collaborative co-design between teachers and researchers can provide the kinds of
         learning opportunities  for teachers  that  lead   to teacher agency, and   flexible,  adaptive,
         principled pedagogy. This symposium features four projects in which teachers and researchers
         engaged in technology-mediated collaboration to design inquiry-based learning environments
         to engage students in authentic disciplinary practices in a variety of content areas, including
         literary reading, literacy in mathematics, science, and engineering design. The size and scope
         of the collaborations vary, ranging from one-to-one to larger groups, as does the time span of
         the collaborations,  providing opportunities to  examine  temporal affordances     of technology
         supports. All four papers discuss collaborative co-design as sites of professional learning for
         teachers. We argue that these are excellent cases of CSCL and that they afford new insights
         into roles for technology in supporting and facilitating teacher and researcher learning.

Overview
This symposium features four projects involving teachers and researchers collaborating in co-design of inquiry-
based learning environments. Across the projects, technology mediated the collaborations in two primary ways
(Hmelo-Silver, et al., 2016): (1) As a context for reflection on implementation of the designs via video capture
of classroom instruction, and (2) as a conduit for connecting participants and facilitating communication during
various phases of the process. As context, video of classroom instruction or of the design process itself can serve
as a boundary   object  (Akkerman    &  Bakker,   2011)  that  focuses discussion and   inquiry    by teachers     and
researchers. In this way, boundary objects mediate sharing perspectives, joint construction of knowledge in use,
and potentially the emergence of negotiated perspectives on various aspects of teaching and learning processes
(Hmelo-Silver, et al., 2016). As conduit, video conferencing and other forms of communication technology (e.g.,
web-based forums, chat rooms) enable collaboration, reflection, and analysis across time and space.
         The collaborative co-design efforts described in the four presentations aimed to engage student learners
(ages 8 ­ 17 years) in authentic disciplinary practices in a variety of content areas, including literary reading,
literacy in mathematics, science, and engineering design. As such, the four contributions reflect what might be
called a second generation of (computer) technology-supported collaborative learning research in the following
sense. Co-design involves working with teachers throughout all phases of the iterative design cycle (design,
implementation,   reflection, and  redesign). This   can  be   contrasted with  design-based     research       wherein
researchers created designs for teachers to implement. (See for discussion Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, & Sabelli,
2011.) Collaborative  co-design  throughout   all phases of  the design cycle  reflects perspectives   grounded     in
practice as well as in learning theory and research. Rather than teachers being positioned as the "end users,"
they are agents   in co-designing what   they will  implement.   This  second generation    of CSCL    creates    new
opportunities to study learning as it occurs in the course of iterative design cycles (e.g., Ko, et al., 2016).
         In this symposium, three of the papers (Gomoll & Hmelo-Silver; Hall, Ko, Goldman, & Fortune; Kyza
& Agesilaou) focus on different ways in which technology creates artifacts that provide contexts for reflecting
on implementations and redesign. Two discuss how technology enables communication across time and space
among co-designers (Gomez, et al; Kyza & Agesilaou). The size and scope of the collaborations vary, ranging
from one-to-one to larger groups. The papers differ with respect to the time span of the collaborations, providing
opportunities to examine temporal affordances of technology supports. All four papers discuss collaborative co-

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   751                                                      © ISLS
design  as  sites of professional   learning  for teachers. Details     of each  presentation  are provided     below. The
discussant for the symposium is Iris Tabak, Ben Gurion University. Dr. Tabak, former co-editor of the Journal
of the Learning    Sciences,  is an  extremely    accomplished   learning   scientist who   has   created  and  researched
science inquiry learning environments and teachers' professional learning throughout her career.

Rationale and background for the symposium
Collaborative  co-design     between  teachers  and   researchers  throughout    the  design-implement-reflect-redesign
cycle has emerged as an alternative to earlier design-based research (DBR) paradigms. Prototypical early DBR
(Brown,   1992)   involved   researchers   designing, teachers   implementing,     and   researchers   reflecting  and then
redesigning. Researchers sought teachers' input as part of the reflection and redesign process, but teachers did
not have agency in redesign beyond providing input based on their experiences with what they had been given
to enact. One lesson from early DBR is the highly embedded nature of classroom practice. For example, even
the same teacher's implementations of the "same" lesson over three different classes of students are not identical
in part because the students are different from class to class. This context-specificity creates the need for design
modifications  and   adaptations  in response   to local circumstances      during implementation.     Hence,   though   the
resultant implementations bear a family resemblance to one another (Wittgenstein, 2009), they are not identical.
For teachers to adapt and modify, they need to understand the principles underlying the designs and how to
flexibly implement them in ways that are consistent with the underlying principles (e.g., Brown & Campione,
1996).  In  other words,  teachers   need   adaptive expertise  to be   able to  respond  to   changing   sets of  demands
(Hatano & Inagaki, 1986; Bransford, Derry, Berliner, & Hammerness, 2005). This is especially so when they
are teaching for deep learning (National Research Council (NRC), 2012; Wang, Derry, & Ge, 2017).
         The adaptive expertise perspective on the teaching process calls for shifts in the teaching practices of
the vast majority of teachers. They need to change what they do, how they do it, as well as their understanding
of why they do it (Bereiter, 2014). Just as transmission models of student learning fall short of the goal of deep
learning (NRC, 2012), transmission models of professional development are inadequate in supporting teachers
in developing flexible knowledge and adaptive expertise (Darling-Hammond & McLaughlin, 1995; Guskey &
Huberman, 1995; Joyce & Showers, 2002). Rather, teachers need professional learning opportunities that build a
principled  knowledge     base and   sustainable,  responsive   pedagogical     knowledge.   This  form    of  professional
learning empowers teachers as agents of change by engaging them as co-creators of curriculum that directly
addresses their problems of practice in their own contexts in response to their own students.
         Collaborative    co-design  between    teachers and    researchers  is  one  way   in which   learning    scientists
attempt  to provide   the kind   of learning  opportunities  for teachers   that lead  to teacher  agency,     and flexible,
adaptive,  principled   pedagogy    (e.g., Kyza &  Georgiou,    2014;   Kyza  &  Nicolaidou,    2016).  There   are several
variants of collaborative co-design. Some of these models draw from principles of improvement science and
negotiate common goals for improvement efforts as well as sources of evidence that allow close monitoring of
anticipated and unanticipated outcomes of implementation (Bryk, Gomez, Grunow, & LeMahieu, 2015). Others
expand the DBR process to embrace practitioners in Design-Based Implementation Research (DBIR). DBIR
confronts  the realities  of  implementation   from  the very   initial phases  of design   (Penuel,   et al., 2011).  In a
similar vein, Research-Practice Partnerships (RPPs) reflect long-term commitments to collaborative co-design to
address  problems    of practice (Coburn    &  Penuel, 2016).   All three   models   tend to   situate teacher  learning in
problems   of  practice  that teachers see   as relevant to  their  own    circumstances    and   hold much    promise   for
productive  adaptation    to  new   settings  and  problems   of   practice.  (See   for elaboration   Gomez,      Kyza, &
Mancevice, 2018.) The collaborative co-design projects discussed in this symposium are instances of one of
these three forms of professional learning experiences. We argue that these are excellent cases of CSCL and that
they afford new insights into teacher learning and, although not discussed here, researcher learning as well.

Organization of the symposium
A short introduction to the symposium is followed by four presentations plus a discussant. The presentation
order of the papers moves from work in technology-mediated, one-on-one collaborative co-design (Gomoll &
Hmelo-Silver) to professional learning in several one-on-one cases and in teacher-researcher multi-discipline
communities (Hall, Ko, Goldman, & Fortune). The third paper examines professional learning in hybrid co-
design  environments    (Kyza  &    Agesilaou).  The  fourth paper  marshals     technology    to enable   rapid  and  agile
learning  from practice   among   researchers   and  community     college  instructors  of developmental      mathematics
(Gomez, Gomez, Pressman, & Rodela). Tabak offers a discussion and takes questions from the audience.

Co-designing Problem-Based Learning (PBL) experiences using video as a
boundary object

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       752                                                      © ISLS
Andrea Gomoll and Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver

This presentation explores how a co-design experience that leveraged video analysis supported the design of a
problem-based robotics curriculum. This curriculum was grounded in user-centered design and asked students to
address local problems using innovative technologies. Within the research-practice partnership (RPP) described
here, collaborative video analysis of past and current implementations of our robotics curriculum served as a
boundary object (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011) for design partners. Video analysis collaboratively done by the
first author and the teacher allowed us to communicate around the curriculum design and how it was enacted via
in-class facilitation. To  support   development      of   user-centered   design   practices and  the   coordination  of
functional  design teams   in the classroom,   we    used  video   reflection to interrogate  what collaborative  student
work can and should look like as well as how to support it in real time.
         The specific focus of this presentation is an ongoing partnership with one teacher and our co-design
experience orchestrating CSCL experiences for students. In our earlier work with the robotics curriculum, this
teacher was inspired by high levels of student engagement. The school and community were concerned about
student safety, a concern exacerbated by the increasing frequency of shootings in US schools. Students acted on
this concern and opted to design robots that served an emotional need in the school--helping students to feel
safe  during school  shooting   drills. We   converged     on a focus for  the robotics  curriculum:  how    robots might
enhance school safety.
          In this presentation we focus on the co-design process between teacher and first author as we designed
and  implemented   a   robotics unit    for students (ages    13  ­ 14)  taking  an  elective science   course in a   rural
community. Students engaged in the work of co-design as they designed and built safety-focused robots for their
local community.    Thus,  in  this case    study, co-design   is positioned  as a  means of   learning  for  teacher and
researcher as well as the process engaged in by the students. Through co-design, students are better supported in
their efforts to collaborate effectively and to learn with and through user-centered design and computing. The
co-design process between the teacher and researcher, specifically joint video analysis played an important role
in supporting the effort to create, deepen, and sustain a locally meaningful engineering design experience for
students. Prior research has highlighted that for teachers to develop robust practices, they need to develop rich
professional vision (PV)--the ability to see nuanced issues of teaching and learning in their environment (Borko,
2004;  van   Merriënboer,  Kirschner,    &   Kester, 2003;    Rehak   et al., 2016).  Carefully   organized   viewing  of
classroom   video  can make    PV   visible  and   inspire action.  For  example,  video analysis  of   prior and current
implementations    helped  the    teacher    and   researcher   to  refine their   understanding   of   what   productive
collaboration looks like within engineering design as well as how to best support collaborative group work.
         In the teacher-researcher collaborative design of this robotics unit, school stakeholders were contacted
who could identify safety issues in the school that could potentially be addressed by a robot (e.g., students who
have disabilities need additional assistance evacuating during emergencies; providing a live video feed to the
police station  during  active  shooter  scenarios).  These   stakeholders    agreed to play  the  role of design   clients
within the  robotics unit. The  unit    was  designed  to  promote   authentic   engagement   with local   issues--asking
student groups to select clients they would like to design and build robot prototypes for.
         We explore how the teacher refined her PV as a designer and facilitator--focusing on the ways that she
oriented to and facilitated collaboration in student design groups. We illuminate the role collaborative video
analysis played in co-design and implementation using discourse analysis methodology (Potter & Wetherell,
1987). In attending to discursive patterns related to PV in the work of co-design and facilitation, we study how
the use of video as a reflective tool can support the development of PV and the design of CSCL experiences.
         Preliminary results highlight discursive patterns including the teacher's attention to establishing and
maintaining group norms (e.g., ensuring that all voices are heard), emphasizing the iterative nature of design
(e.g., modeling how to talk about work as "in progress" and "a prototype"), and helping students build on each
other's design ideas (e.g., modeling how to summarize and respond to a peer's comment). Teacher-researcher
reflection on video of the teacher's classroom during the implementation allowed the teacher to view group
work   that she had  not experienced     in  real  time--informing   interventions   made during   future  class  periods.
Furthermore, the instructor was inspired to integrate video analysis into students' design work. The instructor
used her own experience of co-design to inform the design work that her students engaged with in real time.
Throughout this RPP, both teacher and researcher used video to communicate and collaborate as well as to
design rich CSCL experiences for students.

Teacher-researcher collaborative reflection supported by classroom video
Allison H. Hall, Mon-Lin Monica Ko, Susan R. Goldman, and Angela Fortune

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       753                                                     © ISLS
Facilitating productive disciplinary discourse (PDD) in classroom discussions is a complex and multi-faceted
task: teachers need to make in-the-moment decisions as they elicit and problematize students' ideas (Hammer,
Goldberg, & Fargason, 2012; van Es et al., 2017). Teachers need to consider these ideas in light of the learning
goals and respond in ways that lead to the development of disciplinary knowledge and skills. Moreover, teachers'
in-the-moment   responsiveness      is shaped   by  the   constraints  of   their teaching   contexts  and  informed    by  their
knowledge of their students, the curriculum, the discipline, and its epistemic commitments. There is a dearth of
research on   how    teachers learn    the requisite   skills and   knowledge     to engage   in this  work  and   the  kinds  of
learning experiences that may promote these pedagogical shifts.
         This  paper    discusses   ongoing  work      in the context    of a larger  project   whose    overarching    aim is to
promote PDD in literary reading, mathematics, and science. We are pursuing three goals in collaboration with
middle   and  high   school  teachers:  1)  to  understand       how  teachers  learn    to facilitate productive   disciplinary
discourse (PDD), 2) to characterize what aspects of facilitating PDD are specific to the disciplines of math,
science, or literature, and 3) to co-design models of professional development to support teachers in developing
knowledge and skills to facilitate PDD. This paper focuses on the first two goals in literary reading and science.
         To address the first goal, we are drawing on a library of classroom videos recorded during a prior
multi-year,  design-based     research     project.    During    that work,    teachers     and  researchers   collaborated    in
disciplinary design teams to design curricular modules to promote disciplinary reasoning about multiple texts.
Teachers  implemented     these   modules    in iterative     cycles  across  several    years.  For   the current  project,   we
recruited two literature and two science teachers for whom we had multiple years of classroom video from the
prior project. These teachers are collaborating with researchers on the current project to try to understand how
they learned to facilitate PDD. During one-on-one teacher-researcher meetings, the pair engages in collaborative
reflection on the teacher's classroom videos to identify shifts in teacher practices over successive iterations of
the co-designed modules. As well, they explore what may have induced noticed changes (e.g., discussions in
design  teams, other    professional   learning opportunities       from the  prior  project,   responses  and  reactions   from
students during the implementations). Thus, the classroom videos serve both as tools to identify what changed in
teacher practice over time and as "video triggers" (Hmelo-Silver et al., 2016) to prompt teachers to reflect on
events or experiences they think contributed to changes in practice. Videos are sampled from beginnings and
ends of implementation cycles and from events or moments identified by teachers as potentially significant or
critical to their own or their students' learning. To address the second goal of the project, these videos are also
being used as "context-rich cases" (Hmelo-Silver et al., 2016) for cross-disciplinary conversations. In cross-
disciplinary groups,    teachers  and   researchers    view   and   discuss video    segments   in service  of identifying    and
describing   characteristics  of    PDD    within   and    across    disciplines--what's     common;       what's   unique.   We
documented the one-on-one as well as the larger group meetings via audio and/or video recordings and analytic
memos.   The   data  from   each    context  were   analyzed     using   open-coding     and  constant   comparative    methods
(Corbin & Straus, 1990) to determine themes across teacher-research teams and across disciplines.
         Analyses of these two contexts revealed common themes in what practices changed, in experiences that
influenced   changes,   and   in what   teachers    identify     as being   disciplinarily  specific   to  facilitating PDD    in
classrooms. One common theme that emerged in the video co-analysis with individual teachers was around the
amount   and   type  of teacher  talk   and how     it shifted   over successive     iterations of the   co-designed    modules.
Teachers  indicated   surprise   at how    much they      talked in  their  early implementations      and noticed  themselves
doing much of the intellectual work during discussions. In later enactments, sometimes of the same modules,
teachers re-positioned students by removing activities where content was `given' to students and opening up
space for ideas to be contested and resolved among students (as opposed to students looking to the teacher to
validate the  "correct"   response).   This  pedagogical      shift created   room   for  students to  ask  questions,  propose
alternative claims,   and engage     in debate  about     disciplinary   questions   and    problems.  The  teachers    cited  the
implementation and reflection on the co-designed modules that occurred during the design team meetings of the
prior project  as a  powerful    influence  on  making     these    pedagogical   shifts. They   also  reported that    using the
modules   in   their classrooms     enabled  teachers     to  see   that students    were   indeed   capable   of   engaging   in
sophisticated  intellectual   work.    Reflecting   on    opportunities  to   learn  during  the   prior  project,  the teachers
reported that engaging in conversations with researchers before and after the enactments helped them in the
recursive process of soliciting and responding to students' ideas. They said that the conversations fostered a
deeper understanding of the epistemology of their discipline. Analyses of the larger group meetings brought to
light both   similarities in  guiding      discussions    (e.g., types   of  questioning,    participation  structures,  setting
expectations) and differences (e.g., what counts as evidence and justification within each discipline).
         Our   findings   point  to the    benefits of    using  video   as a trigger  for  supporting     teacher learning   and
reflecting on teacher's growth over time. Using videos to reinstate the teachers own prior contexts provided a
natural  point of  comparison    to  their  existing   instructional   practice,  illuminating   their   trajectory of  learning

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                           754                                                       © ISLS
across time. Viewing and discussing clips outside of their own disciplines pushed teachers to articulate their
taken-for-granted   and   tacit  knowledge     of  their own    disciplinary practices    and  how   that influences     their
facilitation of classroom discussions.

Co-designing at a distance: An investigation of teacher-researcher interactions
in video-based and face-to-face meetings
Eleni A. Kyza and Andria Agesilaou

Teacher-researcher collaborations, and, in particular, the co-design of innovative learning environments can lead
to professional learning and serve as contexts for teacher professional development (Kyza & Nicolaidou, 2016;
Kyza   &  Georgiou,    2014).    Nonetheless,     teachers  are   often hesitant  to  commit    to  extended    professional
development programs due to challenging schedules and multiple demands on their personal and professional
lives  (Loucks-Horsley,     Stiles, Mundry,    &   Love,    2009).  In  previous  work    (Kyza  &   Georgiou,     2014)   we
introduced   a hybrid  model    of  teacher   professional  development   (TPD)   in  which    face-to-face   meetings were
interspersed   with   video-mediated    meetings    and  electronic communication      technologies    (i.e., email,  instant
messaging) to support collaboration and co-design. In this case, technology serves as a conduit for learning and
communication (Hmelo-Silver, et al., 2016). Reports of video mediation of computer-supported collaborative
work are not common (Brubaker, Venolia, & Tang, 2012). The goal of this study was to investigate the nature of
interactions   during  technology-mediated        teacher-researcher    co-design     sessions  in  relation   to   teachers'
professional   learning. The  collaborative    co-design    was focused   on generating   inquiry   learning  environments
around controversial socio-scientific issues that were to be enacted in the teachers' classrooms.
          As part of a broader project, four in-service science teacher co-design teams (a total of 27 teachers),
each  led by   a  university  researcher,   developed    inquiry   learning  environments    that  integrated  Responsible
Research  and   Innovation   (RRI)     ideas. RRI   seeks   to involve  stakeholders   in the  processes  of   research  and
innovation   so  that the final  outcome    meets    the needs  and expectations   of  society  (Owen     et  al., 2012) and
advocates a more dynamic and inclusive relationship between scientific advancements and societal involvement.
In this context, teachers participated in a year-long professional development (PD) program which placed them
in the roles   of learners,  designers,   instructors and   reflective  practitioners. Teachers    along  with     researchers
worked in co-design teams in biology, chemistry, and elementary school science to develop and implement with
their students  an  RRI   unit,  based  on    the pedagogical   framework    known    as  Socio-Scientific    Inquiry Based
Learning  (SSIBL)     (Levinson     et al.,   2017).  SSIBL,    an  approach   to engage     students  in inquiring    about
contemporary    socio-scientific    controversies,  operationalizes  how   RRI   can  be  integrated  in  science   teaching.
Specifically, SSIBL requires students to make decisions about how to actively address particular socio-scientific
issues in their   school, communities,      or broader   societal  context  (critical citizenship). The   co-design    teams
developed  learning   activities using    the SSIBL   framework     to  engage students   in inquiring   about  the  relation
between the quantified self movement (also known as lifelogging), that advocates the use of technology to study
one's data from daily activities, and privacy issues related to sharing personal data in a networked society.            The
co-design  teams    adopted   a  hybrid   mode     of collaboration.    Some   collaboration   was   conducted      online in
technology-mediated      meetings,  while   other  meetings    took place  face-to-face.  Teachers    enacted  the   learning
materials with their students and then used these experiences to revise the curriculum they had co-designed.
Thus, the co-design cycle consisted of the initial design, which was concluded in five months, the enactment
phase, which took place during a period of two months, and the reflection and redesign phase which happened
during three meetings in the months that followed the enactment.
          In this paper, we draw from four face-to-face (f2f) and six online meetings from one of the elementary
school teachers'   co-design    teams. This    team  consisted  of  seven elementary   school   teachers  and   a  university
researcher. Data were collected from co-design videos, teacher interviews, and researcher reflections and field
notes. These data were analyzed qualitatively using the Actor-Network theory (Latour, 2005), to examine how
the setting (f2f, technology-mediated) influenced the teacher-researcher co-design discourse and interactions.
Drawing from studies on telepresence (e.g., Rae, Venolia, Tang, & Molnar, 2015) and analyzing both the videos
of the  sessions   and   the transcribed    interactions,   we  examined    dimensions    such  as  power     dynamics   and
hegemony (e.g., who initiated discussions), participation of both teachers and researcher, and the nature of the
co-design talk (e.g., pedagogical, design thinking, communicative, technical, knowledge co-construction) during
the f2f and online (video) meetings.
          All teachers consistently reported, and highly rated, the importance of the co-design context to their
professional learning.    In their interviews, they commented on how this collaboration differed from their usual
adaptations  of   curricula  and how   it contributed    to their professional learning   and  led  to more    sophisticated
curricular materials for their students. The analysis of the co-design interactions provided evidence that teachers

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        755                                                       © ISLS
participated as reflective practitioners, once given the opportunity to feel like an equally respected member of
the  design  team. The   teachers  emphasized    the    socio-technical    support  provided   by  the  researchers,    while
acknowledging    the challenges   that  professionals     face   in such   experiential  approaches    to  learning   due  to
conflicting responsibilities. The technology enabled continuous teacher collaboration and coordination of co-
design;  however,  the  teachers still pointed  to  the   challenges  around    the use  of technology,      such  as finding
common time to meet due to hectic schedules. Accordingly, they sought different types of technology-mediated
communication, such as instant messaging. There were important differences in how the various technologies
contributed to the co-design process as might be expected given the affordances of each. Finally, data from the
teacher  interviews  indicate that  both   the  ability   to creatively explore   ideas  in the  supportive    environment
fostered by the research team and the joint development of something innovative with the potential to change
current practice contributed to the teachers' feelings of ownership and feelings of being intellectual partners in
the co-design process.

The agile process in collaborative co-design:                           Implications for community
college developmental mathematics pedagogy
Kimberley Gomez, Louis Gomez, Emily Pressman, and Katherine Rodela

This presentation reports on a project that used technology as a conduit for creating a design and implementation
community    among   instructors of  developmental      mathematics     courses in  community      college   settings located
across the United States. Developmental mathematics courses have been called "the graveyard of dreams and
aspirations"  (Merseth,  2011).   Over     60%  of   community      college  students   in  the  U.S.   take   at  least  one
developmental mathematics class before they can take credit-bearing courses, yet 80% of these students do not
complete college-level mathematics courses within three years (Bailey, Jeong, & Cho, 2010). Many of these
students--increasingly   ethnically,   linguistically,  socioeconomically,    and   age-diverse--spend       years repeating
courses and may leave college altogether. Mathematics is inextricably coupled to being able to use and express
mathematical   reasoning  and   understanding    through     language   in fields  as diverse   as nursing, environmental
science, and   medical   technology.   Instructors across    the country   teach  these  courses,  often,    like their K-12
colleagues, working independently and in isolation. On campus professional development opportunities may not
address  their specific  concerns   and    are often   diffuse   (Murray,   2002).  What    is  needed    is a professional
community experience in which instructors who share similar students, similar issues, and similar challenges are
able to  share their pedagogical   strategies   with   colleagues   locally  and  nationally.  To  address    this need,  we
embarked    on a two-year  long   project  in  which    video-based    technologies   enabled   collaborative     design  and
communication about implementation experiences across 13 instructors of community college developmental
mathematics    courses located  across  the    United  States.  All  of the  instructors were    implementing      Quantway
developmental    mathematics    curricular  lessons    (Carnegie,    2014).  The    collaborative  design    was   aimed   at
enhancing the lessons with additional language and literacy supports that would connect with students' language
and literacy needs as well as with student workforce training programs offered in community colleges (e.g..
healthcare, information technology, and environmental science). Our guiding hypothesis was that using iterative
design cycles to engage community college faculty would offer key opportunities for faculty learning about how
to support mathematics through language. Specifically, we hypothesized that engaging in design activity, such
as iterative testing, influences change in instructor knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes, and in their professional
experimentation with the designed content and materials.
         Inspired by "agile software process" commonly used in software design, we chose an agile process to
guide our   design work  because   of  its attention   to cycle-time  reduction,    iteration, resource management,       and
collaboration (Agile Alliance, 2013). We used rapid and iterative cycles of enactment, analysis and refinement
during which data were continually analyzed to make improvements to lessons in between instructor enactment
of  lessons.  During   a single  agile cycle,   two  to   three  instructors taught   a newly   designed     lesson,  and we
conducted a quick analysis of data (interviews, surveys, student work, videotapes) to determine the need for
immediate, medium, and long-term revisions to the lesson. Once we determined changes, we redesigned the
lesson quickly so that two to three instructors in a second agile cycle were able to test the redesigned lesson.
This process continued until all the instructors in the enactment group had tested the lesson. To ensure that we
were promptly learning about instructor in-the-moment changes, as well as instructors' post lesson enactment
recommendations for changes, we employed classroom video observation (SWIVEL), post-enactment online
surveys  and   video-based  interviews     with  instructors    immediately   (within   24-36    hours)   following     lesson
enactment and analyzed the nature of in-the-moment and/or instructor recommended changes. Once the changes
were categorized as immediate (e.g., change some details of the materials), we determined if they called for
intermediate (e.g., change a specific problem in a math lesson) or long-term change (e.g., shift the problem

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        756                                                       © ISLS
context). Recommended changes and the redesigned lessons were posted to the virtual community website so
that they were immediately available to all of the project's Quantway instructors.
        Using Clark and Hollingsworth's (2002) professional growth analytic model, we analyzed the data to
identify change in three instructors' experiences, focusing on (a) instructor knowledge, beliefs, attitudes or skills
about supporting    mathematics  learning  through literacy  supports,  and (b)   classroom  practice. Our   findings
suggest that participation in design, regardless of extent of involvement, led to instructor changes in practice and
in beliefs about the role of literacy in mathematics. Although we did not collect process or outcome data from
students, interview and survey data collected from the instructors suggest that the instructors believed that the
design process, and designed materials, contributed to improved student outcomes.
        We argue that design experiences help community college instructors address their students' language
and literacy needs. The technology enabled typically isolated instructors to overcome physical separation and
form a virtual collaborative design and implementation community in which they rapidly learned from each
other's practice.

References
Agile   Alliance,   (June,    2013).      "What   is   Agile   Software     Development?".     Retrieved     11/7/18.
        https://www.agilealliance.org/agile101/.
Akkerman,   S.  F., &  Bakker,   A.  (2011). Boundary   crossing  and   boundary  objects.  Review   of Educational
        Research,   81(2),   132-169.Bereiter, C.  (2014).   Principled practical knowledge:   Not   a bridge  but a
        ladder. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(1), 4-17.
Bailey, T., Jeong,   D. W.,    & Cho,  S.  W.  (2010).  Referral, enrollment,   and completion    in developmental
        education sequences in community colleges. Economics of Education Review, 29(2), 255-270.
Borko, H. (2004). Professional development and teacher learning: Mapping the terrain. Educational Researcher,
        33(8), 3-15.
Bransford,  J. D.,  Derry, S., Berliner, D.  & Hammerness,    K.  (2005). Theories  of learning   and  their roles in
        teaching. In L. Darling-Hammond & J. D. Bransford (Eds.), Preparing teachers for a changing world:
        What teachers should learn and be able to do (pp. 40 - 87). San Franciscom CA: Wiley.
Brown,  A.L.   (1992).  Design   experiments:  Theoretical   and methodological   challenges  in  creating   complex
        interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.
Brown, A.L. & Campione, J. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments:
        On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning:
        New environments for education (pp. 289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bryk, A., Gomez, L., Grunow, A., LeMahieu, P. (2015). Learning to improve: How America's schools can get
        better at getting better. Boston, MA: Harvard Education Publishing.
Brubaker, J. R., Venolia, G., & Tang, J. C. (2012, June). Focusing on shared experiences: moving beyond the
        camera in video communication. In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference (pp.
        96-105). ACM.
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. (2014). Pathways 2014-2015 Improvement Priorities.
        (Foundation memo, July 2014).
Clarke, D., &   Hollingsworth,   H. (2002).  Elaborating a model   of   teacher professional growth.   Teaching  and
        Teacher Education, 18(8), 947-967.
Coburn, C., & Penuel, W. (2016). Research-practice partnerships: Outcomes, dynamics, and open questions.
        Educational Researcher, 45(1), 48-54.
Corbin, J.  M., &   Strauss, A.  (1990). Grounded  theory  research:  Procedures,  canons,   and evaluative  criteria.
        Qualitative Sociology, 13(1), 3­21. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00988593.
Darling-Hammond, L., & McLaughlin, M. W. (1995). Policies That Support Professional Development in an
        Era of Reform. Phi Delta Kappan 76, 8: 597- 604.
Gomez, K., Kyza, E.A. & Mancevice, N. (2018). Participatory design and the Learning Sciences. In F. Fischer,
        C.  E.  Hmelo-Silver,    S. R. Goldman,   &  P.  Reimann   (Eds.). (2018). International  Handbook    of the
        Learning Sciences (pp. 401-409). New York, NY: Routledge.
Guskey, T. R., & Huberman, M. (1995). Professional development in education: New paradigms and practices.
        New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Hammer, D., Goldberg, F., & Fargason, S. (2012). Responsive teaching and the beginnings of energy in a third-
        grade classroom. Review of Science, Mathematics and ICT Education, 6(1), 51­72.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. 1986). Two courses of expertise. In H.Stevenson, H. Azuma, and K. Hakuta (Eds.).
        Child development and education in Japan (pp.262-272). New York, NY: Freeman.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    757                                                   © ISLS
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Jung, J., Lajoie, S., Yu, Y., Lu, J., Wiseman, J., & Chan, L. K. (2016). Video as context
          and conduit for problem-based learning. In Educational technologies in medical and health sciences
          education (pp. 57-77). New York, NY: Springer.
Joyce, B. R., & Showers, B. (2002). Student achievement through staff development. Arlington, VA: ASCD.
Ko, M., Goldman, S. R., Radinsky, J. R., James, K., Hall, A., Popp, J., Bolz, M., George, M. (2016). Looking
          under the hood: Productive messiness in design for argumentation in science, literature and history. In
          V. Svhila & R. Reeve (Eds) Design as scholarship: Case studies from the Learning Sciences (pp.71-
          85). New York, NY: Routledge.
Kyza, E. A. & Georgiou, Y. (2014).       Developing   in-service  science  teachers' ownership    of the PROFILES
          pedagogical framework through a technology-supported participatory design approach to professional
          development. Science Education International, 25(2), 55-77.
Kyza, E.  A., &  Nicolaidou,  I. (2016). Co-designing  reform-based    online inquiry  learning   environments  as a
          situated approach to teachers' professional development. CoDesign, 1-26.
Latour,   B.  (2005). Reassembling   the social:   An  introduction    to actor-network-theory.    Oxford:  Oxford
          University Press.
Levinson, R. et al. (2017). Socio-Scientific Inquiry-Based Learning: connecting formal and informal science
          education with society. PARRISE consortium [Retrieved on November 6, 2018 from www.parrise.eu]
Loucks-Horsley, S., Stiles, K., Mundry, S. E., & Love, N. B. (2009). Designing professional development for
          teachers of science and mathematics (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Merseth, K. K. (2011). Update: Report on innovations in developmental mathematics--Moving mathematical
          graveyards. Journal of Developmental Education, 34(3), 32-33.
Owen, R., Macnaghten, P., & Stilgoe, J. (2012). Responsible research and innovation: From science in society
          to science for society, with society. Science and Public Policy, 39(6), 751-760.
Penuel,   W., Fishman,  B.,  Cheng,  B., &  Sabelli,  N. (2011).   Organizing    research and development    at the
          intersection of learning, implementation and design. Education Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.
Potter, J., & Wetherell, M. (1987). Discourse and social psychology: Beyond attitudes and behaviour. London,
          UK: Sage.
Rae, I., Venolia, G., Tang, J. C., & Molnar, D. (2015, February). A framework for understanding and designing
          telepresence. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work &
          social computing (pp. 1552-1566). ACM.
Rehak, A. M., Gomoll, A. S., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Danish, J. A. (2016). Developing pre-service teachers'
          professional vision through collaborative multimedia artifacts. In C. Looi, J. Polman, U. Cress, & P.
          Reiman (Eds.) Transforming     Learning, Empowering     Learners:  The    International Conference of the
          Learning  Sciences  (ICLS)  2016  Conference   Proceedings,     12(1), 130-137.  Singapore:  International
          Society of the Learning Sciences.
van Es, E. A., Cashen, M., Barnhart, T., & Auger, A. (2017). Learning to Notice Mathematics Instruction: Using
          Video to Develop   Preservice  Teachers' Vision   of   Ambitious  Pedagogy.   Cognition    and Instruction,
          35(3), 165­187. https://doi.org/10.1080/07370008.2017.1317125
Van Merriënboer, J. J., Kirschner, P. A., & Kester, L. (2003). Taking the load off a learner's mind: Instructional
          design for complex learning. Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 5-13.
Wang, M., Derry, S., & Ge, X. (2017). Guest Editorial: Fostering Deep Learning in Problem-Solving Contexts
          with the Support of Technology. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 20(4), 162-165.
Wittgenstein, L. (2009). Philosophical investigations (4th edition). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.

Acknowledgments
Various funding sources supported the work reported in this symposium; however, the opinions expressed are
those of the authors and do not represent the views of the funding agencies. Gomoll and Hmelo-Silver:      National
Science   Foundation ITEST    grant #  1433414.  Hall, et   al.: James S.  McDonnell    Foundation    Understanding
Teacher Change and Teachers as Learners grant #220020517; Reading for Understanding (RFU) initiative of the
Institute for Education Sciences,   U.  S.  Department   of Education     through Grant   R305F100007.    Kyza  and
Agesilaou:    European Union's   Seventh   Framework   Programme     for  research, technological  development  and
demonstration under grant #612438 (PARRISE -Promoting Attainment of Responsible Research and Innovation
in Science Education). Gomez, et al.: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching through a U.S.
Dept. of Labor Trade Adjustment Assistance Community College and Career Training (TAACCCT) grant.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   758                                                   © ISLS
