  Tools and Methods for `4E Analysis': New Lenses for Analyzing
                                        Interaction in CSCL
                      Rolf Steier (Organizer), University of Oslo, rolf.steier@iped.uio.no
              Ben Rydal Shapiro, Georgia Institute of Technology, benjamin.shapiro@cc.gatech.edu
       Dimitra Christidou, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, dimitra.christidou@ntnu.no
                      Palmyre Pierroux, University of Oslo, palmyre.pierroux@iped.uio.no
                          Jacob Davidsen, Aalborg University, jdavidsen@hum.aau.dk
                   Rogers Hall (Discussant), Vanderbilt University, r.hall@Vanderbilt.Edu

        Abstract: This symposium aims to expand the use of and perspectives on Interaction Analysis
        (IA) and related methods in CSCL, and to explore new ways of collecting, editing, visualizing
        and sharing research data, including video and location-based data. We bring the development
        and use of novel digital tools and IA methods to the foreground and invite participants to join
        us in reflecting on and designing the next phase of IA in CSCL, which in keeping with the theme
        of the conference is coined 4E Analysis. During the session, we will share, compare and contrast
        four different digital tools and new approaches to studying collaborative learning that have been
        recently  developed     by CSCL   researchers  from    across three  different countries and  five
        universities.

Introduction
For the past 20 years, CSCL and Interaction Analysis (IA) have developed in tandem, with the classic Jordan and
Henderson (1995) article introducing IA as a method and an approach to studying `knowledge in use' (Hall &
Stevens, 2015) published the same year as the first CSCL conference in 1995. One of the crucial links between
CSCL and IA has been the use of video data to capture and describe interaction in ways that support studies of
collaborative learning ­ from early studies of classrooms with shared computer screens to current interests in
hybrid settings that  are `Embodied,   Enactive,   Extended  and  Embedded'     (4E).  For  example,  recent studies
employing   forms of  IA  from   the International Journal of  Computer-Supported      Collaborative Learning  have
explored the role of talk and gesture for a pair of students collaborating around a shared touch screen (Davidsen
& Ryberg, 2017), the role of teacher support for students performing lab work in science classrooms (Furberg,
2016), as well as the dynamic talk and movement patterns of families visiting a museum (Shapiro, Hall & Owens,
2017; Roberts & Lyons, 2017).
        These studies show that the capability to collect, edit, visualize and share video data has expanded
alongside other emergent data types and collection methods, including 360-degree video, wearable cameras, log
data, location-aware technologies, as well as built and natural environments that are instrumented to link with
mobile technologies. In CSCL research, such technological developments and new types of research data present
a significant opportunity  to extend  the use   of IA to explore  embodied     interaction, movement  and  learning
processes from multiple perspectives, `scaling' analytic attention in time, space (place), and social organization.
Technological developments have opened a wider theoretical and analytical lens onto what constitutes situated
and collaborative learning processes, allowing different types of questions to be posed. Some lenses are focused
on ways of "representing and cataloguing choreographies of embodied interaction" for designing better support
for mediated collaborative learning (Flood et al., 2015), while others are trained on "genres" of learning on the
move to consider how people's movement through built and natural environments can be both the means and
content of learning (Hall, Marin & Taylor, 2017; Bang & Marin, 2017). At the same time, we            suggest that a
common interest in groups, collaboration and social interaction uniquely situates CSCL research in relation to
mainstream  developments     in data collection and   tracking tools  that are focused   on  networks of individual
behaviors.
        However, a critical challenge for the CSCL community is access to new computational tools to support
such work, as well as the development of norms and practices around their use (Wise & Schwarz, 2017). Many
CSCL researchers are unaware of new computational tools to collect, select, organize, manage, visualize, and
analyze different types of data corpora in ways that support both qualitative and quantitative research. Moreover,
while CSCL researchers are developing new computational tools and modifying IA methods to suit their particular
needs, they often do  so  in  an ad-hoc manner,    rendering innovations   in  tools and methods  secondary   to the
empirical studies they are intended to support. As a consequence, new tools and modified methods are often
developed independently, and remain obscured or hidden from the general CSCL community.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   759                                                   © ISLS
        This symposium aims to expand perspectives on IA in CSCL, and to explore some of the challenges in
responding to new ways of collecting, editing, visualizing and sharing research data, including video and location-
based data. We bring the development and use of novel digital tools and IA methods to the foreground and invite
participants to join us in reflecting on and designing the next phase of interaction analysis in CSCL, which in
keeping with the theme of the conference is coined 4E Analysis. During the session, we will share, compare and
contrast four different digital tools and approaches to studying collaborative learning interactions and learning on
the move that have been recently developed by CSCL researchers. We wish, in part, to begin a conversation with
our fellow researchers about possible new arrangements for capturing and using multi-perspectival, multi-scalar
records of cooperative human activity. We will use these tools/approaches a) to show how innovative analytic
tools and techniques  are contributing to deeper understandings  of 4E learning, b)     to raise and identify new
questions for CSCL research including how such tools allow us to expand and extend our units of analysis across
temporal, spatial and social scales and c) to discuss shared methodological challenges.

Overview of symposium format
The symposium will feature 4 presentations followed by an extensive facilitated discussion with opportunities for
audience interaction and participation. Following presentations, we will structure a panel discussion where the
audience can both engage with authors through questions while also having opportunities to use tools/methods
shown in the presentations. We invite audience members to also raise their own issues and questions about new
forms of interaction analysis. In light of the recent UN report on accelerating climate effects of CO2 production,
we will incorporate a virtual component to this symposium for those wishing to participate while reducing air-
travel. Additionally, Professor Rogers Hall will serve as a virtual discussant to the symposium by identifying
common challenges and future goals from across the 4 projects.

   Figure 1. a) AVA360VR ­ Tool for analyzing and annotating 360 video footage in a VR environment, b)
  Interaction Geography Slicer (IGS) ­ Tool for linking movement and map data, to video and transcripts of
   social interaction, c) Visitracker - Software and tablet-based tool for observing and visualizing mediated
 interactions in museum spaces, d) Social Meaning Mapping (SMM)­ Group interview method for `real-time'
                 recounting and drawing of embodied and embedded museum experience.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  760                                                  © ISLS
         The above Figure 1 illustrates screenshots from the 4 different tools for studying collaborative learning
interactions and learning on the move described more fully later in this proposal. The symposium will thus not
merely present these 4 tools, but will emphasize looking across the approaches to support broader methodological
comparison and reflection. For example, though each of the included tools direct analytic attention to participant
movement, this feature of interaction is visible in different ways including 360 video footage as well as a variety
of map visualizations that emphasize temporal relationships, mediated action, and participant narratives.

International panel and areas of expertise

Norway
Rolf Steier is an Associate Professor in the Department of Education at the University of Oslo. His research
focuses  on collaborative learning processes   in  a variety of  contexts    and disciplines   including   museums,
classrooms, and professional design settings, with specialized interest in the relationship between face-to-face and
embodied collaboration, and mediating technologies.

Dimitra Christidou is a senior researcher in the Department of Computer Science at the Norwegian University
of Science and Technology where she is working for the H2020 COMnPLAY SCIENCE project.. Her research
focuses on museum learning, visitor studies, multimodality, and embodied interaction. Dimitra holds a PhD in
Museum Studies from University College London (UCL) and has working experience as a researcher in the
museum sector in Sweden and Greece.

Palmyre Pierroux is Professor at the Department of Education, University of Oslo. Pierroux's research is focused
on technology-enhanced learning in informal settings. She specializes in design-based research methods and
leading projects based on research-practice partnerships with museums.

Denmark
Jacob Davidsen is an Associate Professor in the Department of Communication and Psychology at Aalborg
University. His  research focuses  on collaborative  activities in different   contexts  and   disciplines including
architecture and design education and Problem Based Learning environments. He is specialized in embodied
interaction analysis with a particular focus on collaborative activities.

United States
Ben Rydal Shapiro is a Postdoctoral Fellow in the School of Interactive Computing at Georgia Institute of
Technology. His research and design integrates approaches from the learning and social sciences, information
visualization and architecture to study how people engage and learn in relation to the physical environment and
to develop new types of learning environments and experiences.

Rogers Hall is a Professor in the Department of Teaching and Learning, Vanderbilt University. His research
concerns learning and teaching in STEM conceptual practices, comparative studies of embodied action in these
practices, and the organization and development of representational practices more generally.

Paper 1: AVA360VR ­ Annotating, visualising and analysing CSCL processes
in VR
Jacob Davidsen

With the recent advent of consumer 360-degree cameras and spatial microphones new opportunities for studying
human interaction and collaborative learning processes arise. The 360-degree cameras offer a more holistic and
environmentally sensitive record of collaborative learning interactions compare to traditional 2D flat recordings.
With a 360-degree recording it is possible to navigate the field of view after the capture of the event, which can
afford a better understanding of  interaction in context and a  more      explorative attitude towards the  analysis.
Nevertheless, the  existing tools supporting   the process   of transcribing   and    analysing  embodied   learning
interactions (e.g. ELAN, Transana, etc) are not suited or build for working with 360-degree recordings. As a
consequence and as part of our exploration of 360-degree cameras and spatial microphones over the last years,
we have suggested a `scenographic turn' in the analysis of human interaction (McIlvenny, 2018; Mcilvenny &
Davidsen, 2017). While 360-degree video footage fosters new ways of annotating, visualising, analysing and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  761                                                    © ISLS
disseminating interaction analytic work, it is also clear that new tools are required for utilizing this technology for
interaction analytical purposes.
         As a response to the technological development in video technology and as part of our work under the
banner of Big Video (www.bigvideo.aau.dk), we have developed a tool for working with 360 degree recordings
(McIlvenny, 2018; Mcilvenny & Davidsen, 2017). AVA360VR (Annotate Visualise Analyse 360° video in VR)
is a Unity based software allowing researchers to work with 360 video in a more `natural' interface in virtual
reality. Basically, AVA360VR is offering a more tangible and immersive engagement with current (and future)
spatial video and  audio    recordings. As   described  by  Mcilvenny     (2018) some     of the basic  functions  are "(a)
scanning the field of view in 360°, (b) using the controllers, (c) using the timeline, (d) annotating, (e) inserting
simultaneous  video    streams,  (f)  re-caming,  and   (g) deploying   interactive  transcript  objects.  Many    of  these
remediate familiar operations ­ such as pointing, grabbing, drawing and watching two monitors ­ but with added
functionality because of their virtualization".
         With   AVA360VR      we    are seeking  to  take advantage    of the developments     in video   technologies    for
enhancing the analysis of embodied interaction in CSCL environments. As noted by Flood, Neff and Abrahamson
(2015) there is a need for CSCL to develop ways of "representing and cataloguing choreographies of embodied
interaction" (2015, p. 96) in order to better design for collaborative embodied interaction in CSCL environments.
However, as discussed by Davidsen and Ryberg (2017) the transformation of embodied interaction into transcripts
(traditional or multimodal) is by no means doing justice to the simultaneous, creative and complex choreographies
of intercorporeal interaction playing out between the collaborators in CSCL environments. With AVA360VR new
opportunities for  `cataloguing     choreographies   of embodied     interaction'  is possible,   without    reducing  it to
traditional transcript text. It  becomes   possible  to inhabit   the  data. At  the  symposium,     AVA360VR        will be
demonstrated  with  data    from  architectural  education,  where   a group  of  1st year   students  are   collaboratively
preparing for a critique session.

Paper 2: Studying collaborative interaction across museum & city scales with
the Interaction Geography Slicer (IGS)
Ben Rydal Shapiro and Rogers Hall

Describing and representing collaborative interaction as people move across different physical environments is a
significant challenge  for  many    communities.    For the  computer-supported     collaborative    learning (CSCL)   and
learning sciences (LS) communities, this challenge is further complicated by the need to interpret collaborative
interaction as people move across physical environments from a learning perspective. This paper illustrates a
dynamic   visualization  tool    we  have developed    and  call the   Interaction Geography      Slicer (IGS).    The IGS
dynamically   visualizes    data including audio/video    data   and  location-based   data  about   people's   movement,
conversation, and   social   media    activity over  space  and  time.  Likewise,    this paper   uses   the IGS   to study
collaborative interaction   from  a   learning  perspective  across  two  different  scales.  The  first scale  is visitors'
collaborative interaction across museum gallery spaces. The second scale is students' collaborative interaction as
they create and follow historical walking scale tours of their local urban environment. To interpret collaborative
interaction from a learning perspective at both scales, this paper draws from a growing body of research that views
walking as a form of public discourse (see Marin, 2013; Zimmerman et al., 2016) where learning often arises
either from moments where people "make places" to engage with entities or phenomena of interest (Lave, 1984;
Ma & Munter, 2014; Christidou, 2018; Steier, 2014) or alternatively, designed pedagogical sequences where move
through built and natural environments to learn (Taylor & Hall, 2013).
         Findings from this paper show how the IGS provides new visualization and visual analytic techniques
that advance different approaches to studying collaborative interaction from a learning perspective. In particular,
at a museum scale, findings show how the IGS supports the characterization of interaction geography, an approach
to describing,    representing,   and   interpreting   collaborative   interaction  as   people   move    across   physical
environments (Shapiro, Hall & Owens, 2017; Shapiro & Hall, 2018). This approach encompasses units of analysis
such as "engagement contours" and supports asking and answering new questions such as how young children
use their families as resources for learning through their seemingly erratic movement patterns. At a city scale,
findings show   how    the  IGS  supports  a   broader characterization   of  people's interaction   as  Time   Geography
(Hagerstrand, 1970) in ways that highlight differences in how people learn from creating and following historical,
walking scale tours. Moreover, findings show how the IGS supports traditional and new forms of interaction
analysis on  the  move  (Jordan     & Henderson,    1995;   Hall &  Stevens,  2015)   at  both museum     and   city  scales.
Altogether,  this work  raises   important questions    for the  CSCL   and   LS  communities     as to  the strengths and
weaknesses   of   different analytical  approaches   to studying   collaborative   interaction   and ways    of integrating
different analytical approaches to study collaborative interaction in new ways.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       762                                                       © ISLS
Paper 3: Mapping mediated interaction in museums: Visitracker tool for
ethnographic observations of visitors
Rolf Steier and Palmyre Pierroux

Studies of museums as informal learning environments have identified the significance of talk, movement and
physical orientation in mediating visitors' collaborative meaning making (Steier, Pierroux, & Krange, 2015). To
capture visitors' interactions in these rich semiotic settings, learning researchers have employed methods and
approaches    from interaction analysis   for the past   twenty years  (Leinhardt  &  Crowley, 1998;   Rowe,   2003),
furthering the development of innovative techniques for collecting and analyzing video data (vom Lehn & Heath,
2007). Findings from these studies have been particularly valuable for CSCL research on `informal learning,' e.g.,
technology-enhanced    learning    on museum   field  trips (Bakken   & Pierroux,  2015), and  the  design  of  texts,
technologies and other contextual resources to adapt to personal knowledge and interests in different disciplines
(Davis et al., 2015; Pierroux & Ludvigsen, 2013). At the other end of the methodological spectrum, there is an
even longer history of visitor studies, with consultants continually refining methods and tools for `T&T' studies
(tracking & time) of visitors' movements. These studies are based on observations or other (digital) recordings of
where individual visitors walk, where they stop, and how long they stay there (dwell time). These generally large
datasets are considered valuable for practice, providing demographic and attendance information, mapping `paths'
and popular attractions, and indicating use of services. In this paper, we present a tool collaboratively developed
over a ten-year period that combines insights and interests of both research and practice. Visitracker was inspired
by paper-based protocols and developed into a tablet-based digital tool iteratively over several years with museum
partners in Norway (Pierroux & Steier, 2016).
         Visitracker is a portal and tablet application that was developed in a research project to record, log and
visualize (anonymized) observations of visitor groups and their interactions, movements and use of resources in
the physical spaces of the museum in real time. The aggregate data are recorded and visualized using maps and
other graphical representations. Maps are a familiar representational tool in museum practice, used by exhibit
curators and  architects in   the  design of  exhibitions,  to make  decisions  about spatial arrangements   and  the
sequencing of works on display. Maps are also used in the field of visitor studies to record visitors' movements
and paths through a museum or gallery floor (Bitgood 1988). As mentioned, data in these studies are often used
to address questions of traffic flow and circulation designs or spatial aspects that may relate to an exhibit's
popularity. However, despite the potential to represent relationships between physical context and social learning
interactions, maps   are typically  absent from   sociocultural  research data. Some    research, such as  classroom
learning studies   by Roth  et al. (1999),   have used   maps   to represent aspects of sociocultural  research data.
However, the use of maps as data is largely underutilized and unexamined from a perspective of mediated action.
Maps may, by complementing other forms of data, visually highlight aspects of actions and meaning making not
visible in the words of notes and transcripts.
         Visitracker  provides   a visual overview    of a  physical context in which groups   of visitors move   and
interact, and allows the researcher to document the location of the participants, their use of particular resources,
and the activity. In contrast to visitor studies methods that note the time spent by a visitor standing in front of a
display as an indicator of attention or learning, a researcher using Visitracker documents whether the visitor is
looking at the exhibit, talking with a friend, pointing across the room, reading a text, listening to an audio guide,
conversing with a friend, etc. The unit of analysis is expanded to include not just the physical location and time,
but also the  social  aspects of  group   interaction and  mediational aspects  of resource use.  By  visualizing the
pathways taken by groups of museum visitors and the types and locations of their interactions, we can pose new
questions at a larger scale about which resources are made relevant, how multiple social interactions relate to each
other in a given space, and how a sequence of actions may relate to different physical and social contexts. If a
shared goal of visitor studies and museum learning research is to understand visitor experiences and meaning
making processes, then new means of collecting, visualizing and sharing data using Visitracker contributes to
advancing this aim.

Paper 4: Social Meaning Mapping: a digital tool for visitors to map their
museum experience
Dimitra Christidou

Social Meaning Mapping (SMM) is a qualitative tool embedded in the Visitracker app, designed as a post-visit
research tool used during a researcher-led session for documenting/recording visitors' experience in one gallery
room. For SMM, visitors are prompted to recount and recreate their movement through the room by drawing on

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      763                                                 © ISLS
the digital surface of the tablet using resources from a toolbox available while also sharing their thoughts on their
experience with the researcher and each other. SMM addresses a methodological challenge of incorporating
visitors' own narrative understandings of their movements and meaning making processes into data collected by
researchers through in-gallery observations (i.e. time and tracking studies).
The app allows visitors to depict their path either on a digital floor plan of the room they visited, or recreate their
path on an empty canvas. As such, the dataset created through SMM is comprised of (i) digital trails that visitors
draw by using the tablet, and (ii) audio-recordings of visitors' narrations regarding their experience in this room.
SMM data can be complemented by the dataset collected through the other two methods for data collection
available on Visitracker (i.e. survey and in-gallery observations). Visitracker portal makes it possible to display
the drawing process on the tablet in synchronization with the audio recorded conversations (Figure 1d).
             The design of SMM has been informed by relevant methods used in visitor studies approached now
through a sociocultural lens (Wertsch, 1991), and the theory of navigational learning (Peterson and Levene, 2003).
Particularly, SMM has been inspired by the Personal Meaning Mapping (PMM) tool, a well-established tool in
visitor studies (Falk, Moussouri & Coulson, 1998; Adams, Falk & Dierking, 2003), and other similar approaches
using visitor recall maps, or self-reported pathway maps (Rainbolt, Benfield, & Loomis, 2012) and visitors'
drawings (Diamantopoulou, Insulander, & Lindstrand, 2012; Insulander & Selander, 2009).
         In PMM approaches, a single visitor is usually invited to respond to a keyword written at the center of a
blank sheet of paper and write words and phrases that are related to this keyword before and after the museum
visit. Shifting the attention away from foregrounding individual and linguistic prompts, the SMM approach is
designed to be used by groups of two to four visitors only post visit, enabling them to recollect, negotiate and
visually co-construct their route, making the drawing task a prompt for a discussion recorded in the app. As a
result, SMM marks a shift away from the usual quantitative approaches to data collected via PMM, which measure
the extent of visitors' knowledge and attitudes based on the number and range of concepts/words written. SMM
extends such `reflective tracking' methodologies (Falk et al., 2007) by embracing a sociocultural perspective
(Wertsch, 1991) which considers meaning making as mediated in and through social interaction and the use of
cultural artefacts. Sociocultural perspectives place visitors' own    experiences, and  therefore their spoken  and
written self-reports, at the core of investigating their meaning making. By making available the possibility of
drawing on a floorplan and using it as a prompt for visitors to talk about their embodied experience in the gallery
room, SMM transforms static maps such as the floorplan image into `dialectical artefacts' (Stahl, Ludvigsen, Law,
& Cress, 2014, p. 239) produced by visitors in collaboration with each other and in interaction with the affordances
of the SMM tool (i.e. tablet's screen, toolbox etc.). In this light, visitors' map making is seen as an `act of
representation' ­ that is, `the act of highlighting aspects of our experience and communicating them to others and
ourselves' (Enyedy, 2005, p. 427).
         Data collected through SMM allows us to synthesize various aspects of visitor experience collected
through different methods (i.e. observations, survey) and attend to the individual and social aspects of the visitors'
experience (Grack Nelson & Cohn, 2015) as recounted and re-negotiated by visitors themselves. They further
offer opportunities for visitors in groups to elaborate on each other's trail and exchange ideas, comments, and
interpretations.
         Trails are paths constructed by museum visitors, linking a series of encounters with individual artefacts,
resources  and   other visitors, detailed  through their  own  descriptions   and  interpretations recorded   using
Visitracker. Visitors are invited to `see' and `write themselves' on the floorplan by noting their movement while
talking  about their experience  using the drawing  tools  available. As such,  trails provide one way   of  linking
artefacts and interpretation in a narrative through a process consisting of 'enacting' or creating trails, then editing,
discussing and sharing them with other visitors in their group and the researcher. What is shared is not merely a
list of resources, objects or places, but a path, which places these objects in a spatial, temporal, and/or categorical
context. Additionally, trails are a tool for facilitating visitors' discussions about particular exhibits by indicating
their position in the gallery and without needing to recall the names of the artists, or the titles of the paintings
using art-related language.

References
Adams,   M.,   Falk, J.H. &  Dierking  L.D.  (2003). Things    change:  Museums,    learning and   research. In M.
         Xanthoudaki,   L.  Tickle, &  V.  Secules (Eds.),  Researching  visual  arts  education  in museums    and
         galleries: An international reader (pp. 15-32). Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bakken, S. M., & Pierroux, P. (2015). Framing a topic: Mobile video tasks in museum learning. Learning, Culture
         and Social Interaction, 5, 54-65.
Bang, M. & Marin, A. (2015). Nature-Culture Constructs in Science Learning: Human/non-human agency and
         intentionality. Journal for Research in Science Teaching, 52(4), 530-544.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   764                                                  © ISLS
Christidou, D. (2018). Art on the move: The role of joint attention in visitors' encounters with artworks. Journal
of Learning, Culture and Social Interaction.
Davidsen, J., & Ryberg, T. (2017). "This is the size of one meter": Children's bodily-material collaboration.
        International   Journal      of   Computer-Supported      Collaborative       Learning,   12(1),    65­90.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-017-9248-8
Davis, P., Horn, M., Block, F. et al. "Whoa! We're going deep in the trees!": Patterns of collaboration around an
        interactive   information    visualization  exhibit,  International.  Journal    of  Computer-Supported
        Collaborative Learning (2015) 10: 53.
Diamantopoulou, S., Insulander, E. & Lindstrand, F. (2012). Making Meaning in an Exhibition: Technologies,
        Agency and (Re-)design. Designs for Learning, 6 (1-2), 11­29.
Enyedy, N. (2005). Inventing Mapping: Creating Cultural Forms to Solve Collective Problems, Cognition and
        Instruction, 23(4), 427­66.
Erickson, F. Talk and social theory: Ecologies of speaking and listening in everyday life. Cambridge: Polity Press,
        2004.
Falk, J. H., Reinhard, E. M., Vernon, C. L., Bronnenkant, K., Deans, N. L., Heimlich, J. E. (2007). Why zoos &
        aquariums matter: Assessing the impact of a visit to a zoo or aquarium. Silver Spring, MD: Association
        of Zoos & Aquariums.
Falk, J. H., Moussouri, T. and Coulson, D. (1998). The effect of visitors' agendas on museum learning. Curator:
        The Museum Journal, 41(4), 107­120.
Flood, V.  J., Neff,  M., &    Abrahamson,    D.   (2015).   Boundary   Interactions: Resolving   Interdisciplinary
        Collaboration Challenges Using Digitized Embodied Performances. In O. Lindwall, P. Häkkinen, T.
        Koschmann, P. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Exploring the Material Conditions of Learning:
        Opportunities and Challenges for CSCL (Vol. Vol 1, pp. 94­100). Gothenburg: The international Society
        of the Learning Sciences.
Furberg, A. (2016). Teacher support in computer-supported lab work: Bridging the gap between lab experiments
        and students' conceptual understanding. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
        Learning, 11(1), 89-113.
Grack Nelson, A. & Cohn, S. (2015). Data Collection Methods for Evaluating Museum Programs and Exhibitions.
        Journal of Museum Education, 40(1), 27-36.
Hagerstrand, T. (1970). What about people in regional science? Papers in regional science, 24(1), 7-24.
Hall, R., & Stevens, R. (2015). Interaction analysis approaches to knowledge in use. In A. A. diSessa, M. Levin,
        & J. S. Brown (Eds.), Knowledge and interaction: A synthetic agenda for the learning sciences (pp. 72­
        108). New York: Routledge.
Insulander, E. & Selander, S. (2009). Designs for learning in museum contexts. Designs for Learning, 2(2), 8-21.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Lave, J., Murtaugh, M., & de la Rocha, O. (1984). The dialectics of arithmetic in grocery shopping. In B.
Rogoff and J. Lave (Eds.), Everyday cognition: Its development in social context (pp. 67­94). Cambridge, UK:
        Cambridge University Press.
Leinhardt, G., & Crowley, K. (1998). Museum Learning as Conversational Elaboration: A Proposal to Capture,
        Code, and Analyze Talk in Museums. Museum Learning Collaborative Technical Report #MLC-01.
Ma, J. Y., & Munter, C. (2014). The Spatial Production of Learning Opportunities in Skateboard Parks. Mind,
        Culture, and Activity, 21(3), 238-258.
Marin, Ananda M. (2013) Learning to Attend and Observe: Parent-child Meaning Making in the Natural World.
        Ph.D. Dissertation. Northwestern University.
McIlvenny, P. (2018). Inhabiting spatial video and audio data: Towards a scenographic turn in the analysis of
        social   interaction.  Social    Interaction.  Video-Based      Studies  of    Human     Sociality,  2(1).
        https://doi.org/10.7146/si.v2i1.110409
Mcilvenny, P.  B., &  Davidsen,  J.  (2017). A Big  Video    Manifesto: Re-sensing    Video and Audio.   Nordicom
        Information, 39(2), 15­21.
Nurse  Rainbolt, G., Benfield, J.A., & Loomis, R.J. (2012). Visitor self-report behavior    mapping as   a tool for
        recording exhibition circulation. Visitor Studies, 15(2), 203­216. doi:10.1080/10645578.2012.715035
Peterson, D. and Levene, M. (2003) Trail records and navigational learning. London Review of Education 1(3),
        207-216.
Pierroux, P., & Ludvigsen, S. (2013). Communication Interrupted: Textual Practices and Digital Interactives in
        Art Museums. In K. Drotner & K. Schrøder (Eds.), The Connected Museum: Social Media and Museum
        Communication (pp. 153-176). London: Routledge.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   765                                                  © ISLS
Roberts, J., Lyons, L. (2017). The value of learning talk: applying a novel dialogue scoring method to inform
         interaction design in an open-ended, embodied     museum    exhibit. International Journal of Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(4), 343-376.
Rowe, S. (2003). Visitors and Voices. Journal of Museum Education, 28(2), 3-7.
Shapiro, B.R.,  Hall, R.  & Owens,  D.   (2017). Developing   & Using    Interaction  Geography   in   a Museum.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(4), 377-399.
Shapiro, B.R., & Hall, R. (2018). Personal Curation in a Museum. In Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
         Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, CSCW, Article 158 (November 2018). ACM, New York, NY.
Stahl, G., Ludvigsen, S., Law, N., Cress, U. (2014). CSCL artifacts. International Journal of Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 9(3), 237­245.
Steier, R. 2014. Posing the question: Visitor posing as embodied interpretation in an art museum. Mind, Culture,
         and Activity, 21(2), 148-170.
Steier, R., Pierroux, P., & Krange, I. (2015). Embodied interpretation: Gesture, social interaction, and meaning
         making in a national art museum. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction, 7, 28-42.
Taylor, K. H., & Hall, R. (2013). Counter-mapping the neighborhood on bicycles: Mobilizing youth to reimagine
         the city. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18, 1-2: 65-93.
vom Lehn, D., & Heath, C. (2007). Social interaction in museums and galleries: A note on video-based field
         studies. Video research in the learning sciences, 287- 301.
Wertsch, J.V. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. Cambridge: Harvard
         University Press
Wise, A., & Schwarz, B. (2017). Visions of CSCL: Eight provocations for the future of the field. International
         Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12, 423­467.
Zimmerman, H. T., Land, S. M., Maggiore, C., Ashely, R. W. & Millet, C. (2016). Designing outdoor learning
         spaces  with    iBeacons:  Combining     place-based   learning      with  the  Internet   of   Learning
         Things. Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference for the Learning Sciences. Volume 2, 942-
         945.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  766                                                  © ISLS
